THE BATHES OF Bathes Aid: Wonderful and most excellent, against very many
Sicknesses, approved by authority, confirmed by reason, and daily tried by
experience: with the antiquity, commodity, property, knowledge, use,
aphorisms, diet, medicine, and other things thereto be considered and observed.

Compendiously compiled by John Jones Physician.

ANNO SALVTIS. 1572. At Asple Hall besides Nottingam.

Printed at London for william Jones: and are to be sold at his new long Shop
at the west door of Paul's Church. 13. Maij.



TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Henry Earl of Penbrooke, Lord Herbert of Kayerdid.
etc.
DEMOCRITVS the most ancient Philosopher of Abdera, Reader to the prince of
Phisicyons Hippocrates, (right honorable Earl) most learnedly in his Epistle
De natura humana, to the same Hippocrates recounteth how necessary it is for
all men to know the art of Phisike: because it is not only an understanding
most honorable and profitable to life, but also for that of all other it most
manifestely sets forth to the senses, the wisdom, power providence, and
unmeasurable bounty of our almighty creator, of which to be ignorant it is
great impiety, as Galen testifies in his third book De vsu partium.

Hieronymus Montuus therefore in his epistle to Anasceue morborum, dedicated to
Henry the last French King to whom he was not only chief Physician, but
also one of his privy counsel, affirms that of all sorts, Phisike is to
be embraced, and of them cheefely which are endued with honorable dignities,
and weighty affairs of the common wealth. For, as wisdom (sister to
Physic) does deliver the mind from evil affectes, and makes us to live
for ever in perpetual joy with aungelles: So Phisike maintayneth health, and
expels sicknesses from the body, making us live a long and lusty life, as
Galen in his works* De sanitate tuenda, most reasonably teaches.

Furthermore, understanding, Science, and al actiuities, by health are
increased, as by sickness the contrary of necessity ensues, whereof (my good
Lord) it behooves all men too have a due consideration, which be lovers of
virtue and honesty, and for their sakes love things that be best. For when the
state of the body is sickly affected, the parts not doing their offices, the
mind it self although it be a particle divine has no chearfulnes pleasure or
delight in the meditacion of virtue either divine or moral. Seeing that
sickness darkeneth the mind dulleth the senses, and depriueth, deminisheth,
or depraueth the parts accide^taly of their operations.

Wherefore (Noble and prudent Earl) not sparing any pain, nor fearing the
reprochefull words of the enuiouse Momus, and his capciouse rabble, setting
aparte all colors of Rhetorique for the avoiding of prolixitie, and because,
Veritatis oration simplex, I have published an Aid, most profitable for all
them that need it, and that such an aid, as god has blessed our country
with, co^parable to any elswher, if in every respect thoroughly it be
considered. Seeing that among all the most maruaylouse works of nature, there
is none more wonderful, none more excellent, none more auayleable to the help
of the disseased, and amendmente of the enfeebled parts of man, then the
Bathes natural of the City of Bath, if they be rightly used, orderly
observed, and as need requires, frequented (the efficient cause of this our
enterprise) as here in may appear, as well by the authority of the most sage
Philosophers, most renowned Phisicyons, and most ancient Historiographers, as
by reason it self approved by art, confirmed by use, and daily tried there by
practice for these 2460. years, or thereabout. And for that the founder
Blaeydin Doyeth, or Bladud the wise and eloquent Philosopher.xi. years student
in Athenes, a Brittayn the ix. King of this Monarch after Brute, was the first
that uttered the virtue of the water, and that erected the City (whose
Genealogy we have rightly ascended to Adam and may lineally be descended to
your Honor, and many other of the race of the most worthy Nobles of this
land, how soever the injuries of times have altered and obscured the same. So
likewise of duty to your Honor erde of the same grain, I dedicate these my
willinge labors of the South Bathes of England, entytuled Bathes Aid,
co^tayning four books in one volume (as I have my treatise of the North
Bathes, to the Noble and puissant Earl of Salope.) The first of these books
probably proves, the descent of Bladud, antiquity of the Britains, the
certainty of the monuments, the sicknesses the bathes help, the accidents
they take away, whereof they proceed. etc. The second shows the diversity of
opinions concerning the cause of these and such like waters, how and wherein
the Phisicions and Philosophers resulte, what minerals be in them, of what
qualities they be, by which they work their effects. The third expresses
things natural, not natural, things annxed to nature, and things against
nature, withal the signs shewers of the state of the sick and whole, through
the which the better consultacion may be had, not only whether these bathes
will help or not, but also the Chyrurgians, Students in Physike, and al other
capable of reason, may find a most apt trade of understanding comprehended in
few words. etc. The fourth and last declares Aporismes, and brief rules how,
in, and at the Bathes, they shall use them selves, what meats, what drinks,
what cordial confortatiues, with most excellent purgations, clisters,
suppositoures, etc. meet for every complexion, and purging humors
abounding, with all other remedies, against such accidents as grow by reason
of hot bathes, and to what infirmity every of the bathes serve best
severally etc. Hoping that your Honor, of your Noble nature will accept in
good part my willing endeavor, although in desarte it be far unworthy the
credit or preferment, that Anthonius yielded to Apianus, for his book written
of the properties of Fishes: or that Adrianus did to Arianus for his book of
the Gestes of Alexander: or that Alexander Magnus did to Aristot. for his
work, De animalibus. Howbeit in desire to profit the universal people of
God, I trust nothing inferior, assuring your Honor, as time and leisure will
permit, to present your Noble bounty with greater works hereafter, for that
your honorable disposition evidently appears as well most ready toward the
furtherance of all virtuous attemptes, as the advancement of the common
commodity of your Country: wherein you plainly express a perfect effect of
very Nobility: the continuance whereof (as I nothing doubt) so I humblye
beseech the almighty to endue your good Lordship, and the right honorable
Lady Kateryne, your noble and most virtuous wife, with Galens health,
Nestors years, Craesus wealth, and Augustus hapines.

Your Lordships always, John Jones.

Christophori Carlili ad Lectorem. Hexametra.
IOnsus vt audiui retegens mysteria magna
Naturae, sanat morbos, miracula rerum
Pandit, quae latuere diu, Plutonis ad antra:
Sub terras penetrat, Theophrasti lustrat, and ornat,
Tartara, terrarum venas ruit atque meatus.
Thermarum caussas aperit, quas Anglica tellus,
Ebullit, quas ante illum nemo hercule nouit.
Iis ergo in rebus superat mira art Galenum,
Hippocratem ingenio, Cardanum effingit, eumque
Subsequitur studio, iurares esse magistrum
Ionsi, Ionsum discipulum, cur non et rite putetur
Discipulus Dominum qui ad viuum totus adumbrat,
Moribus, art, theourgia, conamine philtris,
Hippocrates sordet, Celsus nil nouit, ab omni
Long disiunctus fuit agnitione Galenus.
Quantum Sol Lunae praestat, Lunaeque tenebris,
Tantum alijs Medicis Cardanus, Ionsus ab illo
Res didicit medicas, ab eo vos discite cuncti,
Est quoniam effigies, Cardani expressa figura.
Ioannis Ludi. Archidiaconi Nottinghamiensis, (...) in laudem, and vsum
thermarum nostrarum.
BAlnea sunt varijs calefacta salubria morbis,
Ad multosque vsus, (...) valent.
Non externa valent curare pathemata tantum,
Ast interna etiam tollere posle scio.
Si been quis nouit thermis cautissimus vti
Proderit ille sibi: sin male: damna ferent.
Ni prius euacues, pletorica corpora laedunt,
Nec minus and succis corpora farta malis.
Gens sua quaeque solet plenis extollere buccis,
Anglica sed cunctis sunt meliora duo
Altera rex Bladud nobis, comes altra Salopae
Exornata dedit, sumptibus ipse suis.
Tot bona (Lector) habes magno tibi parta labor,
Praeter sudorem nil tuus Author habet.
FINIS.
Thomas Churchyard to the Reader.
JF still my pen in silence slept, when wit the world awakes,
And willing mynds with weary works, great toil and travel takes:
My friends might think I had forgot to honor learned men,
And dulled spirits did dainty wax, through piuish sloth of Pen.
Wherefore though simple sight I have in Bathes and boiling Springs,
I praise the head that here vnfoulds, the force of secret things
Though sundry sercht by judgments deep, to hit the mark before,
At rouers they but shot their Shafts, and dribbed wide a skore.
For Bathes did breed an heap of doubts, and few disclosed the same,
Till he that wrote this skillful book, a form thereof did frame,
And tells us how, and when we ought, to use the Bathes a right,
Which fruits who skornes to know and keep, is blind of sense and sight.
And seeking help he finds harm, yea sometimes death withal,
As does the young babe that warmes his hand and so in fire fall.
Or as a child in summer time seeking his thyrst to cool,
Does slip unawares down cruel streams, and drowns him self in poole.
So men that seek for medicine sweet, may sometime myschef find,
If they observe not seasons due, to take each thing in kind.
I wade no further in this case, read what does follow here,
And rob no spark of fame from him, that makes these douts so clear
Who thinks this labor well bestowed if thou thereby may gain,
Or if in busy babbling world, his works may shape disdain.
Thomas Lupton to the Reader.
JF such are worthy of reproach that never cease to toil,
For private gain, their country men thereby to hurt or spoil,
Then they deserve great praise and fame, whose study watch and pain
Do profet them they never knew, with daily wealth and gain,
And if the greater common good, the greater praise does crave,
Then they that publeck wealth procures, deserves the more to have.
For though with many worldly wealth, is chiefly now preferred,
Yet syck and lame and yrcksome soore do health much more regard.
For who, though he have Cresus wealth in sickness can be glad,
Where health is not, though wealth be there, what Joy can there be had.
Yet does the poor and healthful wretch oftymes rejoice we see,
But if that sickness dwell with wealth, then mirth from thens does slay.
If this be true, then Jones deserves both double praise and fame,
That took such payns for comom health, this Aid of Baths to frame.
TO THE GENTLE hearted Rear, all he wishes.
IF Galen, chief judge of the most excellent Philosophers, and worthily Prince
of all Phisicions (loving Reader) doubted not only the envy of Momus, with the
route of tatling Sophisters, as may appear in his fowerth book, De sanitate
tuenda, writing the art or trade of maintaining health: which knowledge was
(as Tullie affirms) so highly esteemed, that it seemed to proceed from the
immortal Gods, and not from man, but also to loose his labors: Shall I then
suppose, judge you in this iron age (wherein al men, except the honorable and
godly affected, for the most part greeuouslie disquieted either with pleasure,
covetousness, envy, pride, ambicion, and such like passions, mocions of the mind
not obaying reason, greedily gape after worldly gain, whiles in the mean time
the members and the mind fall into such lappes, as they never may recover
again, so that then good night at Algate) to be void of doubt, disdain, or
fear to loose my labors? When as Galen was so afraid both to lose his
labors, and also to incur the envy of maliciouse cauillers, albeit he well
knew that day would appear at a little hole, and that the Sun with his
bright beams, would at length perse thruogh the foggie and dark mistes, and
consume them away. For all counterfeyte virtue in the presence of true virtue,
is no more able to abide, then the snow is able to withstand the heat:
howbeit for a time it may.

Therefore Galen seeing most as well of the Romans as Greeks, spending all
their times in vanities, few regarding the substances, altogether given to the
accident, as if a flock of sheep, a drove of fat ware, a number of fermes,
lea^^s, Lordships, Manours, Offices, etc. were the chiefest good, most
studiously to be desired and earnestlyest to be sought for, having no care,
while time served, of the health of their bodies, which is the very thing that
continues the time of their life: but all settinge greatest store by their
painted sheath, as if a gaie or gilded robe were better or more to be desired,
the^ an healthy body in plain cloth, or a lame jade betrapped with pendentes of
gold, more laudable and serviceable then a sound and lusty courser in a
steel sadle: or a weak witles head covered with a cappe of aglettes, better
then an head furnished with liberal disciplines, of lively mind, and noble
life, bent altogether upon Virtue, covered with a plain bonnet. What service
I pray you (if I may be so bold) does a man affected with the sleeping
sickness, uncured, or a man numme deprived of al his limbs, the same truly
that a painted man does, except perhaps more greeuouse to him self, his
friends, and the world, as was he that was conuayed unto me on horseback
from Master Guilbies, whom I healed at Louth, An. 1562. What should I stand
here expressing infinite millions, that throw the noble art of Phisique have been preserved, I can testify of a thousand, and not so few that I have cured
in all parts, for these fourteen years: some frantique, Apoplectique,
Epileptique, Melanchollique, Paralitique, Goutie, Pleuritique, Hydropique, some
with pertisique, Stone, Strangurie, Consumpcions, Suffocations, Conmulsions,
Obstructions, Ouerflowinges, Barrenes, Descendings, Ascendings, the parts
wasted, one part eaten, another vlcerated, the body distempered, as well the
spirits, humors, as members, with most vehemente agues: all the which
fieuers you may find in my Dial of Agues, and others in Methodo nostro ad.
etc. be it no more vain gloriously published then Hippo. the popular
infirmities, or with Galen the effects which he wrought by Purgation: or that
Montan. does show in his Consultacions, or Amatus Lusitanus, in his Centuriis,
and a thousand other of the learned and expert Phisicions.

Notwithstanding, if any man shall take in hand, as many good me^ do, to show
the way of restoring the^ again to their natural health (being a most
excellent act) their shall not be wanting sum, that if they can not disprayse
it for blushing, yet they will at the circumstances, or some other thing be
carping, or else the sick them selves for want of learning will give credit
rather to the ignorant then to the skillful, aproued and expert. To be brief,
they shall have good leave for my part, seeing it is, and has among so many ben
a commune evil, and the wysest sort think it a booteles matter to persuade the
forlorn hope, such as have decreed to cast away them selves, and contemn
all virtuous diligence, either taken for the preservation of soul or body,
albeit for the weal of the godly, I will not stay but proceed forwards (in
so reasonable manner as I may in so doubtful matters) too show how the Bathes
of the City of Bathe, will aid such as need them: and therefore I suppose it
is worthily termed Bathes aid, if only to your aid for want of other remedy
you will use them, and not as brutishe and senceles persons frequent them. For
as the learned Lactantius shows in steed of things defensible, against out
ward chances, given unto the unreasonable beasts: unto man as a far more
excellent gift, the unspeakable wisdom of our creator has bestowed reason:
therefore according to reason in time if thou have need, frequent them.

This treatice therefore only is achieved, wherein if you hestowe some labor,
most things doubtful you may find discussed at the least so into your
remembrance destilled, that no question needful is, least unremembered. In
which if any thing I have bin over brief, consider our travail, gyuing us
time, and we will amplify it, if not, do it your selves if you can, if you
can not, it were no good manners, to find fault with an other, for that you
can not or will not amend your selves. If it be to tediouse or over curiouse,
I do not know why therefore you should greatly mislyke it, for if you be
bidden to a banquet, and there be more variety of dishes then you be
accustomed, or can away withal, it were no reason that there with you should be
offended, seeing the cost is others, and the delicates ordained for you. But it
may be that you think it neither to brief nor to long, and yet not altogether
after your mind. No marvel, for I use mine own vein and not yours.
Nevertheless I would not that you should take my words as the sacred
scriptures, or to think that whatsoever I shall speak sure and certain, but
as the sayings of some simple man following that which is probable by
conjecture, for further then likelyhode I can not go. It is enough for them to
tell certain and sure things which say those things may be known, and do
also profess them selves wise, but for my part to be a lover of wisdom if
is very requisite.

Thus (gentle Reader) while I labor to proffet thee, I am feign to submit my
works to every curiouse carper, howbeit I crave this at their hands with
Apelles, who when he had made a most excellent picture, insomuch that it rather
seemed a living thing then the counterfayt of any, offering it to the world to
be vewed, (to thend that if any found fault therewith, he might amend it) there
was amongst many other, a shoemaker which found fault with the show latchet,
which Apelles hearing (in a secret place for the purpose attending) with his
pencil forth with amended, as I shall gladly if reasonably thereto I be
admonished. But he not contented therewith (as one by lykelyhoode somewhat
proud, that he could find fault with Apelles workmanshippe) dispraysed
further the shadowing of the tippe of the nose. To whom Apelles answered, no
farther then thy show souter. And true it is that of art no man can judge but
the artificer. No temperate man will take in evil part, the travail of good
natured persons for the universal profet, seeing Tullie in his first book of
his Tusculane questions, and also in his Offices, as all other careful of the
well public, affirms that they be of best nature which think themselves
borne to help, save, and comfort men. But when such lack estimacion, there is
small cause of diligence to attain perfection, honor breeds arts, all men
are stirred to study by fame, and always those things are little set by, which
few or none do advance. In fine, as in pleasing the godly, virtuous and
indifferent Reader, I account my pains abundantly recompensed: So for the
reproachful words of the backbiting Zoilus, (a number of which this our age is
notwithout, as neither the corn without chafe.) I pass not a straw, so that
I may well conclude with Erasmus saying.

Nil moror aut lauds dabis aut conuicia vulgi:
Pulchrum est vel doctis, vel placuisse piis.
Thus committing thee good Reader to the giver of all goodness, who endue thee
with whatsoever thy gentle heart desires remain thine to the uttermost of my
power as thou find.

FINIS.
CATHALOGVS AVTHORVM quorum frequenti testimonio in hoc opusculo vsi sumus.
Aristot. Auicen. Auerhois. Archigenes. Albertus Magnus. Ambrosius. Aetius.
Baptista Montanus. Beda. Basilius. Balus. Democritus. Dares Phrigius.
Empedocles. Erasmus. Fallopius. Fernelius. Galenus. Georgius Agricola.
Hippocrates. Ioannes de Dondis. Iacobus Siluius. Ioannes Almenar. Lactantius
Matthew. VVestmo. Martinus Roland. Mileus Melancthon. Montuus. Martinus Curtess.
Oribasius. Plato. Plinius. Pausanias. Rentiphilus. Razis. Seneca. Strabo.
Scribonius Larg. Sauonarola. Tullius Thesmophilus. Theophrastus. Vitruuius.
etc.
The First Book, of Bathes aid.
WHEN as one kind of knowledge leads as well to expel sicknesses, as to
mainteyn health, as Galen affirms libro primo, de sanitate tuenda: It
behooves him, that would either preserve a whole man, or restore a sick man,
perfectly to know the one and the other, before either be attempted* and
neither of those can be performed, when as the subject his perfect state is
not considered, the medicinal matter thoroughly examined, neither by any skill
applied. It shall be therefore not in vain, to make a pathway that may lead and
direct, in brief rules, as well to the one as to the other of the last
ententes, at Bathe desired. But least there might more in this work be sought,
then the meening thereof does extend: you shall not only find what sicknesses
the Bathes of Bath helps, but also, by what reason and means the same is
obtained, how it may be acquired, and therewith approved. A doctrine of sundry
Clerks elsewhere attempted, and in diverse tongues, countries, and sorts
handled: Some has showed the benefit of the Bathes in Italy, some in
Germany, some of Spanie, some of Afrike, etc. and that diuersele for diverse
causes, and sundry effects. But there is not one that has written of ours in
England, Brytayn, saving Doctor Turner, who in his brief view, (as he him self
confesses) and discourse of sundry Bathes, has remembered ours only of Bathe,
albeit, so barely, as few, or none, is put thereby to the consideracion, of the
full entents. For he has neither showed, the antiquity, cause of their heat,
reason of their force, etc. Nor what the persons that use them, ought to know,
and observe, all the which in this work, shall beneficially be noted. But
forasmuch as every thing that is entreated of, must first be defined, and
distinguished, seeing that the property of every definicion is, to show
apparently to the senses, the matter intended, and that in such compendiouse
form, and order, as what is needful it contains, and what is superfluouse
it leaves: as every distinction, in his propre branches spreads, therefore
of Tullie chief of all latyne elegancy used: ye which although we be far
inferyor, yet in will, to do that might be profitable, nothing behind.

Natural bathes be those, which flow through the bowels of the earth, taking
their effects, of the virtue, of such things, as they run by, and receue
power of, for many infirmities most auaylable.

Of these, some be fervent hot, some luke warm, some between both, some not at
all, some of Brimstone, some of Allume, some of Salt, some of Copper, some of
Iron, some of Lyme, some of Lead, some of Gould, some of Silver, some of one
kind of commixtion of myneralles, some of another, and sundry of these are
found with us.

Artificial Bathes be those, which be made by knowledge in Phisike, either
for the dispersing of humors, locked in the parts, or else for the
strengthening of the members weakened, eftesones to be renewed, of these also
there be diverse kinds, of diverse qualities, and temperatures. But because our
intent is, especyall to entreat of the bathes, of the city of Bathe, in ye
county of Somerset. Albeit we will briefly touch Buckstones, sainctt Vincents,
and hallywell. First edifyed by Bladud, calling it after his own name, Kayer
Blaidin, and after Kayer Bathe, as Matheus Westmonasteriensis shows agreing
to our first native tongue. Brittysh, now improprely called Welsh, for Kayer
signifies fortres or walled city, as is easy to be gathered by the monuments
themselves, in all parts of this land, of which for the better testimony, we
shall recyte one or two (omitting six hundred) as they come first, too our
remembrance, beginning at the uttermost co^fyne, in the borders of Scotland:
although then, and long after, it was one monarche, and tongue: Kayer Leil, the
which as yet has not lost the name, of his founder Leil, as if you would say,
Leils forte. Likewise York was named after his first builder Ebranck, Kayer
Ebrancke, Ebrankes forte. Westchester was first called, and is yet with the
Brittaynes, Kayer Leon Gaur are dur dur, of Leon Gaur, that mighty Gyante,
ruler then of that soil, as if you would say, Leon Gaurs fortres, upon the
water, that is on the River Hauon, or water, which the Sea there ouerfloweth,
all yt which the British tongue, and manner of the place confirms. Moreover
first, more then two thousand years passed, Excester was, and yet is named,
in their Records, Kayer pen Hoel coyd, Howels chief fortres, Kayer pen sant,
the forte of the head Saint, Kayer pen Ruthe, the forte on the read head, and
lastely Kayer Yeske, fortres, on the River Yeske, which now corruptly they call
Exe. All the which at the request of master Whoker of the said city, (a
gentill man not only of great learning, but therewith for his virtues, of great
credyte) I turned as you have hard, forth of the British, into the Saxon or
English tongue, at my first being there, as may appear in his history,
dedicate to the same, most elega^tly penned, which before that, was of none of
the Saxon or English citizens understood, nor of any other that I could
learn. Thus much I thought good to note, albeit some perhaps will think it
vnpertinet, to the purpose propounded, leaping over the style before they come
at it, varyeng far from our mind, in so doing, for we think it a matter
very requisite, as does most sort of the learned, that such notable monuments
be revived, because some have been so doubtful of the Analogy of words, which
often be corrupted, and no marvel, for upon some part of us Britains,
first tryumphed the Romans, calling many things as them lyked. Then the
Pictes, after them the Saxons, then the Dans, and lastly the Normains, all
sense Julius Caeser his time, every sort seeking their own fame, and continual
glory, as they might.

The chief Spring of Bathe, is in the Churchyard, then dedicated to Minerua,
and after constituted the Abbay, of the Monks of the order of saint Benedict,
as says Bid, Basyl, and Bale, in historiarum libris: Erected first by
Blaeidin Cloyeth, or Bladudus Magus, that wise Magicyan, a Brittayne, the nynth
king after Brute, about the year of the world, according, to the account of
the Scripture.3080. before the Incarnacion of Christ.890. Helisaeus Prophet
then in Israel, the son of, 1 Ludhurdebras son of 2 Le^^^ the son of 3
Brute Greaneshild the son of 4 Ebranc the son of 5 Memprice the son of 6
Madan the son of 7 Locrine after whom the Britains or welsh mon call
England, Loygar the son of 8 Brute the first reducer of this la^d to a monar.
which arrived at Dodnes now called Totnes, he builded London and named it Troy
neweth although our common cronicles call it troy noua^t for lack of skill in ye
british tongue as they do totnes, for ye one signinifieth set nier in welsh
british or corni. ye other new troy. which was the son of 9 Siluius
posthumus the son of 10 Ascanius the son of 11 Tros builder of Troy ye
puissant state which after held wars with all the mighty princes of Greece
for.x. years.vi. months etc. The son of 21 Erictonius the son of 13
Dardanus cauled ye son of Jupiter (as Dares Phrigius the Greake writer
testifies) as I conjecture for a sir name of virtue by ye name of god as ye
au^cie^t poets and philosophers were wont to call good princes and such others as
their countreies did profet with some new befit for the common wealth. etc. The
son of 14 Cambablaston the son of 15 Altheus the son of 16 Tuscus the
son of 17 Labien the son of 18 Messerain the son of 19 Cham the son of
20 Noe of whom sprang. 72 generacions of Iaphet. 15 of Sem. 27. of Cham. 30 of
Cham and Iaphet descended the Gentiles on whom this Genealogy, hitherto
stands. The son of 21 Lamech the son of 22 Mathusal the son of 23 Enoch
the son of 24 Iared the son of 25 Malalel the son of 26 Cainan the son
of 27 Enos the son of 28 Seth the son of 29 Adam and Eua. From Noe we have
followed the Septuaginta, as we did the most probable histories until Nos.




Concerning the noblenes, genealogy, of the founder, antiquity of the
Brittaynes, and origyne of these our Bathes of Bathe, we have spoken somewhat.
It rests, that in a word or two, be declared, their excellent properties, and
worthy effects, aydefull in deed, to the most sort of infirmities, accidents,
and greefes, which as says Galen, Lib. de symptomatum differencijs, is the
fealing of a thing contrary to nature, and after Auicen, in canonibus, they be
these.

Stryking. Breaking. Lewsing. Ytching. Smarting. Pricking. Shrinking.
Streatching. Persing. Beating. Greauouse. Heavy. Biting. Tyring. Stunning, or
Sleeping.
And for these disseases following, etc.

1 Morphewes 2 Scales. 3 Scabs. 4 Scurfe. 5 Wheales 6 Pustles, 7 Byles. 8
Apostemes, or swellings. 9 Ulcers. 10 Letters. 11 Ringwormes 12 Lepryes. 13
Pockes 14 Goutes 15 Ioyntaches 16 Paulsye 17 Apoplexyes. 18 Faulling
sicknesses. 19 Shakyngs. 20 Numnes 21 Crampes 22 Destillacions. 23 Rheumes. 24
Poses 25 Whorsenes 26 Coughes. 27 Running of the eyes. 28 Running of the ears.
29 Singing and ringing of the^. 30 Dropping of the vryne. 31 Diabetes which is
the over making of water. 32 Tenesmos which is a desire of going to the stole,
without doing of any thing, or very little with great pain. 33 Collycke 34
Flyres 35 Hemorhoydes 36 Pyles 37 Fevers interpolate, yt come of melancholy or
fleame: entering the Bathe ii hours before the fit. 38 Hardness of ye Spleen,
and swelling thereof. 39 Swelling of ye matrice, or place of co^cepcion 40
Hardness of ye Liver, and coldness thereof. 41 Wyndines. 42 Hardness 43 Barenes. 44
Over slipperines. 45 Coldness 46 Wasting of Seade. 47 Green siknes 48
Hydropsyes 49 Coldness of the brain. 50 Lack of memory 51 The sleapinge
sickness.
Now, as you have hard the disseases and greafes, which it helps. So I think
it not impertinent, to show the causes of the pains before declared, that you
may the reedyer co^sult, with your Phisicions thereof, as of all other things,
heareafter to be mentioned, before ye seek the aid, of the Bathes, and
therefore, that preordinate Physician, by providence divine, Hippoc. the prince
of Phisike, says, that ye way by which the sickness is understood, is the
perfect pathe to the curacion thereof.

Galen likewise, the worthiest Doctor, in Natures schole, wylleth that before
the cause be iuged, no remedy be given, whose councels herein, I wysh you to
follow.

1 Ytching, pain comes of a tarte or salt humor. 2 Smarting, of an eger
humor. 3 Pricking, of a sharp humor. 4 Stretching, of windines, that
stretches out the Synewes, and muscles, contrary to nature. 5 Compressyue,
comes of matter, or wyndines, that makes narrow, or constrayneth, the
membre or part. 6 Concussiue, or shaking pain, proceeds of matter, that is
resolved between the muscles, and panycles: which by extending the panicle,
causes solucion of continuitie. 7 Wearyeng, is cause of humors, or wyndines,
enclosed between the panicle and the bone: or of cold, drawing the said
panicle together. 8 Lewsyng pain, is caused of matter, stretching the flesh
and the muscles, and not the chordes. 9 Persyng, is caused of humors, or gross
windines, retained between the tunicles, of an hard and gross membre, as in
the gut Colon, which without ceasing pearseth as it were boring through with a
gymlet. 10 Actual is caused of humor retained in a member, when solucyon of
continuitie is made. 11 Stupefactiue, is caused of vehement cold or hete, and
by stopping of the pores, retayning the sensible Spyrites: as by strong
binding, or ouerfilling of the ways. 12 Beating, or quapping, comes of a hot
Aposteme: for a cold never causes pain except it turn to heat, neither is
biting pain in hot Apostemes, but when it proceeds of inflamacion,
sensibilitie of the place, and multitude of beating veins. 13 Heavy or
grauatiue pain is caused in an Aposteme in a membre not sensible as in the
Lungs, kydneys, and in the spleen, or mylt. 14 Tyring pain, comes of a
laboryouse exercise, or thorough an humor, vehemently stretching the membre. 15
Biting pain, is caused of sharp and eger humor.
But now let us return again, to the propreties of the Bathes the which in
some anoye the stomache and in the most sort byndeth very much the body if
they drink not of the water as in the last book shall be handled. The which
water, many suppose, has not ben accustomed, to be appointed to be drunk, by
the most ancient phisicions, of the Greakes, the reason is, they say, for
that Galen (whose manner was to pass over nothing worthy to be entreated of)
has so slightlie, skypped over their aids, virtues, uses, and effects, which,
if they had been effectual, to be accounted, he would as sone, have written a
book of it, as of Tryacle, or of the faculty, of simple medicines, etc. This
conjecture I deny not may cause some to think so, who have not well digested
his mening, in all his works: whose whole scope is, to write of nothing at
large, but that wherein reason preuayleth, with experyence. But because, these
Bathes were the medicines of Empyrykes, he left them at large, howbeit, in
diverse parts of his works, we find mention made of Bathes, and especially
in his fourth book De sanitate tuenda, where he has these words: there be some
waters, in use to be drunk, for the purging of the body, as the waters, in
which Nitre, bitumen etc. Again, he says in his first book De sanitate
tuenda, that all waters, representing the force of medicine, as the waters of
Allume, Sulphur, or Bitumen, have force of drying, by the which, it is more
then manifest, that he commends them, when as he calls them medicinal.
Moreover to prove that they were in use to be drunk, both before Galen his
time, and since, by the dyscourse following, it may most evidently appear.

Scribonius Largus, who was Galens ancient, appointed to be dronk for the
ulcers, and swellings of the bladder, water, wherein Iron was quenched, and
this he did, as he affyrmeth, to imitate the propreties, of the Bathes of
Ferraria as you may read in his.146. ca. Archigenes also proves, as
testifyeth Actius lib. 11. that waters of bathes, were used, to be appointed to
be drunk, for thaffects of ye bladder, of the most ancient Phisicions.
Oribasius likewise, appoynteth the use of drinking, both of hot and cold
bathes, In collectaneis ad Iulianum imperatorem. Pansanias does show, how that
the people Cynethensis, used to drink of the medicinable Well called Alisson
for the biting of mad dogs, in Archadicis suis. Vitruuius, entreating of
the waters of Bathes, proves, that by reason of Bitumen, and Nitre, they were
drunk, for purging of the body plentifully. lib. nono, what need many words?
In the time of Augustus Caesar, the waters of bathes, were in great use to be
dronk: at what time, Phisicions flourished, not only in the hye court of
Rome, but also, over all, as preciouse stones, set in goulden ouches. Finally
Pliny shows, that the waters of bathes, of Nitre, and Allume, were often
dronk, for the purging of the body. lib. iii. hist. not. The which Gabriel
Fallopius, most reasonably confirms. lib. de mediatis aquis. Howbeit none of
all these writers, nor any other yt I can hear of, do make any mention, of our
bathes in England, Britain, or if any do, it is unknown, and also
insufficient, without probable reason, why such virtues, should proceade from
them: consydering it were thargument of blunt wits, and also of feeble
understanding, to judge the nature of our Bathes, for any cause yt they have
uttered of theirs, not knowing ours: Seeing Plato wylleth, as may appear by his
reasoning with Socrates: that every matter probable, must be reasoned to and
froe, that so by our senses it may be known, if for Philosophers we will be
accounted and not for rude Empirykes in phoedo, the which thing also Tullie
affyrmeth in these words, Speculator, vaenatorque naturae, Physicus: the
Phisicyon is a viewer, and sercher out of Nature. Wherefore according to my
capacity, desyrouse of the original causes of things, a lover of wisdom,
may not be so satisfied, but rather, seek further, for the efficient causes
ymediate, mediate, and material causes, with the commixtions of myneralles,
qualities and temperatures, faculties, and degrees, as well by authority, and
reason, as by experyence, as in the next books shall appear, seeing they be
accounted most happy, which do best attain, to the knowledge, of the causes of
things, for, Foelix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, otherwise, might
fantasy stand, for understanding, and wilful opinion, for absolute reason.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of Bathes aid.
FOR as much as in every kind of profession, the use, benefyte, and knowledge of
the cause is so necessary, that without it known, it is in a manner
impossible, that any Science may consist, sure, and certain. If so be that
science itself is nothing else but an intelligence habit, knowinge things, by
their causes and effects. I thought it convenient to speak in a word or
two, of the efficient, immediate, mediate, and material causes, of the heat
of Bathes: that so the end, which is the use or profit of the thing, for which
we labor, may more manifestly appear, and the abuse which is the improper
end of things, may be avoided: an argument, as I suppose, not impertinent to
this our present purpose. In describing the which, diverse Philosophers have bin
of diverse minds, as hereafter shall more plainly appear, and certainly this
disagreeing of so wise men, may present, arguments of most weighty questions,
to you very doubtefull, until they be discussed. Therefore, that I may not
seem over tediouse, nor yet over brief, I will allege the chiefest, as well
of the most ancient, and of the middle sort as of the later, in our time.

Mileus the Philosopher, has spoken in this case, and he said ye cause
through which the waters of Bathes be heated, is none other, then a wind,
heatinge in the depth of the earth, and in the hollownesses which be in the
bowels of the same. Wherefore, that heat reboundeth upon the water, and so it
comes forth hot.

Rentiphilus and Thesmophilus in this point be contrary to Mileus, and the
world followed them: who said, the earth in those places is very thin, and not
of coniuncte parts, so that the heat of the sun entering, heateth the water,
in the hollownesse of the earth, and in the caves, and trenches, which be in
the depth, by means whereof it comes forth hot.

Democritus contrariwise, said that the cause of the heat, of hot Bathes is,
for that in the holownesses of the earth, there be mountains of Chalk, and
heaps of ashes, which when the water does run upon, it is heated, and so
the water passes out hot, upon the face of the earth, and of this mind, have
been many that I have consulted with, concerning the hot wells at Buckstone,
which opinion is altogether vain as hereafter shall appear, left unhandled,
in our work dedicated thereunto, wishing therefore, all those that will know,
the reason at large, why, and how, waters become hot, to read this our work,
where I doubt not, they shall find wherewith to content them.

Seneca, and Albertus magnus, affirm, that the imediate or efficient cause, of
the hot Bathes, is for that they run upon a Mine of Brimstone, and through it
are heated. And this opinion, they, and also Sauonarola, with many other would
father upon Aristotle. Howbeeit, so great a Philosopher, could not so much as
think it, the reason is, because they had read, in a certain book ascrybed
to Aristotle, de proprietatibus Elementorum, that the waters of the Baths, flow
hot, because they pass through a Mine of Brimstone, which book to have been
none of his, it may appear by other places, in his works, wherein he freely
protests a contrary judgment, as in secundo meteore et in problematu^ 24,
sectione 17, probl.

The last, and truest, is the opinion of Aristotle, who supposed, that the
waters of Bathes, were made hot, of a most strong, and seruent cause, which he
supposed, to be none other, then fire included in places under the earth: and
that fire is under the earth, it may easily appear at Eclam, in the Isle of
Iseland, and at Varigazzo and Florence in Italy, and also in Sicilie, and
between the great seas, also in Darbyshire, with infinite other places beside.

Now, that the truth, and falshode, of the aforesaid opinions, may more
clearly appear, the divine godhed, first called upon, we will lay this
foundation, that all simple water, essentially challenges, unto it self
especial cold, for it is of cold elements the cheifest, as the prince of
Philosophers declares, and as hereafter it shall be made manifest, in the table
of the things natural, in the third book.

Moreover let this be a principle, that all water heated, must be supposed to
be by virtue, and essence, cold, for all such so demisse of nature, returns to
cold, as by experience we do prove, for if it be taken in a vessel out of the
spring, it waxes cold, whereby it is inferred that the waters of Bathes, by
some other means become hot, must be by proper essence and nature, virtualiter
cold, accidentaliter hot.

Furthermore seeing water is so cold, as in the last degree the quality
especially disproporcionated, with so great a degree of heat, as is the degree
of fervent heat, cannot be induced, but by an especial heat. So that, likewise
it is inferred, that it is not so heated by a wind heating it, as it pleased
Milene, nor by the heat of the Sun, as it pleased Reutiphilus and Thesmophilus,
nor yet because it runs upon a mou^tayn of Chalk or ashes, as Democritus
supposed: seeing these can bring nothing to pass, beyond their own proper
degree, while they work according to nature, except it work upon some subject,
which is like to the worker, and so by affinity receue the impression, as the
light by the brightness and cleernes of Diamonds, Saphirs, and Cristal, or such
like, strengthening the same, but in these, of the^ before aledged, there is no
such aptnes of heating, cooling, moystning or drying, or by any other means
furthering the same, as you may perceue by your own outward senses. Beside
these heat preserved, becomes more mighty, being joined to drynes, then to
moisture, seeing drines does whet and sharpen heat, contrariwise moisture does
dull it, as you may also easily gather.

Lastly, actual fire, working upon the water it self, can not put into it a
greater degree of heat, the water it self remaining, then the degree of fervent
heat: Experience does verifye the supposition whereby it may be inferred, that
the waters of Bathes can not be brought to so great a degree of heat, by whot
vapoures under the earth, nor yet by their dashing from high places, and
craggie, for then the waters, descendinge out of the cragged rocks, in the
high hills, in Kayer Naruayne shyre, there called VVithua, and out of the
raven cragge in Cumbreland, should through their long course and violent
tossinges become hot. But experience proves the contrary, therefore dashinge
together, and passage of the waters, through stony places, is not the immediate
cause of the heat, of the waters of Bathes: Seeing that effect, lastly is
fire, neither be such vapors, or dashinges, matchable to fire in heat, so
that from them, such an heat can not proceed. Wherefore it shall be showed that
if it be heated, their heat shall be by none other means, but of fire. And
seeing fire does so heat, it ensues, that in the bowels, of the earth, fire
may be found. Which, as we have said, shall be farther approved, both by
experience, and reason.

Auicen and Auerhois do permit, that Elements are formally in things mixed,
which thing we leave worthy to be granted by their authority: so that then
thus wise we will argue: It is an harder thing for nature to be able to bring
forth in the bowels of the earth, a thing mingled perfyte, then a thing simple
perfect, when as a thing mingled thus wise, can not be produced without the
simple, seeinge it is presupposed: but nature can do the first, seeing it
brings forth Gold, Silver, Brimstone, Salt peter, Alume, Iron, and all other
myneralles, Ergo, it can do the second: ergo it can bring forth fire also.
And the cause of the beginning of this fire, is none other then that which is
assigned of Aristo. in secundo meteo capite de terraemotu. And it is an
exhalacion, hot and dry, included in the concauities of the earth, where it
seeking a passage out, and not fynding, it is labored, being so labored, it
is rarefied, and being rarifyed, is kindled, because great rarefaction
stands with great heat. If therefore it happen that where such vapor is
included, and after the manner as is said, inflamed, if I say it happen, that
there be metal of Bitumen, or Sulphur, it is also kindled, and the fire is so
long preserved, as the matter feeding it, shall not fail, which matter
feeding, must now be searched out, because it is not yet evident, what it is,
and also many of those which do follow the opinion of Aristo. concerning the
cause, preserving the fire under the earth, do disagree, although all do
confess, that this fire under the earth, has some subject preserving it, and
that this fire, is the cause of the heat of the waters of Bathes, hereafter
shall appear more evidently.

Johannes de Dondis, an excellent learned man, and a pure Peripatetique, has
made a very goodly treatice of the hot wells, in the field of Padua, and
there amongst other questions, he moves this: Whence it is, that the waters
of Bathes do spring hot? he answers at the length with Arist. and says,
that the cause is fire under the earth, and that such waters do flow
perpetually hot, because the fire is perpetually preserved, in those places
under the earth: after he demands what is the cause preserving, and
answered (whereunto very ignorauntly Sanonarola cleaves) that it is heat,
excitated of the Stars, in the face of the earth, which heat he affirms
to be, not only the cause preserving, but also the efficient, as it were: and
the material and subject of the fire, he supposes to be an exhalation hot
and dry, that is wind. And because the wind is still ministered, therefore
that especially fire, is perpetually preserved, and perpetually heateth the
waters.

Afterward he demands, of the place, of that fire under the earth, and
says, that it is not nigh the center of the earth, because then, it would
easily be corrupted, for the earth, is there most pure and therefore, the virtue
does more flourish, so that it is most cold, neither is the place of the fire,
under the brimme of the Earth, for if it were there contained, it would burn up
the plants, and whatsoever is in the face of the same, and therefore he
concludes, that it is in the middle hollownesses, between these two extremes,
that is, beetwene the center, and the face of the earth, and he adds, that
this place, where the fire lies, is distant from the face of the earth.xxx.
Miles, whereby it appears, that he would have the Sun, to perse the earth,
by the space of.xxx. Miles. But this opinion is false, because, if the beams
of the Sun, should keep fire under the earth: it must first pass, thorough
the face of the earth, and then pass, part after part, until it come, to that
especial heat, and so before it come to that fire, it would burn, whatsoever
is found on the superficies of the earth. But admit that this heavenly heat,
passing thorough the superficies, of the earth, do not burn all that it
encountreth, yet it will not preserve that fire, because, seeing it is.xxx.
miles distant from the superficies of the earth, as he says, toward the center
before the heat excitated of the Sun beams, come thither, it will be so
flacke that it will not be warm, therefore, the opinion of Ioannes is false.
Again, if fire under the earth, that is this flame, and especial heat, were
perpetually preserved, of the heavenly heat, it would ensue, that in cold
Regions, waters of Bathes would not be hot, but in hot Regions, they would be
most fervent hot, because in cold regions, there is but small reflection of the
beams of the Sun, for which cause they be cold. Therefore the heat of the
Sun, in them can not be so hot, that it should minister too the fire, under
the earth so strong an heat, but in the hot Zone, there should not only be so
great an heat, that those waters should be most hot, but also, all things
should be burned. But daily experience, proves ye contrary, and also the
authority of Matten Curtesse, in his book of Nauigacion, to Charles the fith
Monarche.

If therefore, the heavenly heat, were the cause of heat, under the earth, in
cold climates, hot waters would not flow, but always cold, and in hot regions,
they would burst out most hot, yet the conseque^t is false, because there are
found hot Bathes, in the cold countries, as is showed before. Also, in the
feeld of Lukes, there be most hot bathes, although that place, all the year,
for the most is covered with snow, as testifies Fallopius, what need we seek
examples so far of? our country is colder then Italy and yet at Bathe, S.
Vincents, and Buckestones, always they flow hot. But if ye heavenly heat, were
there so reflected, snow would first be melted. But that is not so, for ye snow,
sometime continues longer, sometime shorter. Let it be, that the Sun
beams, may be hot in the face of ye earth, by Antyparistasis, yet there can not
be so great Antyparistasis, that so great heat should be excitated, for that
there is not such Antiparistasis, made in the summer. Again, if ye opinion of
Ioannes should be true, ye disco^modities which are aforesaid, should ensue of
the opinions, of the^ which did say, that the waters of Bathes were hot,
thorough the heat of the sun, and wynd. Moreover the opinion of Dondis
appears false, by that that he supposes, one thing very false, that the
heat of ye sun, heateth under the earth xxx. miles, which thing is most
false. For at our being in Wookie hole, besides Wels, and in Poole hole, beside
Buckstones, in the chief of summer, those places were right cold, yet not
half a mile, from the Sodde, or turphe of the earth. Also Theophrast in his
history of plants, affyrmeth that the roots of trees, or plants, do stretch
so far into the ground, as ye heat of the Sun, does perse, where also he
shows, that some said, that the roots of trees, did counteruayle the length
of one foot and an half, which opinion there also he confuteth worthily, for
it is more then manifest, that many trees, do take deaper root, as the oak
trees, pyne trees, larnix trees, fir trees, ash trees, and plane trees, with
infinite others, howbeit of ye length of ye roots of ye plane trees, he recites
for a miracle, because it stretches, direct dounward, under ye earth. 33 foot,
which in other trees do not, although they be perhaps longer. Therefore,
seeing the roots of trees, do descend, no deeper then 33. foot, and that
also to be miraculouse, it plainly proves, that the beams of the sun, can
not perse deeper, seeing the heat of the sun, under the earth, he would make
the cause of their length, and of the heat of the waters of Bathes, which are
proved, to flow out of deeper places.

Therefore, the opinion of Johannes de Dondis, is altogether false. Other some
there be, followinge the Peripatetiques that would the cause of the fire to be
a subject, feeding such fire perpetually, which always preserves itself, but
afterward, what that feeding should be, their is a discord between them. Some
of them say, it is Allume, and the reason with which they are moved, is,
because the fire is perpetual, and necessarely there is required, some sound
nourishement, which should last long, and that they say, is Allume, because
it is hard, and compacte of substance: It can not easily be consumed, Vitruuius
was the Author of this opinion, in his eight book. But this opinion is false,
for there is only a double substance, which may be the nourishement of this
fire, one truly oily, and fattie: and the other thin ^orye, replenished with
much air, but the one easly catches fire, and long keeps it: and ye other
although it be easly kindled, yet it keeps not ye fire long, as it appears
in styxes, straw, and chafe kindled, and like matter. Let us now see whether
Allume (as some would have it) may be reduced to the one or the other, or not;
truly I can not see, how it may be reduced to the first, seeinge it has no
oily thing in it, nor fattie, nor to the second, because allume is of a stony
substance, although it be dry, yet that dryenesse is earthy, not ayery. And
if it should be in the fire xx. years, it would never be inflamed, as you may
prove if you will not believe me. Wherefore the opinion of Vitruuius is false.
Georgius Agricola in his book which he has written, De subterraneis, which
is truly, a very fair, and most learned book, as be all the other, which that
learned man has diuulgated, says, that the subject preserving fire under the
earth, is Bitumen, for to this, he says, some thing must be subject, and the
feeding of this fire, is required to be fattie, that it may easily be taken
with fire, and this is not desired in bitumen, as it appears of Naphta,
whereof comes our petrae oleum, which is a kind of bitumen, and if it shall
be new, it catches the flame from far, so that in the fields of Mutina,
says Fallopius, where it is gathered, plentifully, it is necessary for them
which gather it, to leave their candle far from the place, where they do
gather it, and they gather it in certain places under the earth, unto which
they go down by many steps, and they be most dark places, so that they are
constrained to carry with them a light. Therefore seeinge bitumen may easily be
kindled, and is plentifully found in places under the earth, as plenty of
Naphta gathered in the aforesaid place does show: it is very like that it is
the subject, feeding such fire.

Secondly, Agricola adds, and this mark ye, says Fallopius, that when the
heat, of waters of Bathes, is so great, and sometime, they burst out most
plentifuly says Agricola, we can not say, that the fire which heateth them,
should be under the conduytes, of those waters, (for they would not so wax
hot) but it is necessary to say, that the fire is in the conduytes, where the
bitumen it self is. Of which thing it is an argument, that no matter can be
found which may be kindled, and burn in water, saving bitumen, which also if
you power on water, burns never the less: you may also try this with
Camphyre, which according to some, is a kind of bitumen. For if you kindle it,
and cast it kindled into the water, you shall see, that it will burn no
worse, then if it were without water, wherefore when Bitumen does burn in
water, it seems to be said, that fire heating the waters, is in the
conduyts, and not under them. Likewise this opinion may be confirmed, of the
property of bitumen, because it does not only burn in the water, but is also
nourished of the water, for it draws a certain humiditie of the water, which
it turns into the nature of it self, and it is the cause, that it does
endure long, prove you this, I pray you, taking a drop of it, and you shall
see the Naphta kindled, and dure so long, that it may be maruaylouse, which
could not be, except the feeding of that flame were increased by the humiditie
of the water, which Naptha draws, and changing to his own nature, ministers
feeding to the flame long. And that you may prove of Camphyre, and such other
things, whence it is no maruayle, if waters of Bathes be always hot, seeing
the fire, through which they ware hot, has for a feedinge and propre subject
plenty of bitumen, contained in the places under the earth, and long
preserving the flame. This opinion of Agricola, although it be very like to
be true, yet it has a difficulty against it, because both experience, and
also the authority of the most learned men, is against it. For Vitruuius,
which was a great searcher out of things under the earth, wills that the
fire is under the conduyts, and yet Agricola says, it is not necessary. It
is also against the experience of the old Romans, who as they were most
wealthy, least nothing unproven, and amongst other things of those which did
seem impossible, they practiced to make a well, whose water might continually
slow hot, and the matter succeeding, according to their desire, for they framed
brazen pypes which they rouled into many rou^dnesses, so yt the pypes did
resemble the Spyres of a Dragon, and for this cause, they called the pypes
dragons: these pypes so framed had in the one part an hole, by which cold water
entered in, and by another hole, which they had below, the waters of the
fountain did enter in, and afterward under the spyres of the pypes, they made
fire, by which the water of the first spyre was skarcely heated, the second
more, the third yet more, and so in all, the water was more hot, and so
continually the water of the well flowed hot, and would alwais have broken out
hot, if they had kept the fire still, under those spyres, which thing also
you may perceive by stillinge: therefore seeing both experience, and also
authority teaches, that water can only ware hot, through fire under it,
without bitumen, it is false which Agricola has said, that it is not
necessary, that fire should be under the conduytes, which thing also is hence
evident, because in the Bathe of S. Bartholomewes, in the field of Padua, as
testifies Fallopius, their is a certain well, into which cold water enters,
yet as soon as it is there, it waxed hot, and this is not done because bitumen
is there, as says Fallopius, but because fire is under that place. Also in the
Valley of the same bath, there are two places, out of the which there is drawn
clay and in the place, where clay was drawn out there is found Glarea, and most
hot marble, and that heat proceeds not of bitumen, but of fire under that
Glarea.

Furthermore, if waters were hot, of fire nourished of bitumen, being in the
conduytes, as Agricola says, it would follow, that all waters in their
passage, should have in them selves some fattynesse, and also, smell and taste
of Bitumen, yet this is false, because there be many in which there are none
of these, as the waters of the Bathes of Buckstone.

And those waters which have Bitumen in deed, as there are some found, which
have in them fattines, and smell, and taste of bitumen, and all things, as is
the clay of S. Bartho which in deed tastes of bitumen iudaicum, as affirms
Fallopius, because that in that Bathe, Bitumen burns, and therefore
represents smell, and taste, and all things of bitumen. But some man will
say, note you, that fattines is not in all waters, because perchance, the
bitumen which they conteyne, is sound, so that it can not be melted. This I
grant, yet both the smell, and also the taste, ought to be perceived, if it
were true, besides that in such waters, there ought to be vapoures of bitumen.
Therefore the matter of bitumen, is not necessary in all waters, that by reason
of it, they should be hot. Therefore, let us omit the opinion of Agricola, and
come unto another which is true, and it is the opinion of Aristot. and of them
which do follow Arist. which is, that the matter preseruinge fire, is
Brimstone, and that this was his opinion, it is evident of him self, in the
24. section of his Problemes, and the last Problem: for there he demands
the cause why hot Bathes were called holly, and answers, because they were
made of things most holly. And things most holly, he calls Brimstone, and
lightening: and he called Brimstone most holly, after the manner of the
ancient persons, which used it to cleanse their sacrifices, whereupon, in
Greek it is called theion, as it were divine: of this place therefore it is
clearly gathered, that the mind, and opinion of Aristo. is, that the matter
preserving fire, heating water, is sulphur, which seeinge it is not meet to be
burned out, in the conduytes of the earth, it is necessary, that it be burned
out elsewhere: He says beside, that lighteninge, is the cause engendring such
fire, and by the word fulmen, you may not understand Bitumen (as amiss
Ioannes de Dondis did) that he might cleave to the common opinion, but Aristo.
has accustomed in his Problemes: first to assign the cause natural, then
some common, and the common opinion was, that lightening did heat waters.

But let us omit this, and let us come to the natural, and it is that the
matter feeding fire under the earth, is Sulphur, as experience it self
teaches. For at Bath, sensibly it may be proved, that brimstone, boyleth in
the water, yet I not deny, that Bitumen also, is not the continual feeding of
fire, but I affirm, that fire in some places, is fed by brimstone, and in
some places by Bitumen. So that I will conclude, how that necessarily, the
waters which do wax hot through Sulphur, have smell and taste of Sulphur, as
the bathes of Bath has, of which following more largely shall be entreated, and
those of Bitumen, have smell and taste of Bitumen. But when as al bathes, have
not immediately the one of these, hence it is, that some waters be found, which
do represent neither Sulphur, nor Bitumen, as at Buckstone. And when they
pass through stony places, they do lose straight way, if they have Sulphur
or Bitumen, because some waters do not boil in Sulphur, do wax hot in the
journey. Therefore such waters taste not of Sulphur, the same I say of Bitumen,
seeing there be some waters, which do wax hot through it, that they pass
through places, in which Bitumen burns, and those which do wax hot, thus
wise, do not of brimstone nor bitumen. Howbee it these waters if not
immediately, yet mediatly they wax hot, by reason either of brimstone or
Bitumen, preserving the heat, as in my benefit of Buckstones bathes may
appear. But here arises a doubt, why these fires go not forth, seeing fire
consumes all things, this is true, if it be not still fed, but Sulphur or
Bitumen, be quickly regenerated again, therefore it is no dout, that fire having
matter to burn on, is preserved always. That it quickly ingendreth again,
Strabo testifies, so that the digging of it, beeinge intermitted, for the
space of four years, they shall find again, as great plenty as before,
whereby it is sufficient to feed fire continually, when as continually it is
engendered, and by the same reason, for ever preserves the bathes. Lastely, if
it be objected, that if so great fire be preserved under the earth, that it may
cause the waters to come forth so hot, it should follow, that where such hot
bathes were, there should be vomica and a chimney, out of which that flame
should be expelled: I say, it is not need to ymagine, that this flame, is
equal in all places, but in some places is great, in some small, and therefore
where it is greatest, there it bursteth out, and where it is small, the smoke
passes out, together with the water, as at bathe, which smoke smells there
of the nature of sulphur, howbeit in other places, it may be of bitumen, and
that smoke is made both because the sulphur and bitumen have in them, a
portion of earth melted, and hence it is, that this fire may be long preserved
because it is a sound matter, I call it sound, because both brimstone and
bitume^, be it never so pure, and myngled, have always earth mingled withal,
whereupon, although in some places, the fire be not great, because it is in a
sound subject, which with his soundnes, does long endure, the flame also
endures long. Therefore, the matter by which fire is fed, in places under the
earth is sulphur, either pure, or else commixed with his own earth, or else
bitumen, or some kind thereof, as Fallopius most reasonably affyrmeth, where
you that be learned, if this suffice you not, may read further to content
you. That the metalles of bitumen or Sulphur, do take the beginning of their
heat, of wind inflamed in the places under the earth, it is showed. But how
the waters do wax hot, through that heat, received in the Metalles, and
where that flame is contained, we must now seek, seeing it is not euydent
enough. Therefore, there be in this thing two opinions, one of Agricola that
the waters wax hot, because there is in the same conduite, with the waters,
both fire and coals, by which they do wax hot: and the opinion is most like to
be true, and partly true, because we see, with the water passing forth, that
some of the metal passes forth, and remains on the froth, in which the water
boyleth at Bath, and this could not be, except the fire and water, were
contained in one and the same conduite. The other is the opinion of Empedocles,
propounded unto us of Seneca, that the waters be hot, not because they pass
thorough the burning metal, as Agricola supposed, but because, they pass
thorough places, under which there is fire kyndled, together with the metalles:
Which opinion seems good enough. For we have in the springes of Buckston,
certain well springes, into which water enters cold because they come not of
one conduite, but when it is there commixed, it waxes hot, which thing, we
can not say too be done, through brimstone or bitumen, there kindled, and
burning, seeinge there appears neither any metal, nor fire, but we must
suppose, that this is only done, because the metal burns under those
conduites the water there is altogyther putable, and yet do break out hot, as
you have heard, which thing should not be, if they waxed hot through their
passage, through metalles fyred, but they would necessarily, have the smell and
taste, and some substance, of that metal which as I have said they altogyther
lack, therefore we must say that they be not only in use too be drunk, and
to make meats, of, but also they wash their finest linen whit, and be more
whyter than with the River water hard by, and yet they break out whote:
because they get heat of the Stones, by which they pass, under which
Stones, there is fire kindled in any of the mettalles aforesaid. This opinion of
Empedocles, Vitruuius a man of great experyence confyrmeth, what then must we
suppose in this thing? I lay that the mean, by which waters do wax hot, is
two foulde, both already propounded, one verily propounded of the mind of
Agricola, and the other of Empedocles, for some are heated, because they pass
thorough stony places under which there is fire kindled, and burning in the
metal, of brimstone, or bitumen, neither are these stones therefore, turned
into chalk, that one might judge, or into ashes because they can not be
disgested, or because the heat is slack and little, and so great only, as may
heal the stones, and waters, or because if it be much it is far dista^t,
from those stones. And other do wax hot because they pass thorough the
metal it self fyred and burning, as Agricola supposed: you may gather of
these two ways, by which waters, do wax hot, the cause why, some of the
waters of bathes, break out most hot, as ye hot bath at Bath, other meanly
hot as the cross bath, other between both, as the kings bath, other warm, as
Buckstones, other cold, as at Halliwel in Flint shyre, called in british,
Fannon Onen, Freny, which yet be bath waters, and have a medicinable force, and
faculty. Therefore the causes of these differences, are two: that is,
smalnesse, and distance of the fire, for if heat being in the conduytes, be
much and strong, and that water, makes his journey, not very long, before it
break out of the earth, it will flow most hot, but if the fire be little, and
the journey long, it will be warm. If the fire be much, and the journey
meanly long, it will be meanly hot, as contrarily, if the fire be little, and
the journey most short, because the water should keape the whole heat, which
it has received. And the contrary happens, if it take a long journey,
because in the passage, some heat euaporateth continually. After the same
manner you may say of water, which does not wax hot, through fire being in
the conduytes, but by reason of hot stones, under which, there is fire
kindled, in the metalles, and that may be little or much, and near or far of
those stones, and so the heat of the waters shall be varied, by reason of the
next situation, or the flame far of, as also, by reason of the smalnesse or
muchnesse, of the same, to which you must add the long or short journey, which
the water it self makes, before it break out of the earth: for it may be,
that fire to be much and near the water flowing over, and yet the water will
pass forth warm, or lue warm, or cold, because the water has lost all that
heat in the long journey, as in Buckstones bathes benefyte you may read.
Hitherto we have showed, that Bathes be hot always, because the fire is
continual, and that the fire is continual, because new feeding may be
ministered, and that the feeding is always ministered, because in places under
the earth, there is matter, of which it may be engendered. Moreover, it has
appeared, how that fire has bin kindled, what it is, and where the heat,
heating the waters is contained: we have likewise showed the cause why some
waters do break out hot, some cold more or less, and we have confuted the
opinions of diverse Philosophers, and have showed how they resulte, etc. Now it
follows that we show of what natures such waters be, and after what sort
they be co^mixed. I find three manners of mixtions, in waters of bathes, for
there be some which have so far commixed with the^, those things which they
contain, that those things are made one body with the substance of the water,
and one form has resulted out of the^, and such things, whether they be
metallique or other, ca^ not be separated from ye substance of ye water, but in
a very long time, and a most strong co^coction or mutacion coming out, such
manner of mingling is yt which does give great integrity, and makes the^
durable: this therefore is ye first manner of mixtio^, which may be considered in
ye waters of bathes.

Another is, that there are some waters, which have received metalles, in the
concauities of the earth, as they flow, yet those metalles are not well
commixed, as we presuppose at Buckstons, so that of the metalles, and the
water, there resulteth one body, by one form, as we have said in the first
manner of mixtion, but they be rather confounded with the waters. The third is
mean between both, for there are some waters which are partly mixed in deed
with the waters, which they do contain, partly not commixed, as S. Vincents,
but confounded, as we have said above. But we have not decreed to speak at
large of the commixtions of al bathes, but only in a word or two, of our baths
of Bathe, and what the mineralles be supposed there, commixed or infunded in
the course of those waters, by the qualities whereof, proceeds their effects
medicinable, which in my judgment can in no way, more certainly be approved,
then by the properties, and that the color, smell, and taste, best approves.
The colloure of the waters of the bathes of bathe, is swartie, green, or
marble yellowe, the yellownes of the brimstone, mingled with the water, making
a sussible couloure. Albeit, color makes little or rather nothing to the
knowledge of the faculty, as Montan. has most excellently showed, libro de
componendorum facultatibus. For many things of color white, be found mere
contrary in operation, as for example, Snow is very cold, and chalk is very
hot, yet either of them is most white.

The smell of the bathes of Bathe, and S. Vincents is of brimstone, as the
artificial bathes, that be made thereof, howbeit neither smell also, makes
much, to the knowledge of the property, for it little forces, whether they
smell swetly, or otherwise, for of sweet smellinge and ill sauouringe things,
ye shall find many of diverse natures altogether, nevertheless, of these some
conjecture may be made, yet that is uncertain, and not perpetual: of taste
therefore shall we entreat.

Theion, chibur, sulphur, is sharp, and stinging of taste, especially if you
(as the Chimistes do, destill it into oil or water) of quality whit and dry
in the fourth degree, as partly by his quick burning may appear, and of
thynne essence. And unto this taste (says Montane) we must only trust, for
through it may be perceived not only the temperaturs, of simple medicines, in
heat, cold, moisture, and dryenes, having strength from the first faculties,
as Galen shows, but also all other virtues, as of wiping, dividing, opening,
cutting, expelling and such like, the fittest instrument, the truest
touchestone, of all properties, trying both toucheable and tasteable qualities.
Taste, I say, therefore above all other senses, as all the learned Phisicions
affyrmeth, is too be trusted, of which so great occasion being given, we can
not but speak somewhat with that worthy scholar Melancton, lib. de Anima.
First defyning what taste, organ and object is.

Taste truly, is a sense of feeling, which in the tongue or ruff of the mouth
tries savors.

Savor or smacke is a perfect straining of the dry part of the humor
wrought by heat.

Instrument or organ is a skin pellicle, or philme, stretched in the over
part of the tongue, under the roufe, and hallowe flesh, full of holes like a
sponge.

Object of taste is a quality in juice, in which moisture overcomes dryenes,
earthy heat, digesting them both. Of tastes there be seven simple, iii. hot,
and iii. cold, the eight which the greeks call apoios, tasteles, without
quality, is rather a priuacion, then that it might seem to be taken any kind
of taste, as for the wine and fattie tastes, they are applied to the sweetest,
although Pliny in hist. plant. adds unto these suaue^ and acutum, albeit in
my judgment, dulcis, contains suauem and acris acutum, of this judgment is
Theophrastus, Montan. Mont. and vi. C. other, and truly they be in number
these: (...), Dulcis, calid. (...), acidus, frigid. 1. (...), Salsus, 1. (...),
austerus, 2. (...), Amarus, 2. (...). acerbus, 3. (...), Acris, 3. gradu. 4.
Sweet, hot 1. degree. Sooner cold 1. degree. Salt, in 2. in the 2. Bitter, the
3. Rouge. 3. Sharp, 4. Harshe. 4.

The sweet taste is, says Montane in comen. de simpli. medicament. qualit.
that which is lightly gathered, delighting and pleasing the sense of the
instrument, arguinge an earthy dryenes, temperatly excocted, and not parched,
sometime with an ayrie moisture, and sometime with a watery, therefore
moderately warming, not much moysteninge, or drying, nay it shall easily be
turned to nourishement, and always, such kind of strength, or virtue shall
proceed from the sweet taste, if it be simple: but if it be joined with other
tastes, as to the bitter or sharp, it shall bring forth mingled virtues, the
scope of our purpose, for the qualities of the Bathes.

The Salt taste is that, which perseth and byteth the tongue, bringing a
certain kind of feeling of heat, by reason of earthy dryenes, in a watery
moisture, through much heat deminished, and by such a quality, you may have
the force of heating, drying, and persynge to the depth, because of much watery
moisture, mingled therewith.

The bitter taste is that, which seems to shun away from the tongue,
something arguing, a far greater deminishing of earthy substance, through
heat, tha^ in the salt taste, and therefore it shall have a greater force of
heating and drying.

The sharp taste, is that which not only does byte the tongue, but also
dries, sets on fire, and as it were, burns arguing an earthy drynes,
perfectly diminished by heat, and almost turned into the nature of fire,
therefore it heateth, thinneth, and dries exquisitely, also burns and
consumes. Now for example of the sweet taste, Sugar, honey clarified, or
destilled, honey suckles. etc.

Of the salt taste, Salt, salt peeter, Sal gemme, salt water Bryne, the salt
sea. etc.

Of the bitter, Aloes, Wormwood, Gaul. etc.

Of the sharp, Pellitorie of Spain, Brimstone, Arsemart otherwise called
water pepper. etc.

The sower taste, does manifest an earthy substance, not wholly over boiled, by
heat, yet somewhat deminished, which substance, is mingled with very much
earthy moisture, therefore such a medicyne, does cool and dry.

The rough taste, shall temperatly set on edge, and stop, declaring, that in
earthie substance, cold and dry has souereignitie, in this simple quality,
yet somewhat less the^ the harrish taste.

The harrish taste, shall express great vneauenes, in so much, yt it may seem
to consume the moisture of the tongue, arguing a manifest force, of earthie
substance, in that simple, very little ouerboyled by heat, worthily therefore
termed cold and dry.

Now for example of the harrish taste, we must try it, in unripe hedge pears,
unripe medlers, sloes, etc.

Of the rough taste, in Mirtilles, in unripe Gauls, in the rindes of
pomegranates.

Of the sour taste, in unripe Grapes, in Sorrel, in Vergis, Syder made with
wyld aples. etc. But here I would wyshe, that you should not think I mean so
absolutely, of the simple tastes, but yt they may be joined, with any one of
the other tastes, one, two, or three, more tastes, as in the waters of the
bathes. Nevertheless, we give the name, to the taste most sensibly felt, which
compound tastes, as briefly as is possible, we will express.

If the harrish taste, be adjoined to the sharp, that medicine at the first
dash, shall seem a little to heat, because that power of heat, is buried, or
hid, in much earthie and gross substance, but when thorough inward heat, it
shall be perfectly brought to act, then most strongly it heateth, so that it
consumes, and corrupts, the flesh and parts, which chances because heat,
joined too a gross and earthy substance, is most stubburne, and seruent, as in
red hot, Iron. But if this harsh taste, be mingled with the sweet taste, then
it shall be mean between heating and cooling, and shall so much enclyne to the
one or the other, as it shall have the more, of either of the tails. And this
strength it shall have, of the harsh taste, that it may stop, and make strong:
of the sweet taste, it shall have the power, that it may linnow, smooth, and
fynely lewse and so it shall be compounded, of sundry contrary qualities,
yealdinge therefore, sundry effects.

But if the harrish taste, be adjoined to the bitter, it can not excede, in the
extreemest excess. And by reason of harrishnes, it shall have power of
strengthening, and binding, by reason of sweetness, power to cleanse and open,
etc.

But if the rough taste, be joined with sharp, because the one is found in a
gross, and earthy dry, the other in ayery and fyry earth, it shall have the
power, of vehement heatinge, dryeng, persing, and burning etc. All the which
operations, where they be apposyte, we ought always to understand that the one
or the other is done more or less according, as the one or the other, have
pre-eminence, which rule, in every taste ought to be kept, as well in every
simple, as in any compound, which Montane most excellently (as he does all
things) has expressed. Commentario primo de simplicium medicamentorum
facultatibus. But now, because those our bathes of Bathe, receive their chief
virtues from Brimstone, whose taste is sharp, a word or two of the sharp
taste, and so to the other myneralles therein. Sharp taste as says Cardanus
de rerum varietate, lewseth the hold of the tongue, through the distemperance
of heat, by reason whereof, of al tastes it most molesteth, not as taste, but
of the quality therein, but so does not the sweet, salt, nor the bitter. For
simple sweet, is but meanly hot, or rather temperate, in the first degree.
Simple Salt in the second degree. Simple bitter in the third degree. Simple
sharp in the fourth degree. And there be no more degrees, nor no more tastes,
ye argue heat. The first degree (as says Montanus commentario primo de simpl.
med facult.) sensibly changes. The second, a feeling pain, pain brings.
The third effectually changes, with manifest sign of grief. The fourth,
both sense and temperature fynisheth? These things this expressed, very
easily, and most sensibly aproueth, the propreties of these bathes, which
through their operacion, draw corrupt humors, from the deapthe of the sound
members, expelling them forth in vapors, heating, concocting, and dissoluing
speedily as Hippocrates lib. de internis affectibus, and Dioscorides, and
Galen do testify. But having therewith Copper, Iron, and Marquesite a little.
(Whose qualities and substances we have seen, severed, and tried, as well by
the Chimistes and Fyners in London, Cornwall, Cumbreland, and Ireland, in the
company of our Q. Majesty's Secretary of Irelande, Justice of the Admyraltie,
and Warden of her highness Mines, John Challoner, a gentleman, not only
excellent in all the Mathematical Sciences, but also in Chimistie Phisike and
every part of Phylosophie, as also by our own industry,) as is on the hills,
between Marshfeelde, and Bathe, and other hills about Dunkerton (a lordship of
the right worshipful M. Bamfeeld of Paltemore, in Devonshire certainly a
worthy housekeper whose praises, all the countries sound, so that it were but
in vain for me to extol the^) from whence it may be presupposed, runs under
the hills this natural spring, of the Baths. For hear and there, as they have
dug of late for stones in their Quarries, on the hills sides, they have found
the^ so hot, that they were not able to abide to dig, any deaper, by reason
of fire in the depth, the only efficient cause of ye hot bathes of Bathe, the
which most sensibly, confyrmeth the opinion of Arist. Sauonarola and Fallopius
and ours concerning the fire in the earth, and not to be through Magique, as ye
long received errors, of certain writers, has sought to persuade, that by
magical coniuracion, those Bathes were made hot, a persuasio^ most detestable
and vain, as by that you have hard may be perceived, and altogether ye
illusio^ of the infernal, and wicked spirits, to the end to pervert us from
god, and to give the glory, from our merciful redeamer, to the^ most wicked
sins, continuing in their damnable destruction, of their first offense, from
whom the holy Trinity defend us, to whom beal laud, power, dominion, and
Empire for ever and ever. Amen.

These mineralles, seem yet to require some thing, to be spoken of their
qualities, tastes, and effects. First of Copper, which of taste is bitterysh
rough, arguing therefore a fretting and drying force, and therewith clensing, in
the beeginning of the second degree. Secondly Iron, roughish harsh does bynd
and dry, as it appears not only, by the electuary daily in use, named Scoria
ferri, but also by the Smithes water, that they quench their Iron in, which is
good to be (...) of the^, that have an issue of blood. By the which you may
gather that we mean not, for that were absurd, ye those mineralles, be melted
and commixed, with the water. But we affirm, that their qualities are through
boiling of ye fire in^unded, discussid, co^mixed, and dispersed by ye waters
running forth, as may be well approved, ye which also D. Turner testifies, what
need many words. The water tastles of his own nature, absolutely cold, and
moderatly moist (as it is said, and shall be better in ye Table of the things
natural) is in these Baths per accidens made hot, sharp, bitter, harsh, rough.
etc.

Therefore, 1 Heating. Warming the cold. 2 Concocting, Concocting the crude. 3
Persinge, Opening the stopped. 4 Dissoluing, Dissoluing the hard. 5
Attracting, Attracting the cloyde. 6 Clensing, Clensing the foul. 7 Binding,
Binding the severed. 8 Drying, Drying the moist. 9 Stopping, Stopping the
flowings. 10 Consolidating, Consolidating the broken.


Comforting the weak members, even as if therein nature had bestowed
artificially, her highest cunning, why say I not the God of Nature? for truly
passing great benefits, are to be looked for, of passing great bounty. By
means whereof, it helps not only, all the manifest greefes before specified
in the first book, but also many other hidden and unknown sicknesses, which
be least unnamed: for if hidden sicknesses any where do proceed, it is
necessary says Fernelius lib. de abditis rerum causis, contrary to them
hidden remedies too consiste, as it does appear, as well by authority and
reason, as by experience, if you consider with aduisement and council, which
is (as Plato says, the very keye of wisdom,) the diversities of qualities,
temperatures, properties, and naturs of ye Bathes. The which yet, in them
selves are varied, as well in heat as in nature: For the Kings bathe is hot
between both the other, and in curing most of the aforenamed sicknesses best.
But the hot for many cold sycknesses, iointaches, pockes, rotten vlceres,
more auaylable then the first.

But the cross bathe is least hot, and therefore for chollerique persons, and
such as are easily disposed to fevers, more commodiouse. All the which
differences, may be gathered, by that which is already declared, leauinge too
speak any further of them, to the learned and expert there, acknowledging with
Aristot. that it is not possible for one man to know all things, although every
man ought to know as much as he might: For Omnis homo nascitur, vt sapiens
fiat.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book, of Bathes aid.
IN our first book, the antiquity, aid, and commodities proceeding of the
Bathes are at large described, with a confutation, of all those as reproves
the drincking of it. In the second, the causes of the heat, of the waters of
bathes, and also the properties are reasonably, and apparently to the senses
approved. Now it rests, that in this third book be declared, when the sick
come thither, what ought to be considered, and how, and by what means it may
them profit: without which very little could the former books benefyte. First
therefore, before any person do repair thither, it is convenient that he be
purged, if not before he come thither, at the least wise, before he enter the
bathes, according as 1 Sickness, 2 Cause, 3 Accident,
shall require.

Sickness is an affecte, (but not every affecte) for this word with Galene,
is pronounced of many and diverse things, but contrary too Nature, by whom the
action is first hurt, either depraved, deminished, or taken away, libro de
morborum caussis, libro prim. Therapentices, libro secund, comentariorum in
libr. Hippo. de natura humana.

Cause of sickness is that, unto which any thing follows, which is named
effect, as says Galene libro de symptomatum differenciis.

Accident is that, which the Greeks call Symptonia, and we properly in
English, to fall and with fall, and is what so ever happens to the body,
sickness, and cause excepted. Of the which larger to entreat, were but
friuelouse, for the sicknesses be already the cheifest showed, and the outward
causes are to be sought, in the Table, of the things not natural, and the
inward of the table of the things natural, the coniunct of them both, and of
the accidents, notes of sicknesses, which is the argument, to know, whether ye
need adding, or empting, and that through the consultation with the wise and
learned in Physic, the neglecting whereof, has caused many a one to come
thence, worse then they went. Some with the Gout in every ioynte, which had it
before but in one or two. Some other full of byles, some of ulcers, and scabs,
etc. And therefore, in the behalf of my Country, not without aduisement, and
censure to speak it, what lets? but for such a one, as so deserves, that
there might not be a meet stipend appointed or some impropriat benefyce or
parsonage, or prebend, at Salisbury, Worcester, Herforde, Gloucester, Bristowe,
Excester, Wels Landathe, etc. the furthest of not past a days journey, as well
for the poor, as the rich: yea if in every Cathedral church in the land,
there were a promocion, for a graduate in Physic, that he might be there to
give both council, medicine, and aid, to the better setting forth of Gods
glory, and the magnificence of the Majesty, seeinge the living only praise
the Lord, and not the dead, and also the healthy serve best the princely
dignity in all cheualry: considering further herewith that worthy pillar of
Christian verity, S. Ambrose, who says, that the body is the tabernacle of
the soul, and the conditions of the mind, as says Galene, in temp. Hippo.
Platonis, etc. do follow the temperature of the body: the which thing to be
true, daily experience proves, as we know, and you also that use too visit
the sick (a deed of charity) how some dote, some be frantique, some stark
mad, some numme, some loose, some disioynted, etc. then unfit for any kind
of service, art, mystery, faculty, counsel, or prowes, much less
refourmable by sermons to pity, and godliness, until they be restored again
according to nature: the scope of Physike, if so be Phisyke, as the prince
Hippo. defyneth lib. de flatibus, (and as all Universities, this 2000. years
has received it, as well Greeks, Arabians, as Latinistes) is prothesis, kai
aphasesis, an adding and taking away, and addinge of that wanting in the
Spirits, humors, and members, according to nature, and a taking away of that
contrary to nature, in the members, humors, and spyrites.

According to Nature is 1 Health. 2 The cause of Health. 3 The effect of
health. 4 Strength. 5 Custom and 6 Complexion.
Health is an affect, according to nature, apt to perform, the actions of
the same. Now, the Table of the.vii. things Natural, you may unfold, bearyng
well all things in your memory, unless you mean to perform the proverb. In
at the one ear, and out at the other.

THE TABLE OF THE SEVEN THINGS NATURAL, OVT OF THE WHICH THE ACTIONS according
to Nature do spring, may be perceived in this Table: howbeit not so often
divided as it might be done: supposing these will serve to give the wise and
learned patient matter sufficient to consult with the Physician of, whereby that
which is according to nature may be preserved and aided: and those things which
be against Nature expelled, the scope of Physic as is showed.
Elementum is a simple and most pure body, and the best part, of that wherein
it is, can not be divided into any other kind: and of it all things natural
have their beginning without al generation or corruption. Howbeit of Fire made
thick, comes Air. Of Air made thick comes water. Of water made thick,
comes Earth. And yet here is neither corruption nor generation of the whole.
For this is but a mutation of the parts only. And the consent and agreement of
them is, the fire with the Air in heat, in drynes with the Earth, in moisture
the Air with the water, and in heat with the fire, in coldness the water with
the earth and in moisture with the air, the earth in drines with the fire, and
in coldness with the water and as the water to the fire is extreme contrary, so
is the air to the earth. Elements four. Fire. Absolutely hot, and
moderately dry. Air. Absolutely moist, and moderately hot. water. Absolutely
cold, and moderatly moist. Earth. Absolutely dry, and moderatly cold.
Temperamentum, is a te^pering of diverse qualities of the four Elements in one
body. Temperaments or complections.ix. Simple Hot. Active. Cold. Active. Moist.
Passive, Dry. Passive,
Compound Hot and dry. Hot and moist. Cold and moist. Cold and dry

Te^perate Of all alike, as it were by weight, the very true and just
complexion: but as hard to be found as Plato his Idea, or Arist. summum bonum,
or as the the proverb is, a black Swan. Nevertheless, he that will judge true
of complexions must always have in his imagination, the aforesaid perfect
temperament. Humors (which may be called the sons of Elements) is a part
contained subsisting the body. Humors. four. Natural. Blud. Temperate,
norishing the body contained in the vains swetish reigning in the spring.
Flewme Cold and moist, sowpling the dry and hard parts without proper ma^cion,
tastles, reigning in winter Choler. Hot and dry, clensing and quickening
contained in the gall bitter reigning in summer. Mela^cholie Cold and dry,
staying and binding, contained in the Spleen, sower, reigning in harvest
Unnatural (as) Blud distempered with other humors. Flewm, waterie, glassie,
slimie, plastoie, salt, sower, harsh, rugh Choler, Citrine, yelkie, like,
cankrie.
And eueri day they are thus moved as the blud between the ninth hour at night,
and iij. in the morning. Choler between iiij. and ix before none. Mela^colie,
between ix. and.iij. Flewme between iij. and ix. at night.
Members, are bodies that are engendered of the first commixtion of humors.
Members Spermatike (as) Brain, synewes. Kells, bones, grissels etc.
Simple, as Skin, fat, flesh, muscles, fillets, guts, veins, artires,
Synowes, chords, gristles, bones, tunicles, etc.
Sanguine, as Liver, heart, kidnes. Milt, fat flesh. etc.
Compound, as Head. Arms. Legs.
Principal as Heart, brain. Liver, stones.
Official. as Synowes, serving the brain Artires, serving the heart. Veins,
serving the Liver. Vessels spermatike, serui^g the stons
Instrume^tall, as Stomach. Rayns. Bowels. Great synewes. etc.


Herewith see that you consider the composition, the complexion, the substance,
the quantity, the number, the figure, the operation, the use and the disease,
in part and in all the me^bres.
Facultas, faculty, or power, is the cause of doing thas which is don: as the
water is the cause of the while going about. Faculties or powers. Animal
Ordeineth, discernith, composith. Mouith by voluntary will. Sentith whereof
proceeds the five wits.
Vital. working, delating and wraining the artires. wrought which is stirred
by an exterior cause whereof com^mith subtlety and providence.
Natural. Does minister. Apetite. Retains. Digestith. Expels.
Is ministrid. Ingendreth. Norishith. Feeds.


Actio et opus, doing and working, is that which by the power is don: as the
wheat converted to meal, is the grist of the mill. Action or operation,
Vital. Mouith mirth, sadness, hope, trust, fear, despair, love, hatred,
mercy, envy, wrath, wodnes, wildnes, stobernes, humanity, Empire, glory,
victory. etc.
Natural. Alters. Ioineth. Formith.
Animal Aaprehendeth. Fantasieth. Imagines. Opinioneth. Co^monsenteth In the
two former ventricles. Judges. Estemeth. Thinks Disposith. In the middle
ve^tricle. Remembrith. Knows. calls to memory in the hinder part.





Spiritus, is an ayrie substance, subtle stirring the powers of the body to
perform their operation: even as a prince does his counsel, and as the
counsel does the subjects, every one according to his vocation and to that is
limited by nature, wherein was never seen rebellion, but every inferior ready to
serve his superior, a pattern of a heavenly common weal, and for every
reasonable body to note and observe, although he were an Ethemek: how much
rather then of Christians, every faithful manne knows. Spirits. Natural.
From the Liver takes his beginning and by the veins which have no pulse
dispersith in to all the hole body.
Vital. From the heart proceeds and by the artires or pulses is sent in to all
the hole body
Animal. From the brain is engendered, and is sent by the sinews throughout
the body and makes sense or feeling. etc.


Now that you have here in this Table noted unto you, the things whereof the
Natural bodies is made, with the powers and actions of the same: so likewise
folowith the things not natural, (so called) because they be in parcel of the
natural body, and yet by the temperance of them, the body being in health so
consists, and yet by the distemperance of them, sickness is induced, and the
body dissolved

THese things well waied, being ye things whereof we are framed, and the subject
of phisike, as ye frame of an house, is the subject of the Carpe^ter, will us to
look, in the Table of the.vi. things not natural, by what means we are here
continued, and maintained, as therein further is showed, for other wise, what
auailed a lump not of an hours life, to be produced or so many good laws, and
wholesome precepts, appointed, for the good preseruacion, and educacion, both of
old and young, and avoiding of contagiouse infection, as well from princely
mancion, as from city, town, and Garrison, prohibicion, and admission of
victualles, fit and unfit, for nouryshment, the which, if all were hab nab, as
fools use, to common and other ouerbould, in abusing their eloquence, to take
from us, in indifferent things, our free election, seeing God and nature, to
them that be framid according to nature, not impedited in the actions of the
parts, to them belonging, may as the wise man says, use fire and water, at
their discresion, with each other thing, in this life, to them in every sort
meet, and decent, not forgetting, to give God chief praise, for all things,
yet not in such sort, as the Puritanes, but better we may term them, pinis
precisians, use, who would have, yt no man deserves, be his acts ever so good,
any thanks for them, whereby consequently, they would defraud Princes, of dewtie
to them belonging, for their well governing, of their subjects in unity, and
equity (Gods appointment, and so gradatim, frustrat each man of merit for his
well doing, in his calling, not remembering, ye god thereby is more glorified, and
yet puritanes are they named, pure I would they were: But how puretie and they
may agree, ye distain al ye works of men, as filthy, they the^ selves being
men, you may easily see, we grant, yt there is not one so pure as he should be,
yet in puretie al do not agree, neither is pureti therbi, excluded from ye
saints of god, he is pure, to whom god imputes not his iniquity: and he is
pure in worldly policy, who offends not the laws of any majesty, god
grant that so pure we be found, when we are called to the one or the other for
trial of our puretie, and then shall we be happy, the which kind of puretie,
every man that fears God and loves honesty will seek to observe most
vigilantlie.

But now, fearing least all sorts, can not attain to the perfect meaning, of
these our Tables, and they in especial, who altogether be ignorant in
Phisike, therefore we have provided, these signs following in compendiouse
order, forth of the Table, which in every sickness, are taken, as says Ioannes
Almener lib. de lue. Hisp. either of things not natural, of things natural,
or of things against nature.

Of things not natural, as in what air the pacient has remained, what
meats and drynkes he has used, what exercise, he has practiced, what
filling, what empting, what sleep, what watch, he has sustained, what joy,
what sorrow, and so lykewse of other things.

Of things natural, as of what complexions, humors, members, powers,
operacions, and spirytes. To these may may be added, the inquierie of the
things annexed to nature, as age, region, custom, climate, strength, art. etc.

Of things against nature, sickness, cause, and accident, and that three manner
of ways, of the operacion hurt, of the quality altered, of things expelled,
changed.

Of the operacion hurt, by three means, either animal, vital or natural.

Of the animal two ways, motive, and sensitive.

Sensitive also two ways, inwardly and outwardly.

Example of the motive as how it may be moved according to the whole, and
according to the parts.

Example of the outward Sensitive, as bow he does see, hear, smell, and
touch, as what grief he feels, what taste THE TABLE OF THE SEVEN THINGS NOT
NATURAL,
Air. Good. Bad. Out brethid from the North prolongeth life, Out of the East
purging ill vapors. Over sandy, gravely, chalkie, chempie soil. Needful
therefore to a Physician that he be a Cosmographer well traueled and an
Astronomer.
Out of the Sowth with filling vapors. Out of the West, causing mutation
which naturally dries and Thorough the inflammation of sundry stars, as
when the pockes first prevailed at the siege of Naples, 1494. when the planets
Saturn, Mars, and Venus were in conjunction with Scorpio. Also great standing
waters never refreshed, dichis vncle^sed, corpse of living things unburied, many
people in places vnclensed, lying remaining in small room. etc.


Meats and drinks Good. Bad. Of light digestion and holsom norishment. as Bread
of wheat. Drink of Ale, Beer, Gascoine wine. etc. Neither to new nor to
old, to thick nor to thin, to sweet or to sower. etc. Flesh of mean age
neither to rammish nor vnclenlei. etc. Fowls cloven footed. Fish scaly of
fresh water and that be firm and sound of the salt water. Frewts ripe, that be
neither to sweet nor to sower, to harsh nor to bitter, to sharp nor to rough,
and herbs in like manner.
Of hie disgestion and of evil norishment. as Bread of pulse and other
unwholesome grain, pawled drincks and others to new or to stale. Fustie and
musty wines, old flesh, muddy fish, whole sooted fowls, raw herbs and
frewtes.
Meats of sundry qualities excessiuelie used how they hurt. as Cold does
congele and mortify. Moist, do putrify and hasten age Dry, sucketh up
natural moisture. Clammie, stops the urine ways and the powers ingendringe
tugh fleame and gravel. Salt, and oilie swimith long in the stomach, causing
lothsomnes. Bitter, does not norish. Salt, swells more the stomach. Harrish
does stop and restrain. Sweet, thicketh and chafith the blood filling and
stopping the veins ingendring corrupt sicknesses. Sower cools nature,
hasting age. etc.
Meats of sondrie qualities moderately used how they profit. as Cold asswageth
burning choler. Moist, moistenith that which is dried Dry consumes superfleus
moisture. Clammie, thickith that which is subtle and persing. Bitter clensith
and wipeth of, also molifieth and expellith fleme. Salt relentith fleame
clammie and dries it. Fat norisheth and makes soluble. Rough and stiptike
binds and comfort apetite. Sweet does cleanse, dissolve and nourish.


Sleep and vvatch. Good as That which agrees with the complexion of the
body, and that which is done in dew time, manner, and length. etc. Sanguine
vi. hours. Flegmatique vii. hours. Colerike v. hours. Melancolique four
hours at the least. profitable to Concoction. Distribution. Aglutenation.
Nutricion. Consolidation.



Bad as That which is more than agrees with nature, cause, time, age, region,
sickness, diet, custom. etc. In the day time, for both if they excede, be
evil, says Hip. as well sleep as watch. Immediately after meat. On the
back before digestion causing many disseases, by reason those things that
should be avoided by the proper clensing ways called Emunctories be let slip
(contrary says Montanus) engendring the stone, palsy, goutes, crampes,
numnes, forgetfulness, etc.

Labor and rest. Vehement labor. That which provoke panting, as any bodily
labor, etc. Moderate labor That which trewly alters breath etc. Profitable as
After vehement labor, great euacuation, long sickness, immediately after meat,
at times accustomed, and according to the strength of the body. Hurtful as
Refusing labor at times accustomed, the meat disgested, body cleansed, and the
actions requiring it.
Emptines and repletion Emptying natural. as According to custom and
complexion. as By the virtues, actions, powers and faculties. as The excrements
of the first digestion by the bowels, the excrements of the second digestion
by the ways of urine, the watrie part: separated by the Reins, the earthy
part by the ways of the Spleen, and the Sperme by the side ways: the
excrements of the third digestion by the powers of the skin, which we call
sweat, fumes, vapors, etc.


Emptying contrary to nature. as The virtue, accustom, complexion, lost,
diminished, or depraved. When the sick knows not their departure. When he
knows, and yet can not retain it. When it keeps neither accustomed time,
quality quantity, nor order. etc.

Emptying artificial or not natural by Diet. Medicine. Chirurgerie by Diet in
absteyning from nourishing things. Medicines having power of purging.
Chirurgerie through opening the veins, artiers, skin, flesh, etc. Scarifying,
pricking, launsing. etc.


Repletio^ or fulness two ways. Quality. Quantity. simple without humor, as
excess of heat. Excess of meats. Reserved to the Vessels. Virtue or strength.
Of humor in All filled, and that also is ii. ways. reserved to the vessels.
Blood. Flewme. Choler. Melancholy to the strength one alone.




Affections of the mind. Healthful, as Merry company, Music, enterludes,
games of pastime, etc. as you may find in Buckstones Bathes Benefit.
Unhealthful, as Great cares, much study, unquiet conscience, troublesome
society, thought, fear, anger, envy, wrath, sodein joy, sodem sorrow. etc.
John Jones.

he perceyueth in his mouth.

Example of the inward sensitive, as what imaginacion he has, what judgment,
what memory, what dreams.

Example of the vital, as what pulse he has, what breathing. Inquisition may
be made of the passions of the mind in the six things not natural. If it be
taken of the operation natural, that is two manner of ways, of the operation
of the virtue ministering or ministered.

Example of the first, as what appetite he has, how he does retain things
received, how he does digest, how he draws and expels, how he had done
before, how he makes water, how she has her terms, how they use venerie, al
these things are comprehended under the things not natural.

Example of things ministered, as how he is nourished, and searching of all
these operations, whether the operation be deminished, corrupted, or quite
taken away.

Of the quality changed, as of what savor the breath of the weak person is,
of what savor the sweat is, of a wou^d or ulcer, of filth, also of what color
the tongue is, the eyes, and whole body, what manner moisture, what dryenes,
roughnes, smothnes, hardness, softnes, of the tongue, belly, and whole body, etc.

Of things expelled altered, as how great, of what quality, the superfluities
of the eyes, nose, mouth, of the ears, of what quantity, likewise of what
quantity the vomit, spittell, knesing is, and also of what quality the urine
is, what egestion, what snot, what sweates of the whole body, what gapings,
wamblings, and subuersions, all these may be reduced to the natural operacions
expulsive, because they are by nature expelled, whervppon to conclude, things
following be signs, of blood abounding.

Of things not natural, as by reason they use things multiplying blood, or
because they be of a joyous and pleasant art, as be singing men, interlude
players, or because they use meats and drinks multiplyinge blood, as be
poched eggs, and the stones of cocks, pleasant fowls, nourishing fleash,
confected meats, very good wine, and such like.

Of things natural, because they be fleshye, of sanguine complexion, young
naturally merry, and such like.

Of things against nature, and first of the operation hurt, heaviness in the
roots of the eyes, and in the forepart of the head, beating of the temples,
sweats, gapings, wamblings, much deep sleeping, troublinge of the senses,
slowenesse in cogitation, wearines of the parts without labor, greatness of
pulse, swiftnes and oftenes of the same, repletion of the vessels, whether they
be veins or arteyres.

Of the quality changed, as rudines of the whole body, and especially
replecio^ in ye veins, of the eyes pushes in ye mouth.

Of things expelled altered, as urine, red, gross, obscure, darck red, or rose
red. In egestio^ no sign does appear* spittel is sweet, sometime mingled with
blood, bleading by ye nose, from the gums, mouth or privy ways, ye hemorhoydes,
or else in other places, sweat ra^mish as of a got, also many bloody pimples,
and to this is added, because ye patient does dream, yt he saw red things, or
blood, to flow forth, and that he did swim in it, whereupon the fowerth
collectio^ is rehearsed of Galene, how he commanded a certain man to be let
blood, who dreamed that he was bathed in a tun of blood, but other swaruing
appointed him an exercise which nothing auayled, as Galen before had judged, for
shortly he dyed, because the vein (as Galene willed) was not opened.

Signs of choler in the things not natural, because of the use of much
exercise, or aboade in a hot air, use of hot and dry meats, multiplying
choler, etc.

Of the things natural, because the person is a young man chollerique, and such
like.

Of things contrary to nature, and first of the operation hurt, because the
weak much thyrsteth, has no rest, greef in the right side of the forehead,
and much light does anoy them, sometime they swonne and have weakness of
appetit, wambling, tingling as it were prickinge of nedles, madness, biting in
passing forth of the ordure, and likewise of ye vrynes, swiftnes of pulse, with
hardness, and stretching: here consequently may be placed of dreams, because
they do rather appertain to the action hurt, as because they see yellowe
things, fyery which cause skaldinge, and sometime, they dream that they flee.

Of the quality changed, as yellownes of the face, and of the hot body,
yellownes of the eyes, as it happens in the ioundies, bitterness of the mouth,
drienesse of the tongue, roughnes, with rednes of the nose.

Of things expelled altered, vrynered, citrine, yellow, safraine, egestions,
safron yellow, bitter, spittle chollerique, vomit green, saffron yellow,
bitter, sharp moisture of the eyes and nose.

Signs of fleume, of the things not natural, as replecion of meat, idelnes,
length of sleep, etc.

Of things natural, as because the part is of a phlegmatique complexion, a
fisher, fat and such like.

Of a thing against nature, as of the action hur^e, little thirst, froning
when the fleume shall be salt, weakness of disgestion, yea, in time of health,
much sleep, slouthfulnes, idelnes, lewsenes of the parts, heaviness of the
eyes, oblivion, grief in the hinder part of the head, the turning in the head,
darkness, loss of appetite of sharp things, wambling, kneesing, cold in the
head, heavy or grauatiue greefes, cold in the stomache, notable grief in the
same, because much fleume is gathered there, says Auicen in Canonib* rarenes,
slowenes, and gentleness of pulse.

Of the quality changed, as cold taken, white colloure in the face, and
body: Superfluouse whitnes of the tongue, superfluouse softnes thereof,
scuruines of the body, also swelling of the face, with softnes. Of things
expelled changed, as vryne white, vncoloured chaffie, or subcitrine color,
phlegmatique egestions white, slimie, or filthy watery, and such like, spittle
slimie, waterie, multiplication of spittle, not bitter, but pontique or harshe,
much superfluities, passing out by the nose and mouth, and it is added to
dream of water, snow, or rain, or such like, which may be reduced to
operations, or actions hurt.

Signs of melancholy, first of things not natural, as because of over much
cares, thought, fear, melanchollique meats, etc.

Of things natural, because he is of melanchollique complexion, and
accustomed to incur melancholique diseases, and such like.

Of the things contrary too Nature, and first of the action hurt, because
in the head their is heaviness, and that most in the lift side, burning in
the mouth, corrupt desire of the stomach, and sometime doggish appetite: much
watch, much solitariness, sicknesses of the spelne, as ache, heaviness,
hardness, stillenes, many cogitacions, tears, or will to weep, staring,
groaning, slouthe, stretchinge of the, waste, little sleep, if sharpness shall
not be with phlegm or sowernesse of the mouth, Illenes of the pulse with
hardness, extenuacion, or deminishinge of the body.

Of the quality altered, as brownes, or blackness, appearing in the body,
much hear, the black Morphewe, which is a most strong sign, as says
Auerhois in Collectaneis. Blackenesse in the nether eye lidde, especially
blacknes of the eyes, and clearenes of them.

Of things expelled changed, as vryne black, or blackish, tending to blackenes,
green, wan, blackenes or brownes of egestio^, or stool, spitle harrish, and
bitter withal, sower kneesing, black blood, and crudded, if it pass forth,
dreams fearful. Also hear may be added, of dreams profiting or hurting, yet
we must note, that those three kinds of signs, which Galen puts of
things, substanciallie sticking, of to falls and with falls, and operacions must
be reduced, to these three, or these three to them, of all the which, read
Iacobus Siluius in his Tables upon Gal. de caussis morborum, et symptomatum.
entreating at large. And if it be thus noted, you may as in a glass, behold,
things natural, not natural and against nature, also things helping and
hurting, which may of you be supposed, by that which is already showed. Yet all
may be reduced, to those three of Galen, as it also appears by Hippocrates,
comment. 1. de offic. who will have the Indicatiues to be understood before
any other works of art, and they must be taken, of the knowledge of affects,
for curacion does follow intellection, as every man knows guided by reason,
yeuen as, euacuacion of the similer parts, as made by indicacion, taken of
situacion, as Galen plentifully declares, De locis affec. To conclude,
whatsoever things we do take any knowledge by, we do take them by sense and
understanding, and with those two powers, do we only know says Arist. lib. de
some. and according to Oribasius. 4. Aph. all knowledge dignostike, is had by
signs, causes, or interrogacions, so that their folly is clearer then
middaye, which use the bathes of what so ever nature they be, doing it without
consideration, of all, or the most things, mentioned in these three books,
with the Aphorisms, medicines and other things, contained in the last book,
accomplished, for the better intelligence of such as use their help, which
aid, God grant them, according to their own hearts desire. Amen.

The end of the third book.
The Fourth Book, of Bathes aid.
LAstly we shall place in this book, certain Aphorisms, of the preparacion
unto Baths, of entering in, coming out, diet, sleep, and accidents, with
curacion of them. etc.

Acknowledge your selves, with the holy Apostle Paul, to be in the Lords hands
as the pot, is in the potters, saying before you go in, altogether on your
knees devoutly the prayers appointed in the end of this book.

Such as be disquieted, with any Fever, being weak, slender, and lean, must
abstain from Bathes, as says Roll. lib. de Med. aquis. They whose temperature,
is hot and dry, children, springalles, young men, lean, consumed, also women
great with child, must eschew the bathes, yet I am not ignorant, of ye youth
daily frequenting the bathes, which thing not only reason forbids, but also
experience, for their skins thereby, become not only wrinkled, but also tawnie,
especialli if they enclin, any thing to choler. Every person going into the
bathes, must first cleanse ye bodies from supersluities. All persons affected or
grieved by journey, shall not forthwith enter the bathes, but shall first rest
their bodies, by the space of a day or two, yea or more.

That day which shall be over cold, windy, and rainy, ye bathes shall not be
approached, neither in the pestilent seasons, says Agricola lib de peste. and
also Raza lib. de peste. neither in ye full of the Moon says Rolandus. Neither
in ye leap year, says Sauonarola, because it is the year of Saturn,
therefore in the leap year, you may not without great danger, use them, for
Saturn amongst all the Planets, is enemy to generation, man's nature and good
state of the body, because the state of the living body, consists in heat,
and to prove, yt it is the year of ^aturne, this they say. The Saturnal year
is moved from.iiii. to.iiii. But ye leap years is moved from iiii. to.iiii.
because every fouerth year is leap year, ergo, the leap year is the year
of Saturn, this opinion is not only false, but also rude, and unlearned. The
leap year is not the work of nature, but the inuencion of man, for Augustus
Caesar devised it, to make the year even.365. days, vi. hours and odd
minutes. But the leap year is the co^stitucion of man, and man has not force
to alter nature in the Theorikes, ergo, the leap year to hurt the nature o^
man, has no more force, the^ any other year. In the months of April, May,
June, September, and October, when the air is temperate, be the best times.

About an hour after sun rising, in the morninge, if the dissease require,
drink the water out of the spring, the body before purged, the digestion
fulfilled, and the bath first cleansed, remaining clean.vi. hours before.

So much of the water, as shall not be greeuouse to the stomache, may be drunk.

The water being drunk, the party must walk gently, a few paces, in a
temperate air.

After the Sun rising an hour, enter fasting intoo the Bathe, the
disgestion first being fulfilled.

And every person entering, shall first empty his belly, and make water, if so
be that he can not do that every day, yet every second or third day.

Any person going into the Bathes, shall sit in a place, somewhat distant from
the spring, and so by little and little, draw toward the spring.

If ye parts under ye midrife be grieved, sit up to ye nauel, but if ye parts
above the nauelbe disseased, sit in unto the neck. The first days use it
temperate, a small space: the days following, hoter, and a longer space.

Use the bathe, as well in the morning, as in the evening, if the state of your
body and strength shall require.

Such as be hot, weak, thin, lean, and slender, must avoid long tariance
in the bath, it shall suffice in the morning from.v. until almost.vi. and so
likewise in the evening.

Such as be fat, strong, cold, moist, and women, do sustain longer taryance in
the Bathe, yt is two hours in the morning, an hour and a half in the evening.

In the bath, you shall neither eat, nor drink, neither by the space of an
hour and an half, after their coming forth, except necessity constrayne.

Such as be full of meat and drink: must abstain from bathes.

Before you be ready to faint: avoid the bathes.

When you come out, cover your selves with clothes, then go to bed, and sweat,
for sweat says Galen de sanitete tuenda, euacuateth from al parts, an hour
afterward you must be dried, and put on warm clothes.

Sleep also, after sweat is convenient: but in the bath abstain from
slumbring.

When ye arise out of your bed, move with some light exercise, or walk in a
closset, or in a place, free from distemperature of the air, especially the
cold, and from the blasts of wind.

If you be either weak, or have the ioyntache, use a place of exercise, and
fricacion of the outward parts.

If fricacion (which hear shall be rubbing with a nettel clothe) shall not be
made (of which you may find more largely, in my book of Buckstones bathes
benefyte) we must use a suppositour, of honey, or of the root of white
lilly, or larde, or soap, or else a fygge, and that before meat, of all which
means to euacuate, shall heareafter follow.

The head, at your coming forth of the Bathe, must be diligently dried.

So much meat as is convenient, which will bring unto the stomache, neither
heaviness, nor wambling, may be in due time received.

Repletion must altogether be avoided, so must the Bathes in pestilent
seasons, and that for two causes in special: the one by reason it fills the
body with over much evil joyce: by reason whereof, it may enduce a spasme,
and many other euilles: the other because it opens the pores, making it
ready to receive the ambient infection.

Such meats and drinks must be used as be of light disgestion, good
nourishment, not gross, not stopping, not over cold nor vehemently hot. Here
we might enter into a large and ample discourse of Diete, if thoroughly we should
make mention of all things nourishing, but our intent is not so far as
reason reaches, to show, how all things agreeing and disagreeing, of the
Greeks called simpathia, and antepathia, does either assiste and strengthen
our bodies, or that do alter and corrupt our bodies, seeing it would make the
volume not only over hughe, but also burden the Readers, that brevity couete,
and therefore, that we may be rather pleasant, and compendiouse, then
greeuouse, or tediouse with some little entrance, that your senses may take
some smacke of our meening, shall suffice, until an other place, more meet,
considering also that in our Tables of things natural, such things are
distinguished. This truly, I appoint with Fernelius lib. secundo de abditis
rerum causis.

That nothing at all can nourishe us, which is not it self nourished and
endued with life, for stones or metals ar no eliments, or nourishments for us,
but only either plants, living creatures, or such as have proceeded from the^:
because our life and health can not be sustained but by the life of other, and
it heateth not the substance of our bodies, but by ye matter of them, and
whatsoever of the^ lives most excellent, is most wholesome for our nourishment:
for ye bodies of birds and four foted beasts, does better nourish then fish
and them both, better then fruits or herbs, if ye refer like to like, of
which peradventure it is comprehended that nourishment is familiar unto us,
first truly in spirit and divine heat, afterward in matter, which received
preparation unto these things, and these we call the whole substance. But if
ye will therefore seem to say how yt the Scorpion and the Hemlocke, because they
both live and be nourished with an ayrie substance, and heavenly heat,
nourishes us, then ye are far deceived, for it follows not by and by
contrarily, every living thing to be a nourishment, but it is beside necessary
that the heat of the living thing be agreeable and familiar unto us, as in
Buckstons bathes benefyt it is briefly showed. But the heat and heavenly spirit
of many, is against ours, altogether pestiferous, and deadly: that substance
which is of things expelling poison, and things veneming, is plased contrary
to the substance of nourishments, for, as the one is joined unto us in great
familiarity, so is the other hurtful and pestilent: wherefore in the kinds of
the whole substance, extreme nourishme^ts and things expelling poison be
contrary. Between these as it were, purging medicine take place, which neither
nourish nor corrupt, as after shall be handled, for now we will prosecute the
Diete at bathe best to be observed.

The bread shall be only of wheat, leauened and good, neither hot nor stale:
drink of clean ale, or rather beer cleanly brewed, not over hopped, and
stale. Fleash of Muttons, Kiddes, Rabbettes, and of all cloven footed fowls,
as well wild, as tame. Of fishes, Trught, Creuis de dulce, Breane, Barbill,
Pike, Cheuan, Perch, Roche, Bret, Gurnet, Whiting, Smelt, Cod, Millers tumbe:
all the which be good for chollerique persons. But they must be boiled, not
roasted, nor fried, or poudered, either with spices or salt, as Rola^dus
affirms in Hidri. Pottage made with chickens, or with the aforesaid flesh,
may be very well used, and poched eggs: but neither quayles, stares, pigeons,
sparrows, nor any such bot and filling meats. Fruits, as almondes, raisons,
damask prunes, and quinces baked, or any waydressed, be permitted.

After meat rest or sleep an hour, or more, but not by and by.

If it shall be necessary for the affect of any part, anoint the place, or
emplastre it with the clay of the bathes, where continually the water flows:
but this shall most avail legs swollen through a cold and moist cause, and
vlcerated.

Before the entering into the bath at euentyde, use exercise for the
strengthening of the parts, of the which I wish you to look in Buckstones
bathes benefyte.

The Bathe must be daily changed, receiving new or fresh water.

See that altogether while ye be there, and longer, ye avoid copulation, that
is, the use of women.

In the even tide, let them enter the bathes vi. vii. or viii. hours after
dinner, the disgestion beeinge fulfilled, as is said.

Tariatice in the Bathe in the morning may be longer, in the evening shorter.

If in the first day, the belly by the bathe be shronken, together toward the
back bone, it is a good and wholesome sign.

But if the womb be puffed up, or affected with ache, or else on while it is
hot, and another while cold with other greefes, it is an evil sign.

If after certain days the body begins to be better then before, and the
natural operacions, shall be a sign of curation or not curation.

There be.x. accidents which use to happen by bathes, as Rolandus testifies,
fainting, comonlie called swowning, immoderate watch, thirste, pain of the
head, costifenes, immoderate sweat, burninge of vryne, loss of appetite,
rheum and fevers.

The weakness of the spirits which we ^al swowning, is amended, if vinegar of
Juniper, or that in which grains of Juniper be macerated, and applied to the
mouth, and nosethrilles. Likewise, confection of Buglosse or Borage, or Corrall
of perles or preciouse stones, of the flouers of Rosemary, of Roses, or a sop
in Gascoigne wine be taken.

We do attribute watch, to the heat and dryenes of the Bathes, because it
dries the humidities of the skume, especially in chollerique heads, which
take away, with things cold and moist, or with this liniment in Latin, for
the Apotecaries, in English, for your better understanding.

R. Vnguenti popul. Olei Nemipharis, Croci, Opii, ana. s.d. ointme^t of popular
buddes, of water lilies of saffron, of opium. each half an ounce, either three
grains. analsr. z.

Mingle them, and anoint the foreheade, but if that suffice not, anoint the
wristes, and the palms of the feet, an hour after supper take this drink.

R. Serapii de papauere, ana. s.d. Nemipharae, Aquae lactucae, one ounce. Syrup
of Poppie, of each half Of water Lillies, an ounce, Of water of Lettuse, one
ounce. Commixed, take it going to sleep, milk warm.

Thyrst is thus remedied, three parts of water, one of wine, but better with
Barlie water, or with prunes boiled well, in the water of Violettes.

The pain of the head is thus eased: Assatae radicis Chamomillae, Bellidlis,
Ana. manip i d. Sweat Assa Chamomill, Dasis. of each half a handful.

Those boil in Lixiuium or lie, and apply it, either too the head, or wash it
therewith, rouling with warm clothes your head, suffering it to dry of it
self.

To make the body soluble, take the clear whey of milk, after the chease is
made, mingling therewith honey, and sugar, or else decocte them, and drink the
quantity of a Gill, or a pint fasting, eschuing the bath for that day,
pottage of the meat of Gromell, Gotes milk and wine of mirtles, does
meruailousely profet, which is thus made.

Receive the tops or buddes of the leaves, the fruit of mirtilles, of each
an handefull bruised, boiled in Gascoigne wine, to the consumpcion of the third
part, being strayned drink a draught, so that the wether be not hot, nor the
party chollerique, nor apt to fevers. But what purges every humor cheefely
by thee are to be ministered, if to Hip. as we ought, we give best credit, as
appears in his book, De medicamentis purgantibus.

Bolus to purge choler is thus made.

R. Cassia newly drawn Electuarium Lenitiuum of either z.v. drammes commixed
with sugar, in the morning fasting about four or five of the clock, not
sleaping after, nor entering the bathes for that day, but keeping your chamber,
and within one hour, supping the broth of a chicken.

Bolus to purge fleame, shall this wise be compounded.

R. Of the Electuary of Dates, of the apotecaries called Diaphaenicon, half an
ounce, of the powder of Hiera simplex, z.d. mingled with sugar, obseruinge all
things aforesaid.

Bolus, to purge melancholy.

R. Electuarij indi, a dram and an half, of the confection of Hamech three or
four drams of luger, as much as shall suffice, taken as you know.

A Clister to cleanse the Chollerique.
R. Of Mercury, Mallows, Centorie, Hearts tongue, violets, Liuerwourt, of
every one half a little handful, of the iiii. great cold seeds, of either.ii.
drammes prepared, shall be boiled in a pine and an half of running water unto
a pint, then add of Diaprunis Electuarie, of the juice of Roses, of each half
an ounce, of oil of Violets, and fallet oil, of each one ounce, it first
being strayned, minister it not ouerhot, nor ouercold.

A Clister to purge the Phlegmatique.
R. Of Mercury, Margeram, Minte, Orgaine, Byssope, of every one half a little
handful, both brom roots of the apotecaries called kneholme, and polipoodie
roots, of either one ounce, seeds of persneep, and Dill, of every one half an
ounce, all prepared, boiled, and strayned, add of the electuarie of Dates.iii.
drammes, of powder of Seen prepared, i. dram, and an half, of the oil of
Chamomile, oil of Lillies, of either.i. ounce, and an half.

A Clister to purge Melanchullie.
R. Borage, Bauhne, Bassill, Mawes, Sauory, Time, of each.i. handful, Seen
Lawry, i. ounce, Carret roots.ii. ounces al as is aforesaid boiled, in the
broth of sheappes heads, add of Diasenue in electuarie, i. ounce, Syrup of
Epithimum, four ounces, oil of Juniper, sweet Cost. of each one ounce, of
honey, and salt a little.

A Clister to mundifie the blood.
R. Of hoppes, fumitorie, scabiose, endive, cichorie, of each half an
handful, roots of perselie, and fennel, the inner pithe taken out, of gourde
seeds, of each the waighte of a Shilling. Boil all these in a quarte of wheye
unto almost a pint, all things ordered, as before is showed, adding thereunto
Hiera piera, the weighte of sixed. Diacatholicon, six drams, honey, and salt,
a pretty quantity.

A Clister to break wind, and to cleanse all parts, without danger, in any
complexion, and therewith comforting.
R, Flowers of melilote, of Chamomile, and Hissope, of each a little handful,
of maidens hear, of dill, of each half a little handful, of the seeds of
Anise, and cumine, each one ounce, raysons the stones piked out, a handful,
boil all these in a sufficient quantity, of the brothe of a cock chickin,
every thing first thus prepared, the which I wish you to note also, in the
rest: the herbs chopped, the roots bruised, the seeds broken, and boiled to
a pint, add of cassia two ounces, of hiera picra iiii. drams, of the oil of
Dyll, of the oil of chamomile, of each an ounce, and half ministered after this
sort, so warm as you may suffer, at the towell kneelinge, the buttockes
higher then the rest of the body, turninge after on the back, then on the
belly, after, on every side.

For the burning of Urine, a perfect remedy.
R. Seeds of Purselane, of Lettuce, of Endive, of either one dram, white
Poppie two drammes, Henbane half a dram, Sebestens, three drams, Saffron a
penie waighte, Licorishe four drammes, Pine, ten drammes, fountain water,
three quartes, boil all unto the consumpcion of the third part, then strain
it and take.vii. or.viii. sponefulles in the morning with one ounce, of the
syrup of Violets, and assure you before the fourth day, you shall see worthy
effects.

The Rheum, or destillacion of the head, is thus taken away.
R. Seen leaves.vi. drammes, Rocket.iiii drammes, long Pepper.ii. drammes, make
thereof a powder, of which morning and evening, receive a dram, eschuing the
Bathe, until the Rheum be slakened, this is also good, to keep you soluble,
taken in a thin alebury, fasting, or in whit wine if the party be
flegmatique, or has the stone, last going to bed.

The loss of the appetite, is recovered with this medicine, or with the joyce
of Pomegranates, as says Mesue.
R. Cardui benedicti.iii. handfuls, clarret wine, fountain water, of each a
quarte boiled, unto the third, and strayned, used first in the morning, a Gill
or two, sweating after. If a fever happen avoid the Bathes, until you be
amended. But you may sweat, if you be fat of body, and drink your Cardnus
benedictus drink, or that which we have appointed to quench thyrst. Things
stranger, or of more force, I would not meddle with, knowing how easily the
ignorant may err, and how bold they be, to put in experience every recepte,
without the advice of them that can yield the reason and cau^es, of each thing
mentioned, often to their great hurt, for who I pray you, who is so bold now a
days as blind Bayarde, goodwyfe Margerie, and dame Siblie, Thomas Tinker, and
Pierse peddler: oh lamentable case, oh arrogant people, oh laws where are you
executed? Be ye therefore circumspect, seek not for every matter the bathes,
but for such diseases, as the Phisicions doubt any way else to cure: nor give
not council in art, where the wysest has need to be sought you ignorant. In
conclusion, I wish that you leave a note of the commodity received, and a
knowledge of your condition, and calling in the recorods of the Mayor of the
city, where it shall be registered, until a Physician ordinary be appointed,
who then shall be joined with the Mayor paying to the poor man's box, as in
Buckstons is appointed, and four d. for registring your benefit received
there, and for other things, some of the which, I wish you to look in the
latter end of Buckstones benefyte, that the better ease may be found, the
dividing, of the male from the female, so that they may not see, and embrace
each other, it being a thing not only so indecent, in the commendacion of
foreign nations, but also a thing most uncivil, and barbarous. Therefore, I
beseech you, seek in all things the glory of God, magnificence of the
state, and suffer aid for them, that shall come after. The which aid, help,
and benefit, I beseech God, to grant all them that be favorers of the
Gospel, obeyers of the Prince, and lovers of their Country. AMEN.

FINIS.
A Prayer made by the Author of this aid, to be said of all persons
disseased, meekely kneeling upon their knees, before they enter into the Bathes.
AS thou have (most merciful Father) through thine infinite goodness and grace,
vouchsafed to permit us to come unto these thy Bathes natural thine appointed
aid, for the benefit of us wretched creatures. Even so, we acknowledge most
justly, that for our sin and wickedness we are thus molested, disseased and
vexed. Nevertheless, we incredible rejoice in these our afflictions, knowing,
that whom thou punishest, the same most mercifully remembrest: wherefore we
hope and certainly trust, for that thou do remember us with these our greefs
and disseases, that thou will likewise upon these our pitiefull petitions,
pardon all our misdeedes: and as well renew in us the fruit of good works, as
also the just health agreeable to our creation, and we do promise
forgyuenesse too all them that have offended us, so freely as we do look for
the health of body, life, and Soul, at thy most mighty hands, for we
certainly know, and the same faythefully believe, that as the blessed blood of
our redeemer thy only son, coequall with thee in power, and majesty, was
shed for our sins: so these thine Elements of water and mineralles, may
through thy mighty operacion, cleanse aways the lothsomenesse, pains and
miseries of these our feeble bodies, thy mystical body, through the comfort
of thy pure spirit, of grace, the holy Ghost, who with thy son our savior,
and thee our maker, reigns, one God, in persons three: always more ready
to help us thy feeble creatures, then we be able or ready to desire the
same: and therefore once and once again, holding up our hands to the heaven
of heavens, beseech thy almighty Godheade of Trinity, too comfort and
strengthen us all, that in thy faith and unity be come hither, for the
benefytes of those Bathes, that we may return whole, safe, and sound, to the
better expressing of thy glory, to the posterities, for ever. AMEN.

God save the Queens Majesty, and increase the faith of thy Flock, preserve
the Council, and all the Nobility, Spiritual, and Temporal.

FINIS.
A Table of all the principal matters contained in this book of Bathes aid,
to direct the Readers after the order of the Alphabet to find any notable
matter contained in the same.
AVgustus Caesar devised the leap year. Fol. 28. page 1. Antiquity of Bathe.
fol. 1. page 2. All men going into the bathe must cle^se their bodies. fo. 27
page 2. A prayer to be said of all them that enter the Bathe. fol. 34. page 2.
B
BLadud edified the city of Bathe. fol. 1. page 2. Bath first called Kayer
Blaeydin. fol. 1. page 2. Bathes of Bath not made hot by Magic. fol. 20. page
2. Bathes in pestilent seasons must be avoided. fol. 29. page 1.
C
CAuse of the heat of Bathes. fol. 9. page 1. Cause why some waters be hotter
then other. fol. 16. page 2. Color of the bathes of Bath. fol. 17. page 2.
Clisters to purge chollerique. fol. 32 Clisters to purge phlegmatique. fol. 32
Clisters to purge Melanchollique. ibidem Clister to break wind. ibidem
Camphyre a kind of Bitumen. fol. 13. pa. 2 Counsel the kay of wisdom. fol.
21. pa. 1 Cause defined. fo. 22 pa. 2
D
Definition of natural Bathes. fo. 1 pa. 2 Definition of Science. fo. 9. pa. 1
Definition of Artificial Bathe. fo. 1. pa. 2 Degrees of medicines defined.
fol. 20. pa. 1
E
Exercise before entering into the Bathe. fo 30. pa. 1 Effects of Diet. fo. 29.
pa. 2. Every matter probable must be reasoned too and, etc. fol. 8. page 2
F
Fire under the earth. fo. 9. page 2 Frication meet to be used. fo. 28. pa. 2
H
Hot bathes in cold Regions. fol 12. page 1 Hot Bath for cold sicknesses.
fol. 21. page 1 How you shall use your self before you enter, etc. fol. 28.
page 1
I
Ioannes de Dondis confuted. fol. 11. pa. 1
K
Knowledge of causse necessary in every profession. fol. 9. page 1 Kings Bath,
hot between both. fol. 21. page 1
N
Nothing can nourish which is not norished. fo. 29. page 1
P
Puritanes better termed qrecisianes. fo. 24. pa. 1 Purgations for every
complexion. fo. 31. pa. 2 Property of every definition. fol. 1. page 2
R
Rules to understand the first Table. fol. 26. Roots of trees do enter so
far into the earth, as. etc. fol. 12. page 1 Repletion to be avoided. fol
29. pa. 1 Remedies for pain in the head. fol. 30. pa. 2 Remedies for burning
of urine. fo. 32. pa. 2 Remedies for the Rume. fol 33. page 2 Remedies for the
appetite lost. ibidem
S
Subject preserving fire under the earth. Sickness defined. fol 22. pa. 2 a
Stipend benefyce or prebende in every Cathedral church for a graduate in
Phisike. fol. 22. page 2
T
Three manner mixtions in bathes. fol. 17. pa. 1 The Taste of bathes. fo. 18.
pa. 1 The smell of the Bathes. fol. 17. page 2 Times fyt to enter the Bathes.
fol. 27. page 2 Taste defined. fol. 18. page 2
VV
Whence it is that waters spring hot. fol. 11. pa. 1 Why the fire goes not
forth. fo. 15. pa. 2 Waters of bathes. fol. 16. page 2. What the sick ought
to do when he comes to the bathes. fol. 22. page 1. Women with child must
eschew the bathes. fol. 27. page 2 What bread, what flesh, what fish, what
fruit, is to be permitted. fol. 29. page 2.
Y
York first named Kayer Ebrank. fol 2. page 1. Youghts daily frequenting the
bathes of Bathe. fol. 27. Page 2.
FINIS.
TO HIS FRIENDS, KINSFOLKS, and Alies, of Bath Bristoll, wells, etc. John
Jones, Gentleman, Graduate in Phisike, sends greeting.
AS a lostie Style and long discourse unto them that desire playnnes, and
covet brevity, is a thing irksome: so a plain sense and an hearty affection
uttered to friends (as me seems) is most alowable. And for that the manifold
courtesies and great commodities received, as well in youth, as of late years
at the hands of diverse friends, kinsfolks, alies, etc. In the Counties of
Gloucester, Dorset, Deuonia, Worcester, and Sumerset, were one principal
cause, which emboldened me to take in hand this mine enterprise. I could not
but signify the same unto you (mine assured good friends) especially having
(without offense be it spoken) in the goods of Fortune few equalles, in the
douries of Nature fewer, in furniture of mind none, and chiefly in the
understanding of the holy Scripture, as good sheep, followers a good
shepherd, the right reverend Father in God, Doctor Barkley, my very good Lord
and singular Moecenas of all the learned.

I may not here forget my singular good Lady, the Lady Sydenham, nor her
worthy Son Master Henry Sydenham, in wisdom comparable to Cato, in
valiantnes nothing inferior to Hector, whose singular good will forced me for
their sakes, to deuyse somewhat that might benefyte universally: which
(whatsoever it be) I beseech you all to accept gratefully as a small
present of mine unfeigned heart toward you. Fare ye well.

From London. Anno. 1572.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol. 3. Page 1. Line. 3. For Mempria read Memprice. fo. 3. page 1. lin. 5.
For Lorine, read Locrine. fol. 3. page 2. li. 2. For Monar, read Monarch. fo.
3. pa. 2. li. 10. For corni, cornish.

fo. 8. pa. 1. li. 28. For mediatis, medicatis.

fo. 10. pa. 1. li. 22. for milene, read Mileus.

fol. 12. page 2. lin. 32. for stixes, read flare.

fo. 16. pa. 2. lin. 21. for succeeding, read succeeded. fo. 17. page 2. li.
28. for fannou guen freni, read Funnon Gwen frewy. fol. 18. page 1. li. 3. for
sussible, sussible. fo. 23. pa. 2. li. 2. for whyt read hot. fo. 23. page 1.
lin. 7. for pity, read piety.

fo. 24. pa. 1. li. 21. for Aphasesis, read Aphayresis. fol. 24. page 1. li.
11. for pinis, pinish. fol. ibi. For hot body, whole body. fo. 26. page 1. li.
17. For Spelne, read Spleen. fol. 29. page 1. lin. 25. read Aluments for
Eliments. fo. 30. pa. 2. li. 19. For Nemipharae, read Nenupharae. fol. 31. page
2 lin. 7. for pine, read pint.

Faults in the Table of the six things not Natural.
For hye disgestion, read hard disgestion.

For salt and oil, read fat and oily.

For salt swells more, read salt fretteth much.

Printed at London by Thomas East, for William Jones: and are to be sold at
his new long Shop at the westdore of Paul's Church.

1572.


