THE WISE-MANS FORECAST AGAINST THE EVIL TIME.

BY THOMAS BARNES. Preacher of the Word at St Margretts, in New-Fish-streete.
LONDON.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniell Newbery and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Star under St Peters-Church in Cornhill, and in
Pope's Head Alley. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sir Francis Barrington, Knight, Baronet; Sr Thomas
Eliot; Sr Nathaniell Barnardiston; Mr Roger Thornton, Esquire: the Author
wishes all blessings in this world, all bliss in the other, according to Gods
good will, and pleasure.
OF Creator omnium Deus, inter caetera, and super caetera quae creauit,
RATIONALEM dignatus est illustrare naturam. Hug. Vict. de Any. l. 2. c. 31.
Tom. 2. 109.
all the things, which the Lord has made in this Great World, MAN (Right
Worshipful) is the most noble: for whose sake other creatures were Propter
quem, ( viz. hominem) mundum ipsum, and vniversa, quaecunque sunt, Deus fecit.
Lactan. de Divine. raem. l. 7. c. 4. p. 214.
created; to whose feet the things below are Psalm. 8.6. Rursum caeteras res
animantes, hominis causa esse factas, ex eo clarum est quod homini seruiunt.
Lactan. de Diu. Praem. l. 7. c. 14.
subjected. Of all the essentials, which MAN (the little world) does consist
of, the SOVLE is the most excellent Habet anima quandam propriam naturam,
omnibus his, mundanae molis elementis excellentiorem. Hug. Vict. de Anim. l. 2.
c. 12.
: it is Genesis 2.7.
infused by God, Insufflauit enim, dictum est ad exprimendam operis dignitate^,
vt agnosceretur aliquod eximium, quod eius ore prolatum est. Cassiod. de Anim.
page 313.
which notes out the dignity of it: it Animus est substantia quaedam rationis
particeps, regendo corpori accommodata. Hugo. Vict. de Anim. l. 1. c. 1. Tom.
2. fol. 95.
has command of the body, which notes out the authority of it: it is a work
(as (...). Macar. Hom. 46. p. 507.
One calls it) both Great, Divine, and Admirable. Of all the powers in the
soul, none is comparable to the REASON. Of all the branches in the reasonable
part, none is equal to the MIND, none excels the (...). id est. Ne leuit^r
INTELLECTIVAM animae substantiam perpendas, dilecte. Id. Hom. 26. p. 326.
Understanding. Of all the virtues in the mind, WISDOM gives the greatest
light, Wisdom swaies with chiefest might. Oh the breadth that Wisdom
spanneth; Oh the length that Wisdom reaches; Oh the height that Wisdom
climeth; Oh the depth that Wisdom gageth, when once it comes into a Soul,
cleared by Gods spirit, in some good measure, from those duskish clouds of
Ignorance, and Error, with which before it was obscured (...) Id. Hom. 46
. Without this, how can men discern of things that differ Phil. 1.10
? How can they see what is good, and what is evil, and so exercise the power
of their reason in ensuing the one, in eschewing the other Idcirco data est
homin^ sapientia, v^ cognita bonorum maloru^que natura, and in appetendis
bonis, and malis declinandis, vim suae rationis ex erceat. Lact. de Diu. Pra^
l. 7. c. 4.
? When dangers are imminent, and coming against us, Wisdom foresees them,
forecasteth against them: When troubles are incumbent, and lying upon us, it
does either remove them, or Inter omnes rerum perturbatissimaru^, intemperies,
nos certos, tectosque conseruat. Serran. in Eccles. c. 7. p. 388.
preserve us in them. In a word, What walls are to Cities, what skins are to
beasts, scales to fishes, feathers to birds, and shells to some creeping, and
baser creatures; the same is Wisdom to ( Nam caeteris animalibus quia
sapientia non data est; and munita indumentis naturalibus, and armata sunt:
homini autem pro his omnibu^ ^uod erat prae^ipuum, rationem solam dedit; Itaque
nudum, formauit, and (...), vt eum sapientia, and muntret, and tegeret. Lactan.
de Diu. Praem. l. 7. c. 41. ^.
that naked-borne creature) MAN, even a covering, a Eccles. 7.12.
defense: yea, Wisdom (says Solomon) strengthens the wise, more then ten
mighty men which are in the City Ib. v. 19.
. This excellency, this efficacy of Wisdom, I undertake to lay open (so
far as the Text gives leave, and the times require) in the ensuing Discourse.
In the which (as the Searcher of all hearts knows) next to his own glory, I
seek the good of two sorts; of prudent Christians, of improuident persons. The
one I would not have despair, although the times frown: the other, I would
not have secure, because the times frown. The one having wisdom, do I
advise to use it; that they may foresee the plague, and hide themselves: The
other wanting wisdom, do I persuade to seek it; least like fools they
pass on, and be punished. Now, if either of these persons (through Gods
blessing) reap that good, which I entend, by these endeavors; I do not doubt,
but (besides their praises in the first place returned to God for that
blessing) they will send up some prayers for Your Worships welfare, for
suffering your Names to stand in the forefront of this Treatise, as a
Countenance to the Matter; although scarce known to one of you, and
well-deseruing of none of you, be the Author. My boldness is much, I freely
confess it; yea, overmuch, I crave pardon for it. Although I have joined so
many of you together (because I hope you are united in the same bond of
Religion) when each of your Names, is worthy to countenance some greater, some
better Work, then this is, or any else, that my slender ability can afford;
yet I beseech you, let the intimation o^ ^y desires, to be thankful to most
of you, as I have great reason, to oblige my self to all of you, for this your
Protection, plead excuse for my boldness. 1 These. 5.23.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and preserve your whole
spirits, soul, and body, blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. A Petitioner for which, to the throne of grace, is he, who is

At your Worships service in the LORD; THOMAS BARNES.

THE VVISE-MANS FORECAST AGAINST THE EVIL TIME.
Proverbs 22.3. The prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: but
the simple pass on, and are punished.


FOr me to begin with a large Discourse of this whole Book by way of
Preface, would be both tedious, and incommodious; neither pleasing, nor
profitable; especially too, since they, who are acquainted with the Scriptures,
or have some little insight thereinto, cannot be ignorant that this Book has
God for the Author, Solomon for the Writer, Proverbs, or Divine Parables, for
the Matter of the same.

This Chapter (as Piscator. Tituli rerum quae hoc capito proponuntur sunt isti,
Fama, favor, etc.
One observes) consisting of 29. verses, has thirty several, and sundry
Subjects handled in it: Every Subject has a proper Proverb, most of which
Proverbes are so handled, that very seldom does one depend upon another.

The parts of the Text.
This Text contains a twofold Subject, and suteably consists, of two
Proverbes. Agit locus de prudentibus and prouidis, de simplicibus ru^su^, and
improvidis. Peltanus in Pro. page 325. The Branches of the 1. part.
Here we have, first, a Provident man, and a Proverb concerning him; [The
prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himselfe]: Here we have secondly,
an Improvident man, and a Proverb concerning him [But the simple pass on, and
are punished].

Touching the Provident man, in the first Proverb, we may note two things, 1.
His Title. 2. His Task.
Or if you will. His Style. Practice.


His Title, or Style, [A prudent man]. His Task, or Practice [foreseeth the
evil, and hides himselfe].

1. Branch. Interpretation.
I begin with his Title [A prudent man]: or as some Bibles render [The
Wise-man]: All Is one in effect.

The word in the Original is a Crafty, or Subtle man (...) *
, coming of a Gnarum, Astutam, vel callidum esse: Astute, vel callide agere.
word which signifies to be subtle, or to deal craftily. It is a Metaphora a^
nudis tracta, qui se huc, illuc vers^nt. Cartw. ad loc.
Metaphor borrowed from, naked persons, who turn themselves every way,
sometimes to this side, sometimes to that. Me thinks the Seventie
Interpreters have rendered it well; (...).
A man meddling in every business, (that is to say) A man working toward any
thing, any change, any state, any calamity (...). Sylburg. Etym. (...). Col.
651.
, etc. As if the wise man here should intend such a man as has his wits
about him, or a person so politic, as that he knows what to do, and where
to wind himself whatsoever betideth.

Doubt.
Now whether this prudent, or politic man here be taken in a good sense, or a
bad, there is some doubt, because in the Hebrew Bible it is taken both ways.
Solution.
For the saluing whereof, howbeit, Beda and such as follow him.
Some do take it in a bad sense, and would understand one that is Pro versuto
and versi-pelli
wickedly crafty; or (as the Apostle speaks) wise to do evil Romans 16.19.
, subtle to fancy every humor, a man for all companies, for all times, such
as were some of the Whom Hierom, Lyranus, and others mean here.
Rulers amongst the Jews in the time of Christ, who were too crafty to
profess themselves the Disciples of Christ; yet the very circumstances does
show, that Piscat. Callidas In bonam partem Ianse^. Sicut Callidus in hoc loco
and alibi in hoc libro in bonam accipi debet partem, Vise. Lauat. ad loc.
Those Interpreters hit more right, who take it in a good sense, for one that
is religiously prudent, a godly Wiseman, politic according to piety. That
Iustus nempe est sapiens. Ber. in Cant. Ser. 63. fol. 184 H.
a good man is a wise man. A Christian is crafty. Not crafty as Calliditas
aute^ and astuti^, in mutis quoque animalibus sunt, vel cum insidiantur alijs,
and dolo capiunt vt de voren^, vel cum i^sidias aliorum vario genere deludunt
Lactant. de Iustit. l. 5. c. 18. circ. finem.
Bruites be; as the Serpent was, who beguiled Eve; not crafty as Cheaters be,
to circumvent their brethren to their hurt, either in gaming, trading, buying,
selling, or the like; for these are mischieuously crafty; nor crafty as
hypocrites be to beguil^ men with a show of Religion, and indeed before God to
be irreligious; for this is damnable craftines; But innocently crafty, crafty
in the best sense, holily prudent, and wise. Hence it is that in Scripture we
shall find a Christian often adorned with the style of a Wiseman; especially
in this Book of the Proverbes Pro. 10.8.14. Chapter 17.2. Chapter 25.5.
. To this purpose is that which Moses records of Joseph, Genesis 41. In the 18.
verse of that Chapter, he is called a man in whom the spirit of God is; and in
the 19. verse, it follows; There is none so discreet, and wise as thou art.
Who is a wise man? (says James) let him show out of a good conversation his
works with meekenes of wisdom Iam. 3.13.
: as if he should have said; That man is a wise man, who does wisely bring
forth the fruits of Religion; And no marvel, for why:

Such an one is taught of God; But who, that is taught of God, is not wise?

Christ is made wisdom unto him 1 Cor. 1.30.
.

holy Ghost (whose office is to enlighten, to direct, and to endue with
wisdom) dwells in his heart; it must therefore needs follow upon these
grounds, that a pious man is a prudent man.

Use does meet full in the face with that horrible, and damnable sin of
casting the aspersions of folly in the face of Religion, and the professors of
the same. A sin too common amongst the sons of men Semper enim contra
virtute^ insanit malitia. Chrysostom: in Genesis c. 6. Hom. 22.
. In the Court he is accounted a fool that will not swill, swear, and go to
a Play. In the Country he is reputed a fool that will not take liberty to
rob God of his Sabboths for his base pleasures and profits. In the City he is
esteemed a fool that straynes at a lie, at an oath, at a false gloss to make
his deceitful wares go off hand, to beguile buyers withal, and that makes
any scruple of Usury. Papists deem the children of God, Heretical fools;
Profane ones, judge them Hypocritical fools: Civil ones, precise, and
singular fools. Ah (my brethren) what miserable times do we live in? What
uncharitable opinions? cankred affections, does our age afford? that cannot
beteame Religion it self the name of wisdom; nor such as favor, and savor
of Religion, the title of Wise men Prudentia non ^n foro, non in ^la^aeis, sed
in Ecclesia possitetur Ambros. de Virgin. l 3. Tom. 1. p. 99.
* I would feign know where heavenly Prudence is to be found on earth, if not in
the Prudentia non ^n foro, non in ^la^aeis, sed in Ecclesia possitetur Ambros.
de Virgin. l 3. Tom. 1. p. 99.
Church. It is the proper portion, and peculiar possession of the godly. How
can a man be just, and religious, if he be not truly wise Quomodo est ^n ^^s
vera^us^itia ^n quibus non est vera ^a^enti^? A^g. Tom. 1. l. 4. contra Julian
c. 3 page 70.
? Who have a better insight into their estate of misery, into the means of
their recovery, then the people of God have? Who have their wits better
exercised Heb. 5.14.
, to discern of things that differ Phil. 1.
then they? Who more cunning then they in making the best choices, and matches,
in refusing the evil, and choosing the good, even (with David) selecting the
way of truth Ps 119.30.
? Who have a better forecast, for unmatchable honors, for durable treasures,
and unspeakable pleasures then they? And are such ones fools? Where are men's
eyes? What are men's judgments? Were they not fools themselves, had not malice
against God, and enmity to the truth, blinded, besotted them; they could not
choose but needs confess, that where such signs of wisdom be, there
wisdom her self has her seat. Let therefore all unrighteous, and
irreligious ones (be they of the profaner, or ciuiller sort) learn to repute
the Children of God wiser then they have done, and cease to befoole them, or
else (I tell them) as the Preaching of the Cross of Christ is to them that
PERISH foolishnes 1 Cor. 1 18.
; that is, as the accounting of Gods ordinance of Preaching a foolish thing is
a mark of perishing* so the befooling of the members of Christ, (who are in
this Text styled prudent,) is a fearful token of damnation. For says Christ
himself; Whosoever shall say to HIS brother (that is) to his neighbor, much
more to Christ's brother, (...).
THOU FOOL, shall be in danger of hell fire Mat. 5.22.
.

you that are the Children of God, Encouragement to the godly against reproach.
from being discouraged at the befooling terms, wherewithal the Devils
Mimickes, and the worlds mock-gods, do abuse you. It may be, both your
persons and profession are brought forth in Shows and Stage Plays (where no
Villainy is wanting Nihil serme vel criminum, vel flagitiorum e^t, quod in
spectatulis non sit Sal. de Prou. l 6.
) and there by Satan's- Apes, and Agents exposed to derision; It may be, you
are not admired, nor applauded of the men of the world ( Impossible enimest,
vt qui a^gus a^, et arcta^ virtutis viamambulat, and mandata sequitur Christ's,
ab omnibus laudetu^, et in admirat^one sit. Chrysostom: in Genesis c 6. Hom. 22.
for it is impossible you should) but rather exploded and disgraced, as though
you were the veriest fools that live, yet this need not much trouble you, much
disquiet you; So long as the Lord accountes you wise; So long as He, (who
knows you, both what you are, and what you do, who teaches you from heaven,
who has made you partakers of the wisdom of Christ, who has put his spirit
(the spirit of wisdom) into your inward parts) so long as HE (I say) has
adorned you with this Title of Dou^ like providence, of harmeles policy; you
for your parts are well enough: you have honor enough, you have renown
enough, whatsoever the world thinks, or says of you. All their taunts with
which they do befoole you, cannot make a flaw in your Title, or be a blemish
thereunto. Profit you they may by the use you may make of them, hurt you they
cannot Qu^d damni d^core, hinc nascitur viro, quod ab hominibus subsannatur,
and irridetur, cu^ is qui finxit corda hominum, et intelligit omnia opera
eorum, praedica: eum, and corona? Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 22. Nihil autem
prudentibus aufert, in o potius consert merdax infamatio maliuolorum. Maxent.
Dialog l. ^. c. 1. in Or^had 684
. Praeocerpatio.
I know indeed, it is Neque p^ruum est despicer^ irri^emes, and oppr^br^mes,
and salibus i^^^ssentes Chrysostom sup.
no ^asie matter (especially to flesh and blood) to brook, and set light by
such taunts, such obloquies; T^ntum virtatio rebur, vt cum imp^gnatur, hostibus
fi^t potentior Idem ibid
virtue has that power and strength, that it can bear, and break through
them all; and Anima fortis, and constantis est ocul^nt su^m intendere ad il^um
insopitum oculum, and ab eo solam gloriam expectare and haec despicere,
nulliusque pili facere hu^ anam la^dem ^el con^icia, sed transire vt vmbras,
and s^mnia. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 23.
a courageous heart, and valorus spirit, which looks at that All-seeing God,
and expects praise from him alone, can easily despise the speeches of evil
men; not weighing either their praises, or disprayses a rush, or an hair. Now
we for our parts, profess our selves to have grace, to be virtuous; oh be
we then so courageous, as (with Noah, At iustus ille viz Noa) non antum december
and vigints ho^ines, sed and ^unium homi^um naturam, and tot myriades ^spexit:
verimise enim erat ^nnes eos ridere ^prehendere, ^bsannare and ^bacchari, etc.
Id. ibid.
that just one, who was not daunted at millions and myriads of reproaches) to
beat down, and keep under all such faynting thoughts, and fearful
conceits, as this consideration (that the world reputes us fools) may
occasion in us. I am sure, Dominus mi^ros vocat eos, ^ui propter hu^anam
laude^, ^irtutem n^gli^unt. Id. ib.
miserable would your case be, if for the shunning of this imputation, and for
the gaining of man's applause, we should neglect holiness: Better it is a
thousand times, to be accounted by the world fools for Gods cause, then to
have the wisdom of the world, then to be reputed wise in the world, and in
the mean time to be fools in Gods account, for being enemies unto him. I know
^his has need of enforcing, because there are Multi non fe^ntes conuicia
ominu^ viginti ^el december, vel ^iam paucoru^ ^pplantantur, and ruunt. Chry. 1
Gen c, 6. Iom. 22.
many (even in the profession of Christianity) whom a few such bugge words
do scare too much. But I must make have to that which follows.

The second Branch of the ^^rst part.
Foreseeth the evil, and hides himself.

The second Branch subdi^ided into two ^articulars
Here we have the Prudent man's task or Practice; in which consider, His
Prevision, Provision,
or His foresight. The fruit of his foresight.


The former in these words [foreseeth the euill]. The latter in these, [And
hides himselfe].

The 1 parti^ular in the Branch.
In the first of these, which must first be handled: two things offer themselves
to our view, 1. An act. 2. The object of that act.


The Act [Foreseeth]. The object, or what he foreseeth; [The euill].

In the meaning I will join both together. And albeit, (because every Act is
terminated, and limited by its object) the object might (and not
inconueniently) be first opened, yet in regard of the order which the spirit of
God here observes, I will explain the words as they lie in the Text, the Act
first, the Object last.

Interpretation.
Foreseeth]. The word is in the Original [Seeth] and so it is usually
translated in other Languages, saving that the Septuagint do turn Sees into
(...).
Seeing, and Piscator (among the Latins) foreseeth into Praevidens.
foreseeing; Both using a participle in stead of the Verb.

(Sees) why is it in our English Bibles translated (foreseeth)? Explicationis
ergo.
explications sake, to show what a kind of seeing the Hebrew intends in this
Text. For, inasmuch as the word See; has diverse constructions in the Book of
God, as viz. signifying sometimes (properly) to take a view of some outward
object with the eye of the body Mat. 22.11. The King came in, to see the
guests.
; sometimes metaphorically to understand Ioh 9.41. Now you say we see.
, with diligence to observe, and mark Psalm. 46.8. Come and see the works of
God.
, to receive a thing from God by prophetical revelation Isa. 2.1. The Word
which Isaiah saw.
, to believe Ioh. 6.40. This is the will of my Father, that eueryone that Sees
the Son.
, sometimes to hear Apoc. 1.12. I turned to see the voice that spoke.
, sometimes to beware, Apoc. 22.9. See thou do it not.
etc. Why may it not as well signify to foresee: especially too, since there
can be no sure believing, that a thing will happen, no provident bewaring of a
thing that may happen without foresight, and no foresight without seeing,
either with the eye of the body, or else with the eye of the mind. You have
the Act explained.

Now to the object [The euill]. It is well known that there is a Malum
Delicti. Supplicij.
Tertul.
two fold evil Of sin. Of punishment.


If we should here understand the evil of sin, the meaning would be this,
that a wise Christian forseeth what may be to him an occasion of sin, that he
may shun it. But leaving this; by evil here is meant the evil of
punishment: For this meaning both the Septuagint will bear (...). i. e. Malum
vlciscens vel puniens
, and Interpreters for the most part do give As Vatablus, periculum. Piscator:
Vidit ingruere res aduersis. Lavat Ra^nah, a Ragnah pascere, in malum sumitur,
De pascere, arr^dere, frangere, affligere Dyonis ^arth^sianus Damnum
. And this evil of punishment, some restrain to one thing, some to another:
As Peltan ad locum.
some to places of preferment, either in the Church, or Commonwealth, as if
this should be the meaning Prudentes expendentes quantum periculi positu^ sit
in magnis honoribus, amplis magistratibus, O^ulentis Sacerdotijs, etc.
; A crafty Christian weighs with himself how great danger, or peril, is in
great honors, in high places of command, in wealthy Priest-hoodes, and the
like. Some Cartw. ad loc.
other refer it (in part) to great and gross sins, as if the sense should
be this; Incommoda, ex ebrietate, adulterio, contentione, ambitione, long
prospicientes.
A prudent man foreseeth what mischief comes by drunkenness, adulterio,
contention, ambition, and such like sins. But (because of the Particle The, it
being termed rather THE evil, then evil, or, An evil) I rather extend it to
some eminent danger that a people may be in, to some notable judgment
imminent, or hanging over a place: and so deliver the meaning in these terms:

Paraphrase.
A person that is piously prudent sees before hand, or foreseeth eminent
dangers, or calamities that may come upon a place, upon a people.

The Doctrines which hence I collect, are these two.

1. That it is possible for a people, where good men are, to be in great
danger, eminent judgments may hang over it. 2. That a wise Christian may have
a sight of that dange^, a foresight of those judgments. I strain not the Text
for either of these points; therefore heavens-hand go along with us in
handling the same.
The former I will be the briefer in, because (howsoever it affords matter of
use by it self) yet it is but an introduction into the latter; and the
chiefest use which I shall put this branch of the Text unto, does after a sort
arise from both these Doctrines now propounded, as they are jointly considered.

Well, let us begin with the first, and handle it so far forth as it is
useful of it self.

1. Doct. From the 1. particular in the 2. Branch of the 1. part. Evils may
hang over places where God has his Church. The Lords wrath may break out
like fire, even in the house of JOSEPH. Amos. 5.6.
It is possible for some eminent evil, or judgment to hang over a place, to
be coming upon a people where God has his Church, where wise Christians are.

If I should distinguish the judgments of God into three sorts, Eternal,
Spiritual, and Temporal; I could demonstrate the truth of the point by each
of them.

First, that Eternal judgments (which are the shutting out of heaven, and the
thrusting into hell) may hang over such a place (that is) over some in such a
place; the horrible, and great sins that are there committed, do manifestly
declare.

Secondly, for Spiritual judgments, as namely, 1. A famine of the Word, which
is an heavy plague. 2. General hardness of heart. 3. General defection from
Religion, or falling away from God; which the Author to the Hebrews, calls a
(...).
departing from the LIVING God Heb. 3.12.
, or God of life; A drawing back (...). Heb. 10.39.
to perdition: that such may hang over such a place, I could make good from the
examples of the Israelites; Amongst them good men were, yet the judgment of a
spiritual famine and declining from God, which came to pass in Ieroboams
time, did even hang over the heads of the ten Tribes, in the latter end of
Salomons reign, when his wives and Concubines drew him to Idolatry 1 Kin.
Compare 11. Chapter with the 12.
: as likewise by the example of the In the book of Exodus.
Egyptians, and others. But these Eternal, and Spiritual judgments I pass
over, and choose to insist on the Temporal, as more specially intended by the
holy Ghost in this place.

Now that some such temporal judgments may be coming against a people, whom
Gods Children live amongst, it is very evident by many testimonies. What an
evil hung over the Men of the old world, amongst whom Noah lived Genesis 6.
? over the Sodomites, amongst whom Lot was Chapter 19.
? over Egypt, and the Countries round about, where Joseph, Jacob, and the
Patriarchs lived Gen 41.25.26 etc.
? What shall I speak of the famines 2 King. 6.25. Lam. 4.9.10.
, pestilences Number. 14.12. 2 Samuel 24.15. 2 Chronicles. 7.13. Ier. 21.6. Ezekiel. 14.21.
, invasions by the enemies Iere. 32.24. Ezekiel. 38.22. Ezekiel. 11.3. Chapter 39.33. 2
Chro. 6.36.
, captiuities, and the like, so often mentioned in sacred Writ, that were
imminent over the people of the Jews? For in that such mischiefs fell upon
them, of necessity they did hang over them ere they came. All the threatenings
of grievous plagues against that people, wheresoever you meet with them in the
writings of the Prophets (great or small) you may well refer to this point, as
unanswerable proofs of the same. There is never a Chapter in the Lamentations
of Jeremy, but you shall meet with some such sentence as this; IVDAH is gone
into Captivity Lam. 1.3.
; the ways of SION do mourn; all HER gates are desolate, HER Priests sigh
Verse. 4.
; How has the Lord covered the daughter of SION with a Cloud in his anger, and
cast to the earth the beauty of ISRAEL Chapter 2.2.
. The punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of MY PEOPLE, is greater then
the punishment of the sin of Sodom Chap. 4.6.
: The Mountain of SION is desolate, the Foxes walk upon it Lam. 5.18.
. Now in what place of the world were there better people then in Judah, then
in Sion? It was the place where God himself did delight to dwell Psalm.
9.12.68.17.132.14. 1 Kin. 6.13.
: yet misery came upon them; and therefore it did hang over them.

loath them, and abhor them, as he was provoked by the tongues, and doings of
the old Israelites Isa. 3.8.
; and did abhor the excellency of Jacob Amos. 6.8.
. But a people which provoke God to anger, and whom the Lord abhors, heavy
plagues may hang over; Ergo, etc.

evil day, and that it is possible for our Land, for our Kingdom to be
punished, to be plagued with some grievous scourge, or other, by the Almighty,
they flout in the sleeue as at some scurilous, and ridiculous tale; much like
the last-dayes Rebels, that Peter speaks of; Where is the promise of his
coming 2 Pet. 3.3.
; taking after the sons in Law of Lot, unto whom (when he told them of the
destruction of Sodom) he seemed to mock Genesis 19.14.
: as though this were a matter to be iested at, to be laughed at. I trow the
Lord has begun with us already, if we could, yea, if we would see it. It is
true (I confess) our Land may be called the very excellency of Jacob Amos.
6.8.
: of all places in Christendom, none in privileges (especially in that Magna
illa praerogatiua dominica religionis. Salu. de Pro. l. 8. p. 271.
great privilege of true Religion) have gone beyond us; in the abundance of
heavenly wisdom, in the plenty of holy wise Christians, most Countries come
behind us, yet the point in hand, intimates that plagues may hang over places
where Religion, and religous ones be: Is it then a sufficient cause of
derision to say, judgments may be approaching OUR kingdom? Four years ago
the Lord had a wise, and understanding people in the Palatinate, yet the evil
which has since befallen it, was even at that time imminent over it. Well,
THERE judgment is begun 1 Pet. 4.17.
, where it will stay, God knows. Can WE only look to escape Scot-free?
Were the natural branches not spared Romans 11.21.
, and is it impossible for US, a part of the wild Olive to be spoiled? Had not
Gods mercy been Our Rampart Mal. 3.8.
, we had been consumed ere this time. Cannot God be possibly provoked amongst
Us? Is it not possible for him to abhor, and loath Us? I doubt not but (ere I
have done) I shall too manifestly declare, that it is past the peradventure,
or, it may be; and come to this, that God IS provoked amongst us, IS most
strongly incited to detest us. Wherefore, cease thy mocking, (whosoever thou
art) and this careless putting away the evil day from before thine eyes,
least as now the Word of reproof meets with thee, so the day of vengeance
ouer-takee thee like a snare, or a thief in the night, ere thou art aware.

2. Doct. From the 1. particular in the 2. Branch of the first part. Gods
children have a foresight of misery ensuing.
I come now to a second Doctrine, which is that I would be at; That when any
grievous calamity is approaching, Gods Children have some foresight of it.
Prudent Christians foresee the plague. What everlasting miseries may light upon
themselves without prevention by repentance, they foresee, when the Lord first
opens their eyes to see what their estate by nature is. What likelihoodes of
spiritual judgments to fall upon them, they suspect, and fear sometimes,
their many complaints of the remainder of hardness, unbelief, coldness of
zeal, and love, etc. in themselves, do declare. But to ratify the Doctrine
in these particulars, is not to our purpose. That they have some foreknowledge
of some common evil that may be coming against the places where they live, it
is very plain.

A cautio^. Lest the ensuing proofs of this point should seem impertinent, I
refer thee (Reader) to the Objection in the 3. Use of this Doctrine, and to
the answer of the same. Page 15.
Noah foresaw the drowning of the old world Genesis 6.13. Heb. 11.7.
. Abraham and Lot foresaw the burning of Sodom Genesis 18.20. Chapter 19.13.
. Joseph foresaw the seven years famine that came upon Egypt in his time,
and upon the Countries round about it Genesis 11.30.31.
. After Joseph's time the ten great plagues (of turning the waters into blood
Exodus 7.17.
, of frogs Chapter 8.2.
, lice Chapter 8.16.
, flies Verse. 21.
, of the murraine upon the bodies of beasts Chap. 9.3.
, of botches and blaines upon the bodies of men Verse. 8.
, of the hail Verse. 18.
, locusts Chapter 10.4.
, darkness Verse. 21.
, and death of the first borne Chapter 11.4.
) which fell upon the same kingdom, were all foreseen, and foreknowne by
Moses, and Aaron, the servants of the Lord, as the Story does plentifully
relate. I omit the foresight of particular plagues upon particular persons, (as
Samuell's, of the renting of Saules Kingdom out of Saules hand 1 Sa. 13.14.
Chapter 15.23.
, and Michaiah's, of Ahabs perishing at Ramoth Gilead 1 Kin 22.19. 25.28.
verses.
); had not most of the Prophets (great and small) visions, and praeuisions of
the great miseries, which both in, and after their times the people of the
Jews met withal. Christ had a knowledge himself, and gave his Disciples a
foreknowledge of the destruction of Jerusalem Mat. 24.
. Agabus foresaw that great and general dearth throughout all the world, which
came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar Act. 11.28.
. But how far go I? I stay my self, for fear of burthening your memories
with multitude of authorities.



First, Christians are in favor with God, therefore some way or other he gives
them some foresight of the plague. Shall I (says the Lord) hide from Abraham
what I mind to do Genesis 18.17.
? From Abraham? Whom I have admitted into my favor; with whom I have made Genesis
17.2.
, and will establish Verse. 7.
my covenant! It is said of Noah, first that he found grace in the eyes of the
Lord Genesis 6.8.
, and then the Lord gave him forewarning of the Flood Verse. 13.
.

Abraham they will command their children, and household to keep the way of the
Lord Genesis 18. compare the 17. and 19. verses.
; or with Noah they will Preach the Righteousness and Judgments of the Lord, to
convince the world Heb. 11.7.
; or with Esther they will hazard their goods and lives for the safety of the
Church, or seek an hiding place for themselves, and them that belong unto
them. Some such or like Use, the Lord knows (I say) His Children will make of
acquaintance before hand with ensuing calamities: and this is one cause why
through the grace of the Almighty, they do so foresee the evil as they do.
A Similie.
What father will not put a Talent into such a childs hand, as will husband
that Talent to the fathers credit, his own profit, and the public good of
the whole Family?

ALL the Doctrines in this Text, what the Spouse Christ says of the teeth of
the Church; There is NONE barren amongst them Cant. 4.2.
; But THIS Doctrine amongst them all is most fruitful, so many are the Uses
that it affords. Which (for breuities sake) I will make but Three.

The first whereof is for trial, whether we be truly wise, 1. Exhortation.
yea, or no. Every carnal and unregenerate man is wise in his own conceit:
and where is the man, or woman almost, that is not piously prudent, not wisely
religious, if all may be their own judges? But man's own judgment (being
naturally corrupted by self-love) is a leaden Rule, a false glass to see what
a man is indeed: therefore whether we be truly wise indeed, yea, or no, we
must go to some certainer Rules; amongst these Rules, this point affords
one. A wise man foreseeth the plague. Tell me now: Do thou when evils, when
great evils are approaching, foresee the same; yea, foresee them to some
purpose, to make some holy, and godly Use of this foresight? Are thy eyes where
the Preacher says a Wise-mans eyes should be, in thy head Eccles. 2.14.
? Can thou (like the man which climbed the Watchtower in Iezreell, that said
I see a troop, a company 2 Kin. 9.17.
) say, I see a trouble, I see a calamity when it is drawing near? and can
thou be so affected with it, as a true Christian usually is, and ought to be? a
wise one thou art, even that prudent one which the spirit here speaks off. But
if otherwise, no true wisdom have thou, a bundle of folly Pro. 22.15.
, and impiety is bound up in thy heart: and before I conclude this Text, I
shall speak something to the terror of thee, and all such as thou art.

Righteous Noah shall foreknow it; if he minds Judah shall into Captivity, an
upright Ezekiah shall be acquainted with it Isa. 39.6.
: if Haman plotteth the Jews ruin, Mordecai and Esther shall come to
understand it Esth. 4.
: if Paul's enemies vow to dispatch him, a little Lad shall reveal it unto him
Act. 23.16.
: if Popish powder-mongers plot treason against England, all the devices in the
Devils shop, in the Popes cell, shall not hinder England from the knowledge of
it, only, if she will know it. So that whatsoever judgment the Lord in
justice intends: whatsoever mischief man in malice inuenteth, wise and good
people have right to foreknow it. What a privilege is this oh Christian, that
thou have part in? I tell thee, when thou have grace to foresee: it is a sign,
that the Lord has not only wrought prudence in thee, but also that his good
providence is wakefull for thee; it is a comfortable evidence that thou art one
of those, who shall either prevail with him to divert the plague, or else have
a shelter, and find a sanctuary from the dint of the plague, under his own
wing. Now when Gods providence watches over a man, when heavenly wisdom is
wrought in a man, and both these for that man's good, there is double cause of
comfort, and consolation.

Use 3. Exhortation.
Thirdly, this serves for Exhortation. Do the prudent foresee the plague? is it
Illud ingenij est, si quis potest vigore mentis praevidere quae futura sunt,
and tanquam ante oculos locare quid possit accidere, et quid agere debet, si
ita acciderit, defi^ire. Ambros. Offic. l. 1. c. 38.
wisdom to foreknow dangers; that a man may know how to behave himself
whatsoever happens? Then be we persuaded to be so prudent, as in times of
great danger to take notice of them, and foresee the judgments that are
approaching, when indeed they are at hand. Shall our eyes like Stultus (...).
fools eyes be in our heels? No; let them stand where the Wise-mans do, in
our heads. The speech of the Prophet comes to mind; Though ISRAEL play the
Harlot, yet let not IVDAH offend Hos 4.15.
; I allude to it; Though carnal Gospellers; and careless Atheists will not
foresee, yet let them that profess themselves wisdoms followers, and Christ's
Disciples, be wiser. Oh, if such be sightles, careless, and feareles, how look
they to be covered Prudens si fueris and futura prospicies te ipsu^ ita
praeparabis vt in die malo regumentu^ inuenies. Marul. Spal Evang. l. 2. c. 1.
136.
IN the evil day, or preserved FROM the evil day, more then the vnwiser, and
profaner sort? Esaias and Habakuk, two wise and worthy Prophets, ran up, and
resolved to stand on their watch Tower Isa. 21.8. Habak. 2.1.
, that, if any calamity, at any time were acomming, they might both foresee it
themselves, and forespeake of it to others; let us do as they did, hereby we
may keep hurt from our selves, and be instruments of no small good unto others.

Esaias, Habakuk, and other holy men of God did in former times foresee future
plagues by special revelation from God; Such revelations are now ceased,
therefore you seem to impose upon us a duty, not only hard, and difficult,
but also impossible, when you persuade us to foresee the plague.

extraordinary manner be ceased, yet the ordinary way of foreseeing plagues to
come, is not ceased And although a man cannot directly determine by the spirit
of Prophecy, What the evil is that shall come, yet he may warrantably gather,
by some courses which he may take, that some great evil may come, yea (if it
be not prevented) will come upon the place where he lives.

Quest. The Answer, which contains in it Rules of direction to further a man
in the foresight of future judgments, one of the chiefest things intended by
the Author in this Text.
But how? (may some say).

Not (as One falsely thought Noah to foresee the Flood) by the Stars Berosus
cited by Coop. in his Chron. fol. 5.
, though I know blazing Stars have portended ensuing miseries Witness the
troubles that have happened beyond the Seas since the last blazing Star that
was seen in our Climate.
: but by these means.

1. Rule.
The first is, to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of the former Doctrine;
That it is possible for Gods judgments to hang over places, where God has his
people. We must be soundly rooted in the persuasion of this. For if a man
thinks this to be false Doctrine, and (like those mockers before reproved)
laugheth rather at it, then yields credit unto it, judgments innumerable, and
punishments unmatchable, may be near the place where he has his abode, and he
never suspect them, nor dream of them. What was it, but partly this, that
hindered the old world from foreseeing the Flood, when Noah did Preach of it;
they (as it is likely) derided him for it, as if he had taught false Doctrine:
and hence it came to pass, that they could not take notice of the great danger
they were in. Were it not that there are numbers in our Land, who think
Ministers to mock, when they speak of an ensuing plague, they would not be so
sightles of the danger this Nation is in, nor so feareles, and foresightles of
the evils that in all likelihood are not far off.

2. Rule. Prayer for foresight.
Secondly, because it is God that must give us this foresight, therefore let us
entreat him to open our eyes, that we may see, let us beseech him that he
would not suffer the love of honors, pleasures, or profits, to arise as a mist
betwixt our eyes, and approaching evils, to keep us from beholding the same.

3. Rule. Abhor flattery.
Thirdly, we must not Prospiciendu^ est ne adulantibus apperiamus aurem. Ambro.
Off l. 1. c. 27. Tom. 1. page 27.
love to be flattered. Parasites, and Claw-backes, that cry nothing but peace,
peace, must not be in request with us. It is said of our Savior, that the clay
which he tempered with his spittle on the ground, did open the eyes of the
blind man Ioh. 9.6.7.
; but the untempered mortar Ezekiel 22.28.
which these Sycophants daube with, works a contrary effect, puttes out the
eye of preuidence, and hinders men from seeing that which otherwise they
might foresee. Ahab might have foreseen his ruin at Ramoth Gilead 2 Kin.
22.37.
, and Iezabell, her shameful destruction by the walls of Iezreell 2 King. 9.33.
, had it not been for their fauning and flattering Prophets. Of such
flatterers therefore let us beware, as we love to have a foresight of dangers,
and safety from dangers.

4. Rule. Observe the signs foregoing a plague.
Fourthly, and lastly, if we would foresee the plague, we must observe the
signs that have prognosticated plagues in the holy Scriptures, and try how
near those signs are paralelled by our Land in these days. And herein give
me leave to be something large, because that this is the principal rule of all
the rest.

To let pass particular plagues upon particular persons: (though we will not
altogether reject their examples as we meet with them). We may find in
Scripture many remarkable judgments upon whole multitudes of people; as upon
the Moabites, Ammonites, Amalckites, Canaanites, Philistines, etc: But amongst
the rest of the general judgments, these as most eminent; The drowning of the
old world; The destruction of Sodom; The overthrow of the Egyptians in the red
Sea; The bondage of the Israelites in Babylon before Christ; The desolation of
the Jews and Jerusalem after Christ. And either of all of these, or of most of
these, Signs of general judgments.
you shall find these foregoing Signs.

First, (as the very ringleader of the rest) most monstrous ingratitude, and
horrible unthankfulness 1. Unthankfulness.
for Gods favors. Men (says Moses began to multiply upon the face of the
earth Genesis 6.1.
, that is, God was so merciful unto mankind, as to increase their number, for
the mutual comfort, and communion one with another: and this his kindness did
mankind requite with disobedience, and rebellion As it follows in that
Chapter.
, and after this came the Flood, and swept them away Genesis 7.21.
. The Lord in the midst of justice showed mercy to Pharaoh: for, at the
request of Moses, He sometimes mitigated, sometimes removed the plagues he sent
upon Egypt; yet Pharaoh continued unthankful, yea, in so high a degree
unthankful, that he contemned the Lord, and then, drowning in the red Sea he
could not escape. Who has read the writings of the Prophets; and has not
found therein, that the unthankfulness of the Israelites, was one thing that
did provoke the Lord to threaten Captivity against them, and in due time, to
send the Babylonians upon them, who led them prisoners into a strange Land
Compare Isa. 2. with the 7. Hos 2.8.9.10. with sundry other places.
? So GOOD was our Savior Christ to the people of the Jews, that he would be
borne of their line, and in their land, he lived amongst them, he Preached,
wrought most of his mighty works amongst them, yet they dealt most
ungratefully, most unthankfully with him, and then an heavy judgment must
needs follow, even the subversion of their City, the dispersion of their
nation, like a company of vagabonds, into all parts of the earth.

Secondly, general corruption 2. Sign. General corruption in all sorts. See
Ier. 23.10.11 1^.
in the manners of people, does foregoe some general destruction. I will
punish the world, (mark, not one, or two, or few, but the world) for their
EVIL, says the Lord Isa. 13.11.
. When ALL flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, THEN God said, I will
destroy the earth Genesis 6.12.13. Deus ob malitiae nimietatem, sententiam tulit,
quid universally perditione humanum genus sit puniendum. Chrysostom in Genesis c. 6.
Hom. 22.
. The Quia enim ho^ines qui tanta^ ^uitatem ^nha^itabant multos ^npietatis
fruc^us protulerunt ^lcirco (inquit) ^ot inutiles fruc^us terra facia^, ^t et
llis aboliis, perpetuu^ si ^onumentu^ se^uentibus gene^ationibus; om^es docens
qua^. ^ta fuerit inha^itantium ma^itia. Chrysostom: in Gen cap. 19. Hom. 42 ad
^alcem.
Inhabitants of Sodom brought forth MANY fruits of ungodliness, and upon THIS
did the Lord consume them, and make the very ground barren, as a monument of
their great wickedness to after ages. The like thing, the Prophet Esaias notes
concerning the people of Israel. He tells them in the name of the Lord, that
Isa. 1.7.8.
their whole country was desolate (that is, should certainly be desolate)
their Cities burnt with fire, their Land overthrown, and devoured by
strangers; the daughter of Sion left as a cottage in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in
a Garden of Cucumbers, as a besieged City. But what went before this great
misery? Even general ouerspreading iniquity See. v. 4. 6. Gentem pecca^ricem
appellat quod tota pectatis sit dedita. Arcul. in Isa. page 19.
: The whole Nation was sinful, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil
doers; from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there was no
soundnes, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. The manners of Placet
mihi illegoria, caput id est princeps, cor id est sapientes, et reliqua^
corporis partem vsque ad plantas id est plebem, etc. Luther in Isa. c. 1. p. 27.
all sorts, from the high to the low, from the Princes to the people, were
depraved, and this did presage those general hardships, which that people did
endure at the hands of their enemies.

3. Sign. Contempt of the Word.
A third sign of future evil, has been Contempt of the Word Adversus
Evangelij irrisores indignatio desaeuiet. Marc. Marul. Evangelistar. l 1. c. 9
p. 16. Si Sodomitas minus esse dicit damnabiles, quam cun^tos Evangelia
negligentes, c^^tissima ergo ratio est, qua and nos qui in plurimis Evangelia
negligimus peius timere aliquando debeamus. Sal. de Pro. l. 4 p. 108, 109.
. We have a pregnant example for this in the last of the Chronicles. When
Zedekiah, his Nobles, Priests, and People were grown to that lewd, and
forlorn pass, as to make a mock at the messengers of the Lord of hosts, and
despise the Word which they Preached, then into Babylon, unto bondage they
must, there was no remedy 2 Chr. 36.12.16.17.18.19.20
. To the very same purpose is that Prophecy in Jeremy; Because ye have not
heard my words, behold, I will send, and take all the families of the north
(says the Lord) and Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant, and will
bring them against this Land, and against all the inhabitants thereof, and
against these Nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them
an astonishment, an hissing, and a perpetual desolation Ier. 25.8 9.10.11. see
Ier. 22.21.22.
. I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruits of their thoughts,
because they have not hearkened to my words, nor to my Law, but rejected it.
Iere. 6.19.

Fourthly, it is a sign that some general judgment is at hand, when the
offers of grace 4. Sign. Rejecting the offers of grace.
are rejected by the greatest number of people. This fore-ran Ierusalems ruin,
as appears by Christ his own complaint; Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee together, as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings (how often have I freely made most large and bountiful offers of grace
unto thee) but ye would not, Behold, THEREFORE your habitation is left unto
you desolate Mat. 23.37. Luke 13.34.35
.

Fifthly, as the rejecting of mercies offered, so the abusing of mercies
received, (as namely, the patience, 5. Sign. Abuse of Gods goodness and
patience.
and bounty of God) presageth some ruin. When the Lord had, with great
patience borne with the people of the old world an hundred and twenty years,
and yet they would not repent, then he threatened to destroy them, and
(accordingly) did destroy them from off the face of the earth Genesis 6.3.7.
. When as Israel did prepare for Baal (that is, abuse to the serving of Baal)
the corn, wine, oil, silver, and gold, which the Lord had multiplied, and
bestowed abundantly upon her, THEN he threatened not only to take away those
his blessings from her, but also to Visit upon her the days of Baallm Hos.
2.8.13.
; to inflict upon her some great, and grievous punishments, in stead of the
good things that she formerly enjoyed.

A sixth sign is covetousness, oppression, and violence. 6. Sign. Covetousness
with her two hand-maydes, Oppression and Violence. Quam multorum malorum causa
sit immodica cupiditas quis explicet? M^rul. Evang. l. 4. c. 49.
The Prophet Jeremy speaking to Shallum, the King of Judah, and under his name
including the rest of the Jews, says thus; Thine eyes, and thy heart, are not
but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression,
and for violence to do it Ier. 22.17.
: and after he adds; Verse. 2.
The Wind shall eat up all thy pastures, and thy lovers shall go into
Captivity, surely then shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy
wickedness. The earth is filled with VIOLENCE by them (said God to Noah) and I
will destroy them with the earth Genesis 6.13.
. This is that also which the Prophet Ezekiell points at; The people of the
Land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and
needy, yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully; THEREFORE have I
powered out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them, with the fire of
my wrath Ezekiel. 21.29.31.
. The Scribes, and Pharisees, devoured widows houses, and afterward desolation
came upon them. No certainer sign of ensuing plagues then this damnable kind
of unrighteousness, covetousness, and oppression. I will stretch out my hand
upon the inhabitants of the Land, says the Lord: For from the least of them,
even to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness Ier. 6.12.13.
.

In the 7. place. Pride 7. Sign. General Pride.
goes before destruction, and haughtiness of mind before a fall Pro 16.18.
Chapter 18.12.
. The day of the Lord (says the Prophet) shall be upon every one that is
proud, and lofty, and lifted up Isa 2.12.
. This was one of the sins which procured, and prognosticated the overthrow
of Sodom Ezekiel. 16.49.
. Because the daughters of Sion (says Esaias) are HAVGHTIE, and walk with
stretched forth necks, etc. Her gates shall lament, and mourn; and she being
desolate shall sit upon the ground Isa. 3.16.26.
. It was pride (as one observes, who wrote about an Anno 1519.
hundredth year since) which gave the Turks advantage against the Christians,
so that they inhabited their Villages, Towns, and Provinces, defiled their
Temples, and places of worship, carried their bodies to prison, took their
beasts for a prey, and exercised all manner of villainy, and cruelty against
them Vtinam non de nobis ista ( viz. loca Isa. 13.11. and Eze. 7.24.) exponi
queant, quorum, infideles Tu^ci, viros, oppida, prouincias occuparu^t, aras,
focosque propha^antes, nullo die ^essant in reliqua Christianorum regna
debachari, captiuos ab ducere, pecora depraedari, vastare agros, cadibus
grassari, and in nomen Christianum magis quam dici queat, impie fuerent: hoc
perpetuo fl^gello nostra percutitu^ superbia. Marul. Evang. l. 7. c. 8. 348.
. Insomuch that whosoever thinks to escape imminent judgments, and yet
continues in pride, is greatly deceived, and like to undergo some more
horrible misery Caeterum siquis hanc quam imminere cernimus calamitatem
effugerit, and tamen superbiasese efferre non desieru, nequaquam illa multo
horribiliorem erumnam effugiet Id ibid.
.

8. Sign, Carnal security.
Eighthly, Like as Diu viuere nequeunt, qui multo se^^ o dediti Marcent: tument
vultus lurido color infecti, putrescentiaque viscera repent ingruens
inualitudo dissoluere festinat. Marul. Spal. Evang l. 2. c 7 p. 80.
extraordinary and immoderate sleep pines the body, and presageth death; so
carnal security in the body of a people, does ever Cum pacem, and
securitatem dicant, tunc repentina eis imminet pernicies. Chrysostom in Mat. c. 24.
Hom. 78.
prognosticate some weakening, some wasting to that body, by some plague that
may come upon it. So much does the Prophet Amos tell us; Woe to them that are
at ease in Sion, that put away the evil day far from them, they shall be led
captive with the first that go captive Amos. 6.1.3 7.
. All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword, which say the evil
shall not overtake us, nor prevent us Amos. 9.10
. So much also does Zephanie tell us off; They are settled upon their lees, they
say in their hearts, Tush, the Lord will neither do good, nor evil; THEREFORE
their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation Zeph 1.12.13.
. Our Savior tells his Disciples, that when that generation of Vipers, the
malicious, and obstinate Jews, should be like the people of the old world in
the days of Noah, marrying, and merry-making, and so secure as not once to
dream of their destruction, then should their destruction be nearest at hand
Mat 24.38.39.
. This is one of the signs, which goes before the ruin of the Romish Babylon;
She says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow, THEREFORE shall her plagues come (...).
in one day Apoc. 18.7.8
. Yea (as it is in the tenth verse) in (...). V. 10.
one hour. That is, when she shall be most secure, then shall her plagues be
most sudden, and sure: when she thinks her self safest, then shall she be
unawares surprised; even as Babylon once was by Cyrus, who invaded it in a
night, when it did least think of its own invasion Non longa obsidione regnum
premetur, sed subito capietur quia erit secura (sicut Cyrus Babylonem secura^
vna nocte inuasi) a socijs deserta etc. Paraus in Apoc. col 984.
. There is no want of examples in holy Scripture, to show, that the end and
issue of sloth and carnal security, has usually been evil and unhappy Nec
exempla de sunt quibus dotemur quam infelix sit carnalis securitatis, and
secordiae exitus. Gua^t^m Act. Hom. 39. c. 5.
. Hence it is that the Lord in Scripture Psalm. 88. Isa. 13. Ier. 9 9.
, when he comes to judge or punish a place for sin, is said to visit that
place; because he is wont to strike when men are most secure, and do In malam
partem d^citu^ Deus visitare, cum peccata quae diu dissimu^^uerat, INEXPECTATO
fl^gello vlciscitur. Zanch de Redem. part. 1. l. ^. Tom. 4. col. 371.
least suspect his stroke. His visiting, notes out a sudden plaguing of a
people when they are secure. No sin does more provoke him to smite then
security does.

9. Sign. Luxury.
Ninthly, ^n^e aspice late florentes quondam, luxus, quas, verterit vrbes
Sillius Bell pun^o l. 15.
Luxury, riot, and wantonness, have gone before some general calamity. This
sin went before the destruction of the old world. The sons of God saw (that
is, with a lustful eye) the daughters of men, and took them to wives Genesis 6.2.
, mingled themselves together, and so Viri magno stupro amoris, et
fornicationis, and istorum mulieres collapsae sunt, et in omnibus fornicationis
erat confusio magna. Metho. Rev. in Orthodox. page 388.
committed great filthiness one with another: and immediately after, came the
flood to scour this filth from the face of the earth Genesis 7.22.
. Did not this also precede the burning of Sodom? Questionles it did. Sodom did
burn (as Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. 240. Sicut Aetna intestinis quibusda^
naturae feue^tibus ardoribus, sic ILLA, abomina^dis iugiter fornicationum
ignibus aestuavit.
one says of Africa) Aetna-like with the fire of fornication, and the Lord
did burn IT with the fire of Desolation. The inhabitants of that City (as the
same Author writes of the Carthaginians Foetebant, vt ita dixeri^, cuncti vrbis
illius ciues cano libidinis, spurcum sibimetipsis mutuae impudicitiae nidore^
inhalantes. Id. ibid. p. 244 et paulo post, eadem page and p. 245. Quis in
illorum numero castus fuit? Castum dico? Quis non fornicarius, non adulter and
hoc sine cessatione, sine termino.
) did stink with the filthiness of lust, breathing forth the noisome savor
of uncleanness, and the Lord punished them with the stinking flame of Brimstone
from heaven Int. Cur sulphureo igne puniebantur? Resp. vt putidissimus
libidinis ardor putidissimo flammarum ardore puniretur. Albin. Quaest. in
Genes. in Orthodox p. 1073.
. Their gluttony provoked them to incontinencie, and the Lord did then
incontinently with fire and Brimstone together, extinguish and consume them for
ever Gula Sodomitas, and Gomorrhaeos prius in nefandos egit concubitus, DEINDE
igne, and sulphur de Caelo pluente extinxit. Marul. Spalat. Evang. l. 4. cap.
22.
. It was the drunkenness of Judah, and Ephraim, which made the Lord threaten
judgment against them, and execute judgment upon them Isa. 5.11.12.13. item
Chap. 28.1.2.
. To this purpose is that of Amos; They lie upon beds of Iuorie, and stretch
themselves upon their Couches, they eat the Lambs of the flock, and the
Calves out of the midst of the Stall, they chant to the sound of the Violl,
and invent to themselves instruments of music: they drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: THEREFORE shall they go
captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched
themselves shall be removed Amos. 6.4.5.6.7.
. It was the effeminate wantonness of Semiramis, a Man-woman Simulat sepro vxore
Nini, filium, pro faemina puerum: sic primis initijs sexum mentita puer esse
credita est. Justin. Hist. lib. 1. page 4. 5.
, of Sardanapalus a Woman-man Vir muliere corruptior: Medis praepositus nomine
Arbactus inuenit eum inter scortorum greges purpuram colo nentem; and muliebri
habitu cum mollitia corporis, and oculorum lasciuia omnes feminas anteire,
pensa inter virgins partientem. Id ibid.
, which did occasion not only their own destruction Cum Semiramis concubitum
filij petisset ab eode^ interfecta est. Id. ibid.
; Bellum Sardanapalo infertur etc. Victus, in Regiam se recipit, and extructa
incensaque pyra, and se, and diuitias suas in ince^diu^ mittit. Just. hist. l.
1. p. 6.
but also the translation of the Empire from their posterity unto strangers,
from the Assyrians to the Medes Interfector eius Arbachus qui praefectus
Medorum fuerat, Is imperiu^ ab Assyrijs ad Medos transsert. Id. ibid.
. It was this foul sin also that Et sic gens industria quondam potens and
strenua manu effeminata, mollicie, luxuriaque virtute^ pristinam perdidit, et
quos ante Cyrum inuictos bella praestiterant, in luxuriam lapsos otium ac
defidia superauit. Just hist. l. 1. c. 10.
weakened the Lydians, a valorous and victorious people before, and subjected
their necks to the yoke of Cyrus, Monarch of Persia. I am persuaded (albeit,
God does afflict his Church for his own glory, and its good, and tribulation
is the portion of Gods people in this life) yet, that the wasting of the
Church, and the troubles in Germany at this day Anno 1623.
, have been occasioned, in part, by that abundance of intemperancie, and riot,
which, (as by the complaints of the late learned ones amongst them, in their
writings does appear Germani cunctos possunt perferre labores, oh vtinam
possint tam been far sitim. Dithmars. System. Eth. l. 3 p. 174. Germanorum
bibatitas apud alias gentes hodie ante cuncta nobilitatur, atque inter miracula
celebratur, cum singuli quaternos quartarios vno prandio hauriunt, and hodie
rasa potoria cernuntur quae plus quam duas choas capiunt, quibus hospites, and
externos liberalissime inuitant and proluunt. ac nullus hoc tempore est, qui
luxuriosas, et profusas mensas non struat, quique coquos, ganeaeque artifices
peritissime cibos condientes, and patrimonia mergentes non quaerat quam vitae
intemperantia^ apud Christianos maxim debacchari memoria nostra videmus.
Goelen Orat. delux. 98. O tempora, o Christianoru^ ^ores prostratos! venimus
eo, vt maxim cibis pereamus. Id ib. Potatores nostri sunt ieiuni and sobrij
neque a sole neque a luna, nedu^ hominibus videntur sed de mane vino vel
adusto, vel Malvatico, Corinthiaco, Alacanthico, Petro, Simoniaco, etc. Se
opplent; ^eredie cerevisia, tanquam frigida suffusa se refocillant; Vesperi per
noctem ad aurora^ vsque Rhenano sese ingurgitant; Vsque dum neque pes, neque
manus, neque lingua, neque sensus quisquam officiu^ facere norit, sed superata,
prostrataque iaceant in ipsis omnia: o tempora! o mores! o bone Petre, si e
mortu^ ad nos tibi iam daretur auditus, quid quaeso dicturus esses, si
bellicoses potatoru^ duces certamina peculatoria de die in noctem, de nocte in
diem protrahentes conspiceres? Cunrad Dieter. Postill. in Fest. Feria 3.
Pentecost. p. 712 Scultetus etiam applicat Textum Isa 5.11 12 Germanis; verba
eius haec sunt. Viua haec est ebriosae Germaniae pictura, Potandipassim studiu^
maximu^, vsque ad opum, corporis, famae periculum: Nulla operum diuinoru^
habetur ratio quantumuis irae Dei manifesta signa app^^eant, hostibus ex omni
part imminentibus, annena ingrauescente, p^ste in vicinia grassente: tandemne
aliquando expergiscemur? stultum est voluptatem in aula and ventre querere.
Idea Conc. 3 in Isa. c. 5. p. 86.
) they have been given unto. I will end this note with the speech of the
Prophet; Make thee bald, poll thee, enlarge thy baldness as an Eagle. Why? For
thy DELICATE, thy luxurious Children; for THEY are gone into captivity from
thee Mich. 1.16.
. Thy luxury, oh Jacob, shall work thee that misery.

10. Sign. Profanation of the Sabbath.
Profaning of the Sabbath (which the Adimp^euit hic ( viz. Christus) legem, dum
ipsum Sabbati diem benedicti one patris a primordio sanctu^, benefactione sua
efficit sanctiorem. Tertul. in M^rcio. l. 4. 238.
Father at first made holy, and Christ afterward more holy, as Tertullian
speaks) is a ten^h sign, that foreshowes a plague. Inter Babylonicae
captiuitatis causas, haec quoque numeratur quod Sabbata Dei prophanauerint.
Gualt. in Act. c. 13. Hom. 88.
This occasioned (together with other sins) the Babylonish Captivity. If ye
will not hearken to me (says the Lord by Jeremy) to hallow the Sabbath day,
and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall
devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched Ier. 17.27.
. And (by Ezekiell); Thou have despised my holy things, and profaned my
Sabbaths. THEREFORE will I scatter thee among the Heathens, and disperse thee
in the Countries Ezekiel. 22.8.15.
. The Lord threatens in Amos his time, that the whole land should tremble, and
every one mourn that dwelt therein, because (besides other sins which were
there committed) the covetous wretches of those times thought long till the
Sabbath was gone, that they might follow after their profits, and worldly
gain, that they might set forth Wheat, make the Ephasmall, and the Shekel
great, and falsify the balance by deceit Amos 8.5.8.
.

11. Sign. Unjust Governors.
Again, it is a sign some judgment is at hand, when judgment does not
proceed out of the seats of judgment. When Officers are corrupt, and
Governors unrighteous. Pervse the Prophets, and see whether this be not
written down in capital letters, amongst those capital sins, which brought
those great miseries upon the Jews, that they did undergo. Hear what Esaias
says; How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It WAS full of judgment,
righteousness DID lodge in it, but NOW murderers. Thy Princes are rebellious,
and companions of thieves: every one loves g^fts, and follows after
rewards; they judge not the fatherl^s, neither does the cause of the widow
come before them, THEREFORE says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, Ah, I will ease
me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies Isa. 1.21.23.24.
. And how the Lord did avenge himself of these unrighteous Adversaries,
Jeremy shows in the Lamentations; He has swallowed up all the habitations
of Jacob, and has not pitied: He has polluted the kingdom, and the Princes
thereof. He has cut off in his fierce anger, all the horn of Israel Lam.
2.2.3.
. Hear what Amos says; They know not to do right, therefore thus says the
Lord God, an Adversary there shall be, even round about thy Land: and he shall
bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be destroyed Amos.
3.10.11.
. Hear ye this, ye Kine of Bashan that are in the Mountain of Samaria Chapter
4.1.2.
, In [Montanis] Synecdoche me^bri. Sed potest proprie ^ntelligi de monte in quo
sita erat vrbs Samaria: Et hoc potius videtur: quia e sequentibus apparet,
propheta^ hic proprie alloqui Iudices: illi autem residebani in vrbe Samaria.
Piscat. Schol. in Amos. 4. v. 1.
, that is (ye Magistrates which have your abode in Samaria, the chief City
of the Land) which oppress the poor, which crush the needy. The Lord has
sworn by his holiness that lo the days shall come upon you, that he will take
you away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hookes; and ye shall go
out at the breaches; that is, Per rupturas scil. Murorum effectas ab hostibus.
Id. ibid. verse. 3.
at the breaches of the walls, which the enemies shall make when they carry you
away captives. In another place, what says the same Prophet? They afflict the
just, they take a bribe, they turn aside the poor in the gate from their
right; Therefore wayling shall be in all streets, and they shall say in all the
high ways, Alas, Alas. Hear also what Micha says; Hear this ye Heads of
the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment,
and pervert all equity. They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity; The Heads thereof judge for reward: Therefore shall Sion for your
sake be plowed as a field, Jerusalem become heaps, and the mountain of the
house of the Lord as the high places of the Forest Mich. 3.9.10.11.12.
, even wast and desolate. Ier. 5.28.29.
The right of the needy, says Jeremy, do they not judge, shall I not visit
for this, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this?

12. Vain confidence, 12. Sign. Vain confidence.
is another thing that foregoes destruction; when men lean upon foreign
stays, trust to their wits, wealth, friends, strength, yea, more then to
God, or as much as to God, they cannot but even come to ruin Illi faedissime
cadunt quihumanis praesidijs ^^ituntur. Luth. in Isa. c. 30.
. And Tametsi ad Tempus votis potiri videntur, tamen omnia tandem ipsis
exitiosa sunt. Calv. in Is. 30. v. 3.
although for a time things may succeed according to their vain hope, yet the
end will be evil. When the Rebellious Children of Israel, went to go down
into Egypt (without asking counsel as Gods mouth) to strengthen themselves in
the strength of Pharaoh (an enemy of God too P^ar^onem Deo non abs re oppouit
Esaias. Calv. in Is. c. 30. v. 2.
) and to trust in the shadow of Egypt (as deadly enemies as ever Israel had,
who, some generations ago, sought their utter overthrow). When the Princes of
Israel go to Zoan (the greatest City in Egypt Zoan, vrbs maxima in Egypto.
Vat^b. in Isa. c. 30. v. 4.
,) and her Ambassadors to Hanes; THEN Woe to them. Into a land of TROVBLE and
ANGVISH they must Isa. 30.1.2.4.6.
. What remedy when they needs will? When they call to Egypt, and go to
Assyria (says the Lord) I will spread my net upon them, I will chastise them
as their Congregation has heard Hos 7.12.13.
. Because thou did trust in thy way, (thine own way) in the multitude of thy
mighty men, Therefore shall a tumult rise among thy people, and all thy
fortresses shall be spoiled Chap. 10.13.14.
.

13. Sign. Persecuting of the godly.
A thirteenth sign, is cruel and hard dealing with the Children of God, or
persecuting of the Saints. It was Pharaohs cruelty against the Israelites,
that plunged him and his into the bottom of the Sea. When he would needs be
so madd as to pursue and persecute them, even through the red Sea, Exodus 14.
then he must needs be overwhelmed; there was no escaping. When Saul trounced
that good man David up and down, and would not let him rest in any corner, but
ferretted him out of every hole, he took the only course to have the kingdom
rent out of his hand, and his soul rent out of his body. Did not the Jews
bring the guilt of innocent blood upon their own heads, and made way for
their miserable reiection, by persecuting the righteous men of God, and
crucifying the Lord of glory? Nothing is plainer then this, that the molesting
of the godly, is enough to pull fire from heaven, and to let in a Sea of
trouble, and tribulation upon a people. See Ezekiel. 35.4.5.

14. Sign. A pathy, or incompassionatenesse.
In the next place, want of compassion, and vnreadines to help their brethren
in affliction, does presage some great calamity. No man remembers the
affliction of Joseph (says Amos) Therefore they shall go captive with the
first that go captive. Amos. 6.6.7.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the
help of the Lord against the mighty Judge. 5.23.
. How often do the Prophets threaten judgments against Judah, for their
unmercifulness to the poor. What procured the Egyptians ruin? Want of
compassion; they regarded not the sighs and the groans of the Israelites, but
rather oppressed them with heavier burdens. Mordecai told Esther, if thou
hold thy peace at such a time: that is; if thou do not co^miserate the
estate of the Jews NOW, but, swimming in pleasure thy self, forgettest them,
and use no means to help them, thou, and thy fathers house shall be
destroyed Esth. 4.14.
.

The 15. Sign, is love of flattery, 15. Sign. Love of flattery.
a strong, and strange desire to be soothed up in sin, to hear smooth
things. If there were no other sin but this in a Land, it were enough of it
self (so vigilant to destroy are flatterers) to expose that Land to ruin and
spoil Ac sola enim hac (etiam vigilant^bus satellitibus) regnum latronibus
expositum est. Synes Orat. de Regno. ad Arcad page 6.
. This is a Rebellious people (says Esaias) which say to the Seers, See not; and
to the ^rophets prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth
things, Prophecy deceites, etc. Therefore thus says the holy one of Israel,
One thousand (of you) shall flee at the rebuke of one: at the rebuke of five,
shall ye flee, till ye be left as a Beacon upon the top of a Mountain, and
as an Ensign on an hill Isa. 30.9.10.12.17.
; you shall be so wasted, and destroyed by your enemies, that you shall not so
much as have the very name or show of a people Accidet tanta dissipatio atque
imminutio, vt nullam populifaciem retineatis Calv. in Isa. cap. 30. v. 17.
. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and my people LOVE to have it so, and what
will ye do in the end thereof? Ier. 5.31.

16. Hypocrisy 16. Sign. Hypocrisy.
does fore-shew misery Omnes qui perperam agunt supplicio dig^i sunt, qui vero
simulatione bonitatis ad improbitate^ te^dit, mulio grauiori pana omnino
afficierdus est. Chrysostom. in Mat. c 23 Hom. 74.
. The Jews in the days of Christ were a generation of hypocrites So they are
often styled in the Evangelists.
; and within Anno 2. regni Vespasiani. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 7. Annoa Dom.
Natiu. 73. a passione 40.
forty years after Christ, they became, and have ever since continued a
generation of vagabonds upon the face of the earth. Ananias, and Saphyra were
smitten with sudden death for their hypocrisy Act. 5.5.10.
: And their forefathers in evil, (many years before them, or Christ either)
were threatened to be destroyed, for their hypocritical dissembling with the
Lord of hosts, so writes the Prophet; Ye dissembled in your hearts, when you
sent me to the Lord your God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, and
according to all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we
will do it; And now I have declared it unto you, and you have not obeyed the
voice of the Lord your God: Now therefore know certainly, that ye shall dye by
the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whether ye
desire to go, and to soiourne Ier. 42.19.02.21.
. To this join deceit toward man, and it is evident, judgment follows that
also, as the Scripture shows in many places.

17. Sign. The flattering Prophets rising against the faithful.
In the 17. place, it has been in time past, a fearful token of judgment
not to be far off, when false Prophets by their calumnious informations, have
either restrained, or endeavored to restrain the true Messengers of God, of
their liberty to Preach the Word. I find a pregnant place for this in the
seventh Chapter of Amos. In the tenth verse, Amaziah the Priest of Bethell, a
In Amazia sacerdote proponitur exemplu^ hominis mendacis. Piscat. in Amos. c.
7. Obs. 6.
lying Priest, sendes to Jeroboam, King of Israel, to inform him wrongfully
against Amos, saying; Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the
house of Israel, the Land is not able to bear all his words: and in the
thirteenth verse, he commandes him (but I am sure without any authority from
God) to Prophecy no more at Bethel. Well; What was the event, and consequent
of this? The two last Verses of that Chapter will show that: Amos. 7.16.17.
Now therefore (says Amos to Amaziah) hear thou the word of the Lord; Thou
say, Prophecy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house
of Isaac: Therefore thus says the Lord; Thy wife shall be an Harlot in the
City; there is a judgment upon his yoke fellow: thy sons and thy daughters
shall fall by the sword; there is a judgment upon his Children: thy land shall
be divided by line; there is a judgment upon his estate: and thou shall dye in
a polluted land; there is a judgment upon his person: and Israel shall surely
go into captivity forth of his land; and there is a judgment upon his
people; where we plainly see, that for this sin of Amaziah, in opposing
good Amos, not only Amaziah's self, and family, should be plagued, but also
the whole Land of Israel should fare the worse, and be carried into the house
of bondage. The Scribes, Pharisees, and chief Priests did what lay in them to
stop the mouth of Christ, to stay the passage of the Gospel; and was not this
think you, one cause of their woeful overthrow, and confusion?

Again, Abuse of the tongue 18. Sign. Abuse of the Tongue.
in most sorts of people, does presage some wrath to be a kindling against that
people. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen (says the Prophet Isa. 3.8.
) because their TONGVE (as well as their doings) is against the Lord, to
provoke the eyes of his glory. Of all kind of outward calamities that can
befall a people, Nullum calamitatis genus, graui^is exitiorum diluuium inuehit,
quam bellum. Erasm. de ling p. 155.
none is more grievous then War, (David had rather fall into the hands of
God 2 Samuel 24.14.
, then to be exposed to the mischief of war). But there would be Atqui
nullum esset bellum inter mortales, si nullae esse^t malae lingua, quae belli
causas sub ministrarent. Eras. ibid.
no war amongst men, if there were no evil tongues Quot hominu^ millia
quotidie subuertit calu^nia? quot adulatrix lingua? quot impiorum consiliorum
in cantatrix? quot inuidia facino nocens? quot obtrect ^^rix? quot conuitioru^
speculis violenta? Id. ibid.
, which are indeed the very causes of the same. Now the Tongue is abused
diverse ways: by lies, oaths, slaundering, flattering, giving evil counsel,
cursing, backbiting, keeping silence when it should speak to the glory of God;
but how many thousands of people do these evils destroy? Search the R^pete
veteruo^ monumenta, relege quicquid est tragediarum, qu^cquid vnquam gestum, a
tyrannis crudeliter, ac tragice, comperies a mala lingua profectum initium. Id.
ibid.
Monuments of Antiquity, (especially the sacred Scriptures) and, whatsoever
Tragedies have been really acted, whatsoever tyrannies have been exercised
against a people, you shall find some, or all of these forenamed Abuses of the
Tongue, to have been (in part) the original of the same.

1. Lying.
1. Concerning lying, Hosea reckons it up amongst the sins for which the
Lord had a controversy with the Land of Judah; and for which, he threatened
that the inhabitants should languish, and all their provision (as fish, flesh,
and foul) should be seized upon by the enemy, and taken away violently as a
prey Hos. 4.1.2.3.
. They bend their tongues like bows for lies (it is Ieremies speech Ier 9.3.5.7.
) they will not speak the truth, they have taught their Tongue to speak lies,
therefore says the Lord of hosts, behold I will melt them, and try them (
Fiscat. Scil* igne afflictionis.
in the fire of affliction); Puniam eos. lebita poena. Lyra. ad loc.
I will punish them according to their deseruings; how shall I do for the
d^ughter of my people? that is, Tantum dedecus culpae non debet dimitti sine
decore iustitiae. Lyra in Ier. c. 9. v. 7.
I must needs glorify my justice, in not suffering such a disgraceful sin
as this is to escape Scot-free, without punishment. Truth is perished, and is
cut off from their mouth Ier. 7 28.
. And mark what follows immediately; Verse. 29.
Cut off thine hair, oh Jerusalem, and take up a lamentation on high places,
for the Lord has rejected, and forsaken the generation of his wrath.

2. As for swearing, 2. Swearing.
who has not heard that speech of the Prophet? Because of swearing the Land
mourns, the pleasant places of the Wilderness are dried up Ier. 23.10.
.

3. That slaundering 3. Slaundering.
brings general judgments, it is evident also, by the same Prophet; They are
grievous reuolters, walking with SLANDERS Ier. 6.28.
; and upon this follows, Verse. 30.
Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

4. That the flattering tongue 4. Flattery.
does presage ruin, the same Prophet proves also; The Prophets prophecy lies
in my name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, nor spoke unto
them: they Prophecy to you a false vision, and divination, and a thing of
naught, and the deceit of their own heart. Therefore thus says the Lord, by
sword and famine shall these Prophets be consumed; and the People to whom they
Prophecy shall be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem because of the
famine, and the sword, and they shall have none to bury them, nor their wives,
nor their sons, nor their daughters Ier. 14.14.15.16.
.

5. Evil counsel 5. Giving evil Counsel.
given by Rehoboams Vpstarts, rent the kingdom out of the hand of Rehoboam,
and made a breach amongst the Tribes of Israel 2 King. 12.10.16.
. The evil counsel which the Nobles gave Ioash, brought the Host of Syria
against Jerusalem, and Judah, which killed the Princes, and spoiled the People
of the Land 2 Chronicles. 24.17.23.
: Did not also the bad Counsel which Zeresh gave to her husband Haman, breed
the downfall of Haman, and the utter overthrow of his posterity Esth. 5.14.
Compared with Chapter 7.10. and 9.14.
?

6. That abusing of the Tongue, by cursing, 6. Cursing.
and railing, does go before destruction, it is plain from the example of
Rabshekah; For when he in the name of Senacherib his Master rayled upon God, as
if he were weak and impotent, upon Ezekiah, and the whole Host of the living
God, as if they were vainly confident, charging them to trust in one, who was
not able to deliver Isa. 36.4.5. etc.
. And thus blaspheming both God, and his people; then the whole Host of the
Assyrians (which that Rabshekah was a chief man amongst) was most strangely
smitten, and discomfited by an Angel of the Lord in the night: insomuch, that
(as the Text says) there were slain at that time, an hundred, fourscore, and
five thousand Isa. 37.36.
. The Jews, in Christ his time, did rail upon Christ, saying, that he had a
Devil Ioh. 8.48.
, that he was a drunkard, a glutton, a friend of Publicans and sinners, yea,
their friend in the worst sense, to bear them out in their ungodly courses, or
a Libertine, allowing them in their notorious evils Mat. 11.19.
, Thus they rayled on John Baptist Mat 11.18.
, on the rest of the Apostles, calling them, such as were drunk with new wine
Act. 2.13.
. And why might not this as well as any thing else, be the cause of that
destruction, which came upon their City, and themselves?

7. As touching backbiting; 7. Backbiting.
We read that Aaron and Miriam, by defiling their tongues, with this sin,
against Moses, did not only kindle the anger of the Lord against themselves in
particular, but also caused the Lord to testify his displeasure against the
whole congregation of the Israelites, by removing the Cloud (a sign of his
gracious presence) from the Tabernacle Number. 12.8.9.10.
. Hence is that of Jeremy; Their tongue is as an arrow shot out, one speaks
peaceably to his neighbor, (that is, to his neighbors face) with his mouth,
but in heart he lays his wait, and behind his back he will speak evil of
him; Shall not I visit them for these things, says the Lord Ier. 9.8.9.
?

Lastly, Whether abusing the tongue by needless, and harmefull silence, 8
Needless and hurtful silence.
(men not daring to speak their minds boldly and freely for Gods honor, and
the good of the Church, when they are called thereunto) whether this, I say,
Vbi contra Deum aliquid agitur periculosum est pastori si taceat. Pomerian.
cont. Iudae. l. 1 praefat.
has not gone before some ouer-spreading calamity, I appeal but to the
Prophet Isaiah, who seems to make mutenes in such as should speak, the cause
of destruction. Hear his own words; All ye beasts of the field, come to
devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest Isa. 56.9.
; that is, Come ye enemies, destroy my people. Why? What Is the matter? Mark
what follows, Verse. 10.
His Watchmen are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber. As if he should have said; Qu^d si tantae cladis atque
^uinae ca^sa quae ras, haec in grauissimis numerari potest: Quod qui cum se
canes esse putent, quibus commissa fuerit ciuitatis custodia, tamen muti sunt,
aut metu, mercedeve constricta lingua latrare non audent. Sanctiua. in Isa cap.
56. Paraph. v. 10.
Would you know the cause of this great ruin? amongst many and weighty
causes, this is one, that they which are the Watchmen, (thinking themselves to
be appointed for the safe keeping of the City) are dumb, keep silence when
they should not: not daring to bark, and fray away occasions of judgments
from the people, by speaking home, as they should; having their tongue tied,
either with the string of base carnal fear, or the golden cord of profi^ and
reward: So much of the eighteenth sign, of an ensuing plague.

19. Sign. Strange Accidents.
The nineteenth sign, is some strange, and unwonted Accidents, as Wars,
iarres betwixt kingdoms, apparitions in the air, earthquakes, and the like.
Christ tells his Disciples, that before the destruction of Jerusalem, there
should be wars, and rumors of wars, kingdom should rise against kingdom,
and nation against nation, the Sun should be darkened, the Moon should not
give her light, and the stars should fall from heaven, and the powers of the
heavens should be shaken Mat. 24.6.7.29.
; that is, Gualth.
the very Elements should suffer some extraordinary motion, besides the course
of nature. Ecclesiastical Histories Eusebius. Eccles. hist l. 3. c. 8. Joseph. l.
7. de bello Iudaic. c. 12.
make mention of the strange things in particular that happened before the
Sacking of that City: as namely, A star like a sword: A Comet enduring more
then the space of a whole year: a strange light ouerspreading the Altar, and
the Temple in the night time: a Cow calued a Lamb: a great gate opened of it
self: an Army of Soldiers were seen in the Clouds: a voice crying in the
Temple, Let us go hence: one Jesus the son of Ananias cried continually,
(...).
Woe, woe, all about the City. What strange darkness was in the air, in the
Land of Egypt? How did the Waters contrary to their natural course, divide in
the midst, and stand up like a wall, before Pharaoh and his host were drowned
in the Sea Exodus 14.
? How did the Sun and Moon stand still, when the Lord destroyed the Amorites
by the hands of Iosuah Ios. 10.13.
? Thus strange Accidents, have oftentimes prognosticated great judgments.

In the twentieth place, What shall I say of Idolatry 20. Sign. Idolatry.
and superstitition? I think there is none amongst you, but are verily
persuaded, that that is the Harbinger of some grievous misery to come upon a
Land*, Marul. l. 6. c. 7. 30a.
where it is entertained either to iustle out the Gospel, or to play Checmate
with the Gospel. Witness the miserable, bloody, and treacherous times, Ob
Idololatria^ diuisum fuit Iudeae regnum.
that have been in France, since the holy and profane have bin mingled
together; Christ and Beliall; the true Religion, and the false. Witness the
division of the kingdom of Judah See Ier. 7.17.18.19.20.
. Witness abundance of places in the Prophets; as these; Thy calfe, oh Samaria,
has cast thee off Hos. 8.5.
. They sacrificed to Baal, and burnt incense to graven images; The sword shall
abide in his Cities, and consume his branches, and devour them Hos. 11.2.6.
. Their Land is full of Idols, they worship the work of their own hands,
that which their own fingers have made; Therefore thou have forsaken thy
people, the house of Jacob Isa. 2.8.6.
. Diverse the like speeches are often to be met withal; In stead of all the
rest, take this one: Ye have borne the Tabernacle of your Molech, and Chlun
your images, the Star of your God, which ye made to your selves, Therefore
will I cause you to go into Captivity beyond Damascus, says the Lord, whose
name is the God of hosts Amos. 5.26.27.
. The Jews, in Christ's time, were very obseruous of the superstitious
Traditions of their Fathers, preferring the same before the Commandments of
God; and did they not rue for it afterward? This was another thing that went
before the setting up of the abomination of desolation in their habitations.

In the 21. place, lesser 21. Sign. Lesser punishments.
plagues have usually been forerunners of some greater. The Prophet Isaiah in
his third Chapter, at the beginning, seems to give us to understand, Isa. 3.
that before the Babylonish Captivity, these lesser evils should go. 1.
Famine Verse. 1.
. 2. The weakening of the Artillery, and furniture for war Verse. 2.
. 3. The weakening of policy, and taking away of those chief ones, that should
plead, judge, and stand for the Commonwealth, as, the provident, the ancient,
the Judge, the honorable man, the Counselor, and the eloquent Orator Verse.
2.3.
. 4. The decay of those Arts, and mechanical Trades, whereby a Land is
maintained, or the taking away of the cunning Artificer Verse. 3.
. 5. Confusion in Subjects, and contempt cast upon their betters by inferiors;
the child behauing himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against
the honorable Ver. 5.
. So before the Sacking of Jerusalem, there went famines, pestilences, and
other beginnings of sorrows Mat. 24.7.8.
.

Lastly, general incorrigiblenes, 22. Sign. Incorrigiblenes.
and impenitency, notwithstanding these lesser evils fore sent unto them, and
inflicted upon them. Amos has almost an whole Chapter in his Prophecy to this
purpose Viz. the 4. Chapter from the 6. verse to the 13.
; wherein, after he has brought in the Lord chiding the Israelites, because
that neither famine V. 6.
, nor drought V. 7.8.
, nor blasting, and mildew upon their vineyards, fig trees, and Olive trees V.
9.
, nor pestilence, nor the slaughter of their young men V. 10.
, nor the overthrowing of some of them like Sodum and Gomorrah; and the
plucking of THEM (whom he then spoke to) like a firebrand out of the fire V.
11.
, could make them repent; but still they refused to return unto the Lord).
After (I say) all this, he brings the Lord in, concluding thus; Therefore thus
will I do unto thee O Israel V. 12.
. How thus? What would he do? Look back into the second, and third Verses; I
will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hookes, and ye
shall go out at the breaches, (that is) into Captivity. THIS, even THIS will
I do unto you. This strange impenitency did procure, and prognosticate the
great ruin, and downe-fall of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum. Woe unto
thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which have
been done in you, had bin done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in Sackcloth and ashes. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell, for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, it would have
remained until this day Mat. 11.21.23.
. As if he should have said: Because you Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum,
did remain incorrigible, and would not repent, notwithstanding, my many, and
great works among you, therefore, great shall your destruction and overthrow
be.

These are the signs, which must be observed, and taken notice off, by those
that would foresee the plague.

the chief Priests, and Elders put upon Judas (when in the horror of his
conscience he brought back unto them the price of innocent blood) What is that
to us Mat. 27.4.
? What do these signs and marks which you have now set down concern US?

Surely very much. Answ. The particular application of the former signs to our
Land; which is the second Branch of the last general direction how to foresee
the evil.
I would to God that experience did not too too truly apply most of these
sins, and signs to our Land, to our age. Which we must not wilfully be
ignorant off, if we would foresee the plague.

^. Ingratitude in England.
First, there is monstrous, and intolerable ingratitude amongst us. What
blessings has the Lord withheld from us? What mercies either positive or
privative has not He heaped on us? Wealth we have; our Land is another
Goshen, another Canaan; Health, peace, and prosperity we have; That which was
once prophesied to Jerusalem by Zachary, is fulfilled amongst us, by reason of
the abundance of peace which we enjoy; The old men and old women dwell in our
streets, and many a man with his staff in his hand for very age. The streets
of the City are full of boys, and girls, playing in the midst thereof
Zach. 8.4.5.
. What great and admirable deliverances has he wrought for us Witness 1588 and
Nouemb. 5. 1605.
. Has he not bestowed upon us the Gospel of Peace, offering, yea giving
thereby, (if we will but receive Him) his beloved Son Christ Jesus? It is
true, now and then he has scourged us, he has punished us, yet he has done
it so Fatherly, so favorably, that his rods have rather been mercies then
punishments Poena a Deo nobis illatae, misericordiae magis sunt quam poena.
Chrysostom. in Gen c. 8 Ho^. 25
. And whereas, for these helps, and comforts of life, we are bound to give
thanks to our Creator (...). Asterius. Homil. de Diu. and Laz page 2.
, yea, to this very end have our souls breathed into us, and our tongues given
us Ea Propter, and animam nobis inspirauit, and linguam dedit, vt sua in nos
beneficia animis percipientes Dominum agnoscamus Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 25.
; yet, how few David's, and Mary's be there, who rouse up their souls Luke 1.46.
, awaken their glories Psalm. 57.9
, their tongues to magnify the Lord, and strive, with all that is within them
to praise his holy Name Psalm. 103.1.
? There are some amongst us (O lamentable to consider it) who complain against
Gods goodness, because he gives them what they do desire Quid dici hac re
improb^us, quid co^tumeliosius potest? etia^ in hoc de misericordia Dei
querimur, quia tribuat quod rogamus. Salu. de Pro. l. 3. p. 77.
. Send he us Si aestus est, de ariditate causamur; si pluniae de inundatione
conqueremur: si infaecundior annus est accusamus sterilitate^^ si faecundior
vtilitatem. Adipisci abunda^tia^ cupimus, et ea^de^ adepti accusamus. Id. ibid.
wet, or dry, scarcity or plenty, he can never content us. The abundance of
good things, which he does bestow upon us, do we accuse him, and murmr
against him for? Do not the MOST of us, like the old Israelites, requite his
love with rebellion, his kindness with transgression Vt in quantu^ eos
beneficijs suis ille ad se illexerat ad propitiandum, in tantum illi ab eo
recederent. Salu. de Prou. l. 7. p. 220.
? Do not the BEST of us fall infinitely short of rendering that praise we owe
unto him? When we have done the best we can, we must needs cry out; We are
unprofitable servants.

2. General Corruption in England.
Secondly, how generally corrupt and depraved the manners of men be, in all
sorts amongst us, from the high to the low Quis est vel dives, vel nobilis, aut
innocentiam seruans, aut a cunctis sceleribus manum abstinens, Salu. de Prou
Dei l. 3 p 86.
, etc, not only Hoc maiores nostri questi sunt, hoc nos querimur, hoc posteri
nostri querentu^, euersos esse mores, regnare nequitiam, in deterius res
humanas and in omne nefas labi. Senec. de Benef. l, 1 cap. 10. page 386.
had our Ancestors cause before us, shall our posterity have cause after us,
but also our selves NOW have just cause to complain: We have wanted no holy
means to make us good; Our good God, and blessed (...). Aster. Hom de Diu. and
Lazar. p. 1.
Savior has denied unto us, neither precept, nor pattern; has stored us
both with Commandments, and examples, to keep us from vice, to draw us to
virtue, yet what a Miscent mores mali Plaut. in Trinu. Omnia fanda nefanda mali
permixta furore. Catull.
mixture of evil is there amongst us? and how have all almost expelled
Institiamque omnes cupida de mente fugarunt. Id.
Righteousness from their hearts, and lives? So that Praeter paucissimos
quosdam, qui mala fugiunt, quid est aliud pene omnis caetus Christianorum, quam
sentina vitiorum Salu. de Prou p. 81.
except it be a few (the little flock of Christ I mean, upon whom the word of
God has wrought sauingly and effectually) the whole company of those that have
the name of Christians, are little better then a very sink of ungodliness. Nil
erit vlterius quod nostris moribus addat posteritas, eadem capient, facientque
minores. Inuenal. Satyr. 1.
What can after ages add to the wickedness of our age? or how can they be
euiller then this is? If I should speak of drunkenness, gluttony, adultery,
extortion, theft, rapine, and such like sins Quotum enim quemque inuenies in
Ecclesia, non aut ebriosu^, aut helluonem, aut adulterum, aut fornicatore^, aut
raptorem, aut ganeonem, aut latronem, aut homicidam? Salu* de Prou. lib. 3. p.
81.
, (as I shall afterward touch them more in particular) it is even pity to
think how many thousands are addicted unto them. It is easier to find men
guilty of all sins then not of all; it is easier to find such as do commit
rather great transgressions with lesser, then the lesser with- out the greater
Facilius inuenias reos malorum omnium, quam non omnium, facilius maioru^
criminu^ quam minorum, id est facilius qui, et maiora crimina cu^ minoribus,
qua^ qui minora ta^tum sine maioribus, perpetrarint. Sal. ibid.
. To let pass the rude behavior, and lewd carriage of such as never had so
much as civil education, it is too apparent, that Corruption has such
domination over some that profess Religion, that it is accounted a kind of
holiness in them to differ but a little from the lewder, and profaner sort, and
to be somewhat less vicious then they are In hanc enim morum probrositate^
prope omnis. Ecclesiastica plebs redacta est, vt in cu^cto populo Christiano,
genus quoda^ modo sanctitatis sit, MINVS esse vitiosum. l. ib. p. 82.
. We declare our sins as Sodom, we hide them not; We have Whores foreheads
that cannot blush. Yea, sin is not only Scelus no^ tantu^ geritur, sed
docetur. Cypr. Epist. 2. l. 1. 3. The Word is contemned amongst US.
committed, but also taught, as in a School amongst us.

Thirdly, Although there be some amongst us who do reverence the Word of God,
account the feet of them beautiful that bring the glad tidings of salvation
Romans 10* 15.
; who, with the Galathians, would be ready to pluck out their eyes to do Paul
good Gal. 4.15.
, entertaining him as an Angel of God V. 14.
: of whom we may say, as the Apostle writes of the Thessalonians; The Gospel
has come unto them in power 1 These. 1.5.
, they have received it with joy V. 6.
, who are the very hope, joy, crown, and rejoicing Chapter 2. v. 19.
of the Lords Ministers, that labor amongst them; Although (I say) there be
some such amongst us, (and blessed be God for it) yet the Word of God is
greatly contemned amongst us notwithstanding this. We have, not only those
amongst us, who, without In templa, in altaria, atque in Sacraria Dei, passim
omnes sordidi, ac flagitiosi, sine vlla penitus reuerentia sacri honoris
irrumpunt. Sal. de Pro. l. 3. p. 82.
any reverence rush into the Temple of the Lord: when they are there, letting
their hearts run loose to imagine all manner of wickedness, and after they
have been there, fall to their old sinful courses again; some to theft, some
to riot, some to incontinencie Si vult quis^iam scire quid ^n templo huiusmodi
homines cogitauerint, videat, quid sequatur. Si quidem, co^su^matis solennibus
sacris, statim ad consuetudinari^a omnes studia discurrunt: alij ^cilicet vt
fure^tur, alij vt in^ebrientur, alij vt fornicentur, alij vt latrocine^tur. vt
euide^ter appareat hoc eos esse meditatos, dum intra templum sunt, quod,
postquam egressi fuerint, exequu^tur. Id ib. p. 83.
, and the like, (all which cannot but be a kind of contemning Gods holy
Ordinances) but also there are such as do more grossly, and notoriously
despise Prophesying 1 The. 5.20.
; esteeming PREACHERS the Troublers of Israel 1 Kin. 18 17.
, not giving them the tith of that respect, which our blind forefathers did to
every Friar, and hedge-Priest in their days: and accounting PREACHING as a
trifle, a toy, a needles matter, a thing that of any thing whatsoever, might
best be spared. Whence it comes to pass, that either they refuse to hear, or,
if they do hear, they fret in their hearts, and speak with their tongues
against it, as if they were only skillful, to deal with the Ministry of Gods
Ordinance, as Theodoretus.
One complains the Heathens in his time did, with the Mysteries of Gods
providence, even lade, and inueigh against the same, with cauills and reproaches
(...). i. e. Solum periti cauillis and dicterijs incessere diuinae
Dispensationis mysteria. Graec. Affect curat. Ser. 6. p. 100.
. And as touching the Word written in the Book of the Scripture, how many
there are that contemn THAT, experience abundantly witnesses. Though to
(...). Nilus. Episc. Thessal. de cause. dissens. Ecclesiastic. l. 1. p. 21.
accuse THAT, be to accuse GOD himself, yet Some are not ashamed to accuse IT,
to be the cause of Heresy, and Error, of schisms, and dissentions, when it is
(...). Id. ibid.
not so; to be insufficient of it self to declare the truth, when as (...).
Athanas. contra. Gent. Orat. Tom. 1. p. 1.
indeed it is sufficient; to be impossible to be understood, when as yet, with
the helps which God affords us, it is possible to be understood, and a man
may attain to that knowledge of it (in some good measure) which he does desire
(...). Athanas. Orat. cont. Gent. Tom. 1. p. 1.
. How many neglect the reading and studying of the Scriptures: and though the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles are necessarily to be read (...). Theod
de Graec. Affec* curat. Ser. 2 p. 37.
; and though (as Quod autem sacrarum literarum lectio vita sit, Dominus
testatur, dicens, etc. Ambros. Ser. 36. Tom. 3. p. 262.
Christ himself testifies) the reading of the Scriptures is life it self,
when he says, Io. 9. the words that I speak are spirit and life. Now such
Accusers of the Scriptures, such Refusers to read the Scriptures, are in
England, if there be Papists, if there be Atheists in our Land. Of both which
sorts, who can deny there are too many.

4. We are guilty of rejecting the offers of grace.
Fourthly, besides the contempt of the Word, we are guilty of despising the
offers of grace. The Mediator of grace Christ Jesus is offered, and by
unbelief we reject Him. The spirit of grace is offered by many a good motion,
which the Lord infuseth, and it is quenched. The Covenant of grace is offered,
and on condition men will but put off the old man, and put on the new man, the
Lord tendereth himself to be their God, and to take them to be his people for
ever, and this is not regarded. In a word, all the privileges of Gods kingdom
are tendered to us all that do live, or (if we will) that may live under the
Gospel, yet how many of us do prefer before these offers, the offers of a
rich marriage, of a Farm, a yoke of Oxen, tendered by a mortal man.

Fifthly, As touching the abuse of Gods patience and goodness, 5. Gods patience
and goodness are abused amongst us.
it is as manifest as may be, that this kingdom stands deeply charged with
the guilt of this sin. First (I say) we have abused the patience of God. How
many gray headed sinners, are there in our Land, for whose repentance the Lord
has waited a long time, who grow worse and worse rather then better, who
Prioribus malis maiora iunxisti^. Bern. Epist 68. fol. 221. l.
still go on in impenitency, and (for ought that any man can see) they have no
purpose but to live and die in their old impiety. And as for Gods other
blessings, the Lord has as just cause to complain against thousands of US, as
he had once against the Israelites Ezekiel. 16.11.12.13.14.15.16.
, that, the ornaments, and bracelets, chains, and Jewels, silver, and gold,
linen, and silk: that is, our riches, and treasures, and all kind of outward
blessings, which God has given us for necessity, and delight, have been
abused, though not to the direct maintaining of Idolatry, (save peradventure
the wealthy estate of some rich Recusants amongst us) as Isreal's were, yet to
the maintaining, either of Whoredom, drunkenness, idleness, revenge,
stage plays, diabolical meetings, and societies Quid dicam quod ad Diabolicas
sodalitates innumeras multi consumunt pecunias. Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 11. Hom. 77.
, and all kind of immoderate, and immodest vanities (...). i. e. Haec oration
duobus, and quide^ breuibus verbis eos notat, ac traducit, qui nec recte,
diuitias habent, and ad inanes, immodicosque su^ptus abutuntur. Aster. Hom. de
Diu and Laz. p. 2.
, as though ( Parthianis, auri, argentique nullus, nisi in armis vsus est.
Just. Hist. l. 41. c. 2. p. 28^. 6. Covetousness, Oppression, and Violence do
abound here.
Parthian-like) we knew not what other use to make of the good things we do
enjoy, then this, even to fight against God with the same.

Sixthly, Covetousness is a Maxima pars hominum morbo iactatur eodem. Horat.
Sat 3. 1. 2.
disease that most are taken, and holden with. How many a man, and woman is
there, who for gain Pro hac non mendacij, non periurij, non furti facinus
p^rhorrescit, non fidem frangere, non iracundiae noxio furore suppleri.
Cassian. l. 7. c. 7. Qui diuitias amat nec peiurare timet, nec alios fraud
circumuenire dubitat, nec eum omnino aperte mentiri pudet, si quid ex eo se
facturum lucri credit: neque quisquam est qui in leuissimis etiam rebus tam
facile jurat, quam dives auaras. Marul. Evang. l 5 c. 19 p. 282.
, fear not to lie, to forswear, to theeue, to break promise, to deceive, to
rage, and to fill themselves with fury? Is it not come to pass in Nostra
aetate contigit Christianorum Ecclesias a Christianis prophanari, aurum
argentumque Deo consecratum per vim auferri. Id. ib.
our age, that the maintenance of the Ministry, is taken away from some, and
that, which was consecrated a Levites portion, for his service at the
Sanctuary, is now converted most Sacrilegiously to profane uses, it may be, to
maintaining dogs, or birds? How many be there who for the world Nulla ibi
Religionis ratio habetur, vbi auari animi nihil nisi quod rapiant attendunt.
Id. ib
regard Religion no more then a rush, yea, can be content to Si lucri quid
detur potius rem diuinam deseram. Plaut. in Pseud.
abjure Religion, if they be never so little provoked unto it? How insatiable
are some, who, though they have scraped a great deal together, yet can never
see when their heap is big enough Quamuis autem multa depraedentur, multa
parent, multa vndique congerant, nunquam tamen satiantur: semper restat quod
aceruo addi cupiunt. Marul. Evang. l. 5 c. 19. p. 279
. Neither is this the fault of such only as have a Nec minus huic vitio
obnoxij sunt, qui liberis, nepotibusque abundant quam qui soli sunt: Qualem
Ecclesiastes admiratur dicens, etc. Id. ibid.
great charge to provide for, (though that would not excuse the sin) but also
of such as are alone, whose folly the Preacher admireth, saying; There is one
alone, and there is not a second, yea, he has neither child, nor brother, yet
there is no end of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches,
neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good Eccles.
4.8.
? What a multitude of Usurers has England, who are such a wretched, and wicked
kind of people, (for the most part) that one of the Ambros. de Thob. c. 4.
Tom. 4 p. 340. 341. Doctiores, ipsi foeneratori Diabolum putant comparandum,
qui vires animae, and praetiosae mentis patrimonium soenerat quodam vsurariae
iniquitatis sic sumptu capit, sic auro allicit, sic reatu inuoluit, siccaput
pro thesauro reposcit. Quid vobis iniquius qui nec sic capitis estis solutione
content^? Quid vobis iniquius qui pecuniam datis, and vitam obligatis et
patrimonium?
ancients thought, there was no fitter creature to compare the Devil himself
to, then the Usurer: for, as the Usurer does make sure to himself, and get
into bonds the patrimony, and inheritance, and so sometimes the very life of
the borrower, for a little money which he lends him to satisfy his need for
the present; So the Devil for a little fleshly, or worldly content, which he
lends a man for a moment, gets the very soul of that man into bondage, and
makes the poor sinner make over unto his use, and service, the whole patrimony
of the powers of his soul. Such a Viperous brood, I say, there is amongst us.
In a word, so far are the most of us from procuring one another gain, with
some loss to our selves (as duty binds us when we are called unto it) that
we do greedily seek our own profits, in wronging, and hindering of our
brother Tantum abest, vt alioru^ commodis aliquid cum propria incommoditate
praestemus, vt omnes, vel maxim nostris commodis cum aliorum incommodo
consulamus. Sal. de Pro. l. 3.
. Tell me now, are not all these infallible Symptoms of this malady of
Covetousness, and, by consequent so many signs, that this Land is very much
taynted, and infected with it? And as for the hand-maydes, Oppression and
Violence, how can the Land be free of them, when as Covetousness their
mistress is in such use, grace, and place? There are those who (as the Prophet
speaks) do store up violence and robbery in their palaces Amos. 3.10.
. If any should deny this; not only the cruel exactions of the hateful
Usurer (whom I spoke of before) who lends to day, and exacts to morrow (then
Quid tetrius eo qui hodie fae^erat, and cras exigit? Est odibilis inquam homo
huiusmodi. Oblatio quidem blanda, sed immanis exactio. Verum ipsi oblationis
humanitas, facit ad. ^xactionis saeuitiam. Ambr. lib. de Ihob. c. 12. Tom. 4.
p. 346.
which what can be worse) will make it good; but also Naboths Vineyard
wrongfully taken away, crying for vengeance against great ones: Commons
enclosed from the common people: Tenants stocks rent out of their hands by
griping, and grinding Land-Lordes: Countrey-mens livings brought to nothing by
the hypocritical and cruel Oppression of some Citie-Inhabitants; the
complaints of the (...). Aster. Hom. de Diu. and Laz p. 7. Hic arcentur
haereditatibus liberi, illic bonis donantur alieni. Cypr. Ep. 2. l. 1. f. 24.
Poor neglected by the Rich; the moan of the Orphane deprived of his
maintenance; the Tears of the Widow, for the wrongs they offer her, who seek
to undo her (evils too too common amongst us) do so strongly euince it, that
it cannot be denied with any color, that there is, not only Oppression, but
most horrible Oppression, even such Oppression, as does daily, and hourly
knock at Heauen-gate for vengeance; yea, for heavy vengeance, to fall down
upon OUR Kingdom.

7. There is pride in England.
Seauenthly, Is there no Pride in England? What means then the Sui confidentia
est peccatu^, qua plus superbia in se habet. Marul. Evang. l. 7. c. 1.
lofty conceits, that men have of themselves, because of their gifts, be they
outward, or inward? What means the Rich-mans scorning of the poor Quid enim
superbis dives? Quid dicis pauperi? Noli me tangere. Amb. lib. de Naboth. c 13.
Tom. 4. p. 28.
, the impatient storming at reproaches Rarus est aut nullus, qui de se mala dici
aequa nimiter ferat. Cyp. de Tenta. Christ fol. 15. Edit paris. 1512 Videmus
multos qui risum, and subsannationem far nequerint. Chrysostom: in Genesis c. 6. Hom.
22.
, the foolish affecting of vain praises Rarus est qui been de se non velit
sentiri Cypr. loc citat.
, not only by persons of bad desert, but also by some, that have honest hearts
Rarus est qui se, si recte viuit, stantem in vitae rectitudine, non diligat
aestimari. Id. ibid.
? What means the ambitious aspiring, both of Etiam in sinu Sacerdotum ambitio
dormit, ibi sub vmbra recubat, in secreto thalamise fraudulenter occultat. Cyp.
de Caen. Dom fol. 16.
Clerks, and Laics, to high places, and that strife to attain great Offices,
come they by them, by Ambitionis falsugo bibulam animam occupat, vt per fas,
and nefas ad loca superiora nonnulli se ingeram, and de omni gradu vbi aliquis
aditus patet, anheli prodeant, discurre^t ad iud^ces, blandiantur mediatoribus,
conducent auxiliarios, and omnibus modis elaborent vt sedeant cum principibus.
Cyp in Prolog. de Natiu. Christ. f. 3.
right or by wrong? What means that, some Commonwealths, evil, men's Nemo
eorum qui in Rep. versantur, quos vi^cat, sed a quibus vincatur, aspicit: and
illis non tam iucundum est, multos post se videre, quam grave, aliquem ante se.
Senec. Epist. 73. l. 1. Tom 2. p. 671.
excessive rejoicing to see many men beneath themselves; and immoderate
grieuing to see any man above themselves? What means the Alta sapere superbia
est. Ambros. in Romans c. 12. Tom. 5. page 230.
curious seeking to know things not fit, not possible to be known? Excess in
apparel? Apish imitation of every fantastic fashion? In faeminis forma
fucata. Cypr de Laps fol. 113. (...). Aster. de Diu. and Laz. p. 4.
Painted faces, which for a man to meet with, will make him imagine he sees
some e whited walls,) laying out of breasts, and such ridiculous attyring of
the body, which makes very (...). id.
Boys worthily to laugh, point, and wonder at it, and eagerly follow the
party so attyred, up and down, as if it were some Monster, or strange
Creature? And (as couzen-Germane to excess in apparel) what means Pride in
(...). Id. ib. p 5.
belly-cheere, in Table-furniture; every one taking it for a Quo quisque
exquisitissimorum obsoniorum varia genera, epularumque varios apparatus, and
lautos profusius dat, eo magis commendatur. Goclen Orat. de lux. p. 99.
commendation, to exceed one another this way? What (I say) mean all these
things, if there were no pride in our Kingdom? It cannot be, but that, since
Peccata quae plus inse superbiae habe^t, haec sunt, inanis gloria appetitio,
alioru^ contemptus, neminem pati sibi superiore^, and nemine^ aqualibus quidem
facilem se praestare; Praeterea gestus, habitusque corporis immodestus etc.
Marul Evang l. 7. c. 1. p. 337.
these fruits of pride abound amongst us, Pride it self is planted here, yea
(it is to be feared) so strongly planted, that it will not be plucked up,
until the Lord by some grievous judgment or other, pull it up by the roots.

Luxury in England
Eighthly, As touching Luxury (which is a thing so repugnant to virtue, that it
does inthrall men to every vile and evil custom (...). Aster. de Diu. and
Laz. 5.
) never did Abraham find it more common in Egypt, amongst the Abraham
compererat in Aegypto lasciuam esse iuuenum luxuriam, petulantem cupiditatem,
voluptatum intemperantiam. Amb. de Abrah patr. l. 1. c. 2. Tom. 4 p 173.
younger sort, then we may find it in England, amongst all sorts almost. It
is an evil that has ouer-spread the whole world Totum per orbem maximum
exo^tum est malum, Luxuria. Senec in Octau.
, and are we only free from it? No, no: No where (as one said of the Nusquam
improbior voluptas. Salu de Pro. l. 7. p. 220.
French) is there more voluptuousnes, more unlawful pleasure then here. Some,
rather then they will go without such pleasure, or have their lusts
unsatisfied, care not what cost they be at, what villainy they commit Per omne
nefas voluptates emuntur, and per omne scelus libidines copi^sa exquiru^tur.
Cypr. de Ieiun. and Tent. Christ fol. 16.
. Good Lord, how many a Glutton, and Epicure is there amongst us, who makes his
belly his God, as if he had his (...). Greg. Nyss. de Virgin. c. 4. p. 54.
Innumeri viuunt vt edant, non edunt vt viuant. Goclen. de Lu^* ^. ^1.
life for nothing else but to serve his belly! Oh the excessive, and immoderate
abuse at meetings and feastings. To the superfluity of cheer, men must have
forsooth the Tabret, the Viole, and the Harp Isa. 5.12.
; their (...). Aster. Hom. de Diu. et laz p. 7.
Minstrills, and their Minions; their Pipers, and their Parasites; their
Iesters, and their Scoffers; their men and women dancers; and all the vanity
that can be devised. Are not these, that are thus vainly, and vilely addicted
to Epicurisme, Luxurious? Who be, if they be not Satu^itas castitare^ prodigit,
illecebram nutrit. Ambr. in Sermon. Qui autem gulae atque ventri fese in
seruitate^ dedit, idem Luxuriae libidinisque vitio facile caedet Marul. Evang.
l. 1 c. 15. p. 29. Prateream certe ego Cytharam, psalteria, tympana quae
cognouimus conuicijs huiusmodi frequenter adhiberi, vt vino and cantu
excitentur libidines. Ambros de Helia and Ieiun c. 15. To. 4. p. 332.
? Secondly, what an height drunkenness is grown to amongst us, who knows not?
All Tables are full of vomit, and filthiness, there is no place clean Isa.
28.8.
. Neither Court, nor Country, University, nor City. The Prophet Hosea
complains, that in his time the Princes upon their Kings day (that is, Vise
Zanch. in Hos ch 7.5.
upon some solemn day of mirth and festiuitie celebrated for their King) did
make him sick with bottles of Wine. If the same Prophet were alive now, he
would complain, that both Vinahac nostra aeta^e t^m profuse prodigu^tur apud
Christianos, vt videantur ad perdenda ea geniti: Proceres, paupe^es, plebs
infima, infantes, pue^i, viri, atque faeminae virum amplectuntur, nec sine eo
vitam putant beatam, vt ita nulla in part operosiorem vita^ nostro seculo
inueniamus quam in perdendis vinis. Gocleu. de Lux. p. 97. 98.
high and low, men and women, old and young, do, not only upon some solemn
festival day, but upon every usual day, yea, upon the King of heaven his day,
the blessed Sabbath, ( Reader tremble to think it) make both themselves, and
others drunk with bottles of Wine, and other strong drinks; abusing those
creatures so prodigally, so prodigiously, as if they were borne to no other
end, but thus to abuse themselves, and these blessings; and as though there
were no other heaven, nor happiness but this. And is not drunkenness an
argument of Luxury? When Apud nos sine lege, sine modo bibitur Id ib
men amongst us drink thus without law, without measure? Thirdly, What shall I
speak of Stage Plays, lascivious Interludes? they are tolerated, they are
visited; Governors wink at them, troops of men and women frequent them; an
evil so horrible, so odious, that very Sumite saltem examplum vobis a Bar^^^^
(...)
Barbarians (O shame to England) have abhorred, have scorned it. Is not this
another argument of that abundance of Luxury, yea shameless Luxury, which
our Land is like to rue for. There is nothing plainer. For what is the
playhouse, but the Whore-masters Schoole-house, where Adulierium disci^ur du^
viditur, and lenocinante ad viti^ publicae authoritatis malo: quae pudica
fortassis ad spectacu u^, matrona processerat, despectaculo reue^titur
impudica. Cyp. Ep. 2. l. 2. fo. 23. Quere iam nu^c an possit esse qui spectat
integer vel pudicus. Id. ibid. Qui forte ad spectaculu^ purivenerant de Theatro
adulteri reuertuntur: Non enim tunc tantu^modo quando redeu^t, sed etiam quando
veniant fornica^tur; Nam hoc ipso, quod aliquis rem obscaenam capit, dum ad
immu^da properat, immu^dus est. Salu de Pro l. 6. p 176. Machantur in Theatris
Id ib p. 177 Vndecredis naptiarum insidiatores proficisci? Nonne ab huiuscemodi
scenis? Vnde illos qui domos ac thalamos aliorum effodiunt? Nonne a Tripudijs
illis. Chrysostom: in Mat. c. 11. Hom. 38. Adulterijs nunquavi hac spectacula
opportunitatem prebuere dices? imo vero quis non adulter modo factus est? etc.
Id ib.
Whoredom and filthiness is taught by the Actors, and learned by the Seers?
Cunctam enim simpliciter quae ibi fiunt turpissima sunt: verba, vestitus,
tunsura, nicessus, voces, cantus, mod^lat^^nes, ^culorum euersiones, ac motus
tibiae, fistulae, fabularum materies; omnia inqu^m turpi l^sciuia plena sunt
Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. 38.
What is there there either seen, heard, or done, which is not most unclean,
most filthy? The words filthy, the garments filthy, (men invested in women's
apparel) the gestures, songs, motions, music, matter, and all unclean.
Fourthly, concerning actual uncleanness, as fornication, adultery, and the
like, they are too too common; yea, these sins by some ( Fornicatio apud
Barbaros crimen, atque discrimen est, apud nos decus Sal^ de Gub. Dei
who indeed are worse then Barbarians) are accounted toys, and tricks of
youth, rather then crimes, and gross offenses.

9. There is carnal security amongst us.
In the ninth place, we are (for the most part) like Laish, a Secure people
Judge. 18.7
. Though the Lord does threaten us, though our Protestant-brethren be disturbed
near unto us, though Romish Iebusites, and Popish Canaanites be in our Land
already, as pricks in our sides, as thorns in our eyes Ios 23.13.
: though crying sins do call daily for vengeance against us, yet we
generally, (save some few Noah's that are moved with an holy fear,) say, as
Heathenish Babylon once did Isa. 47.7.
, as Romish Babylon now does Apoc. 18.7.
; I sit a Queen, I am no widow, I shall be a Lady for ever, and shall see no
sorrow. For, were there not this security amongst us, we should not have so
many like the old Epicures Et sane iuuenire aliqu^s qui ab istorum iudiciod
screpauerint, prater Epicureorum, vel quorundam Epicurizant^um deli^am^ta non p
ssun; qui sicut voluptatem cum virtute, sic Deum cum incuria, atque torpore
iunxerunt, vt appa^ea^, cos, qui ^ta seat^unt, sicut sensum Epicurcuru^ atque
sententiam, ita etiam vitia sectari. Salu de Prou. l 1. p 6.
, the wickedness of whose lives (being most outrageous) does proclaim, that
they are verily of opinion, that God sits idle in heaven, having no regard to
things which are here below; and so put away the evil day far from
themselves.

Heb. 11.7.
Tenthly, it is a We profane ^e Sabbaths. Dolendie^ vero, ^se inter Chris^anos,
qui nun^uamine diebus ^uidem feriatis, etc qui operibus ca^dalosis, et di^inu^
cultu^ im^edie^tibus Sab^atu^ perda^t, vel^^t comessatio. ^ibus, lusibus,
eliagatio^nibus. Scul. in Is. c. 58. Conc. vlt.
lamentable thing to consider, how, amongst us Christians, the Sabbaths of the
Lord are profaned: yea, to that Hodie eo res leuenit, vt inter Christianos
homines optimi haberipossint, qui operibus manu^arijs, and victui seruie^tibus
sabbatae Dei viola^t, cum plerique illa nefa^dis sceleribus prophanent. Gua. in
Ac. Ho^. 88.
woeful pass are the times now grown, that they are accounted by some the
best persons, that do take most liberty to themselves, to serve the Devil,
the world, and the flesh upon that day, which ought wholly and holily to be
spent in the service of the Almighty. Look into some private houses, and you
shall find the Sabbaths privately profaned; look into more public places,
and you shall find them more publicly abused. What shall I speak of Pecca^t
qui in Sabbato nil praeter inane tium spectant, interim vero fidei, and
religionis ex^rcitia negligu^t. Gual. in Mar. Hom. 23.
idle resting, neglect of the duties of piety toward God, of Peccant
praeterea qui charitatis immemores, auaritia aute^ infla^mati laborant. Id ib
charity toward man, of all heavenly regard to a man's self upon that day?
Do not these proclaim, that this is true which I say? Taking of iourneyes on
worldly occasions, wearying of beasts with laying burdens on them, Pecca^t
qui simul seruos, atque ancillas operibus fac. u^dis exerce^t, vel merces
vendunt, rations subducunt, and deb^ta exigunt non absque graui miseroru^
debitorum molestia. Gualt in Marc. Hom. 23.
employing of servants about earthly needless businesses; selling of wares,
casting up of accounts, and reckoning with Factors, exacting of payments at the
hands of Debtors: dancing ( Quanto melius est arare quam saltare? Aug. in Ps
91.
which is worse then plowing,) Peccant qui diem hunc superbiae, fastui, aleae,
poculis, and impuro voluptatu^ studio tribuunt. Gual. in Marc. Ido^ 23.
pranking up in pride, dicing, drinking; Clyents cumbring Lawyers Chambers, and
Lawyers giving their Clyents counsel; following unlawful pleasures; seeing
and suffering of Interludes, celebrating of feasts with pompous solemnity.
None of which abuses, good Extat enim Leonis, and Anthemij lex, cuius haec
verba sunt: Dies festos Maiestati altissims dedicatos, nullis voluptatibus
occupaeri, ^eque vllis exactionu^ vexationibus prophanari. Dominicu^ ite^ diene
semper honorabile decermmus venera^dum, vt a cunctis executionibus excusetur,
nulla quenqua^ vrge^t admonitio, nulla fide iussienis flagitetur exactio,
taceat apparitio, aduocatio delitescat. sit ille dies a cognitionibus alienus.
Item: nec huius tam religiosi diei otia relaxantes obscenis quibuslibet
pati^nur voluptatibus detineri. Nihil eodem die vindicet sibi Scenae
Theatralis, aut Circense certamen, aut ferarum Lachrymosa spectacula, etiamsi
in nostro ortu, aut natali celebranda solennitas inciderit differatur.
Amissionem munlitiae, proscriptionemque patrimonij sustinebit, si quis vnquam
hoc die festo spectaculis interesse, vel cuiuscunque iudicis apparitor
praetextu negotij publici, seu priuati h^c qua lege hac statuta sunt crediderit
temeranda. Id. ib.
Emperors would endure, and most of which are Sunt peccat. haec vulgaria
hodie. Id. ib.
too common upon the Lords day amongst us: Insomuch, that we may conclude,
that, there is Nec vnquan vel superbia and fastu, vel ebrie tate, vel luxu and
libidine plu peccetur, quan illo die qui totu. Deo, and diuinorum operum,
aeternaeque quieti^, meditationi co^secratus ^ssedebebat. Gualt. in Act. Hom.
88.
no day in all the week more proudly and profanely, more riotously and
luxuriously spent then that is. Nay, I would to God that (besides our Papists)
there were not such amongst us, as cavil against the Sabbath, making a
question, whether there be any necessity to observe such a day at all.

11. There are corrupt Governors amongst us.
In the eleventh place: Although there be amongst us, (may some say) all the
forenamed sins, and signs you have spoken of, [Ingratitude,
Sabbath-breaking, pride, luxurie] yet I hope our Sed tibi, post insidiosas vias
etc. post spectacula vel cruenta, vel turpia, post libidinum probrae etc. Forum
fortasse videntur immune, quod ab iniurijs lacessantibus liberu^ nullis malorum
co^tractibus polluatur. Cyp. Epist. 2. l. 2 fol. 24
Courts of justice are unblameable, unpolluted. Unblameable? Alas! alas! Illic
faciem tuam fl^ctes, plura illic quae detesteris inuenies. Id. ib.
Look but there, and thou shall find, Evils to be detested, to be lamented.
Judgment is turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Hemlocke
Amos. 6.12.
. The Laws are made Interleges ipsas delintquitur, interiura percatur. Cypr.
Ep. 2. l. 2
lawless, and Innocentia nec illic vbi defenditur, reseruatur. Cypr. Epist. 2.
l. 2.
where innocence is pleaded, there innocence is not preserved. Britania habet
iudie^s in sede arbitrij sedentes, sed raro rectriudicij regulam quaerentes
Gild de excid^ Brita. in Orthodox p 1010.
Many sit in seats of authority, but they follow not the rules of equity, as
Gildas complained of us Britains in his time. They Amos. 3.10.
know not, they Malti sunt Recto^es, sed pa^ci iustitiae amatores inueniuntur.
Aug. ad frat. in Erem. Ser 30.
love not to do right. Quid aliud vita curialium quam iniquitas? Salu de Prou.
l. 3. p 84
What is the life of many of them, but even a course of iniquity? Whereas it
is THEIR duty (as a Aug. ad frat. in Erem Ser 35. Decet Iudices plus. De^m
timere quam alij homines, plus honorem Dei quam marsupia plena diligere. Sed
vae vobis o Iudices. Quid inter vos regnat? Auaritiae, mendacium, peruersto
sacrae legis. Ecce acceptio personarum.
good man once said) to fear God, more then other men, to love the glory of
God more then bags of gold, (oh woeful to them that are guilty) what
reigns amongst them but covetousness, lying, perverting of Law, accepting of
persons, and the like? The poor Commons are oppressed by the great Cormorants,
as the poor Christians were in Cyprians time by Inter togas pace rupta forum
litibus mugit insanum Cyp. Ep. 2. l. 2.
Peace-breaking Rulers: Ad hominis corpus vnum supplicia plura quam membra
sunt. Id. Ibid.
one Christian then, felt more several pains, and tortures, then his body had
parts, and members; one innocent man now has more evil reports raised of
him, more Parasites to accuse him, more compla^nts against him, more Law-suites
to vex him, more injuries done him, (and all these undeservedly) then an
hundred others that are more guilty, more faulty. Quis inter haec vero
subueniat? Patronus? praeuaricatur, and decipit. Iudex? sed sententiam vendit.
Qui sedet crimina vindicaturus, admittit: and, vt reus innocens pereat fit
nocens Iudex. Ib.
Who now shall help in this case? Who shall succor this innocent man in the
midst of these injuries? The Magistrate should, but He is corrupted: the Judge
should, but He sets Justice to sale; He that sits to revenge injuries,
runs into injuries: the innocent is condemned without cause, and who is the
cause of it more then he? A Caution.
I do not blame all for some; God forbid I should. For, I know there are some,
who are Judges indeed, their Tamdiu Iudex dicitur, quamdiu iustus putatur. Cas
in Epi.
Justice declares it. Neither do I accuse any in particular. But this I say,
that in our Land, the Law is slacked Hab. 1.4.
. The Non fiunt Coepta partium negotia, quousque marsupia eorum qui causantur,
exhauriant. Isido de Sum. Bono. l 3.
Clyents purse is half consumed, ere he can get his cause begun to be
pleaded: when causes are begun Quando iudicant, non causam, sed dicta
considerant, and negligentes sunt in discussione causarum. Id. ibid.
, they are not thoroughly examined: when they are examined, how strong a let is
Saepe iudices praui cupiditatis causa differunt Iudicium. Id. ibid.
filthy lucre to the ending of them? When they are ended, judgment cannot
pass, and dispatch the wearied Suitor, except Qui recte iudicat, and praemium
inde re munerationis expectat, fraudem in Deum perpetrat, quia iustitiam quam
gratis impartiri debuit, acceptione pecuniae vendit. Id. ibid.
God be defrauded, and the Magistrate, more then is due, extraordinarily
rewarded. O Iudices leaves causas magnas fecistis. Aug ad fratr. in Ere. Sermon 35.
Light causes are made great, great causes are made light. The poor man's good
cause is made bad, and he is made a O patres pauperum, O vere non patres sed
praedones. Quare non patres? Quia vbique per vos opprimuntur, sed si dives
locutus fuerit mox tacuistis, causas vsque ad nubes perauxistis. Id ibid
prey by those that should protect him: the rich man's bad cause is made good,
and the day goes on his side, when it should go against him. Multa scelera
legem, and iudicem effugiunt, and scripta supplicia. Senec. Epist 97 lib. 1. p
799. Tom. 2.
Many sins escape unpunished; Brittania habet iudices protegentes, sed (scil.
protegentes) reos, and latrone, scortantes, creb^o iurant^s, and periurantes,
vouentes, and continu^ propemodum mentientes, belligerentes. Gild. de Excid.
Brit. Orthodox. 1010.
Guilty, theevish, whorish, swearing, periurious, Popish perverse persons are
protected; gifts are loved Hos. 4.18.
, bribes are received, truth is suppressed Diminutae sunt a vobis veritates.
Aug. ad frat. in Erem. Ser. 35.
; Statera dolosa non tantum in mensuratione pecuniae, sed in iudiciaria
discretione tenetur. Quienim aliter causam pauperis, aliter potentis, aliter
sodalis, aliter audit ignoti, statera vtique librat iniqua. Beda. l. 2. super
illud Proverb statera dolosa, etc.
Justice is forced against her nature to hold the Balance of deceit, while
rich men and friends can have their actions heard, poor men and strangers
cannot. Quatuor modis, iudicium humanum peruertitur, timore, cupiditate, odio,
amore. Ansel. de Sim. Mund.
Every way is judgment perverted, corrupted, abused. Now, where the fault of
these mischiefs, these miseries, does lie, I dispute not: sure I am, that they
are too common at this day: and so the eleventh sign of some great judgment,
is as competible, as agreeable to our kingdom, to our age, as ever unto any.

12. Here is vain confidence.
12. What a deal of that same Spes in hominem collocatae fallit and confundit.
Musc. in Psalm. 118. Explan. v. 8.9.
deceiving and confounding hope, of that same vain confidence, is there
amongst us? Some trust in friends, some in strength, some in wealth, some in
their wit, and policy, some in their place and authority, some in an
external profession of Religion, some in the very enemies of Religion, in
Idolatry, the most contrary to Religion; as though such reeds as Egypt, and
Assyria be, were the only pillars to uphold them, the only prop to stay them
up, and the worthiest object of their confidence.

Some kind of persecution in England.
Again, have the friends of Christ as much love shown to them, as they show to
others? It is too evident they have (...). Maxim. de charit lib 4. Orthodox.
567.
not. Although there be not that Hasta illic and gladius, and carnifex prasto
est, vngula effoditus, equuleus extendens, ignis exurens. Cypr. Epist. 2. l. 2.
slaying, fleaing, racking, hacking, burning, and misvsing the poor Saints,
which has been in former times, both here, and elsewhere, nor that storm of
affliction blowing upon them, which has tossed their brethren in our neighbor
Countries, and is not yet calmed: yet nevertheless, whatsoever persecution,
the peace of our times will permit, they are as sure to meet with it, as they
follow Christ. They are men wondered at, as the Prophet speaks Zach. 3.8.
. They are Iustitiae sectatores pro hostibus ducunt, imo vero plus quam pro
hostibus. Lactan. de Just. lib. 5. cap. 9. page 151.
accounted as enemies, yea, worse then enemies. Hoc vero inenarrabile est quod
fit aduersus eos qui male facere nesciunt: and nulli nocentiores habentur, quam
qui sunt vex omnibus innocents. Id ib.
This unspeakable wrong is offered unto them, in that the more innocent they
are, the more hurtful they are taken to be, and such Vti querebatur.
Athenagoras olim, in Legate. pro Christianis. page 3. (...). i. e. criminum
aceruos aduersos nos deblatera^t, quae neque in mentem vnquam nobis veneru^t.
Gesne.
crimes laid unto their charge, as never came so much as into their thoughts.
Oh! How are Statim enim vt quis melior esse tentauerit, deterioris abiectione
Calcatur. Sal. de Pro. l. 3 p. 104. Si bonus est quispiam quasi malus
spernitur. Id p. 105.
they contemned, hated, and murdered Putemus ergo occisos illic non esse
sanctos: sed quid faciemus, quod non sunt long ab occidentibus qui animo
occisionis oderunt. Salu. de Prou. l 8. p. 269.
with the heart; Si quando aliquis Deiservus ad vrbem illam officio diu^i
operis accessit, simul vt in populo apparauit, contumelias, sacrilegia, and
maledictiones excepit. Id ib. p. 270.
reviled, and evil spoken of; scoffed and laughed at, fleered and Nec solum
hoc, sed etiam, improbissimis flagitiosorum hominum cachinnis, and
detestantibus ridentium sibilis, quasi taureis cadebatur. Id. ibid.
hissed at; abused, Sicut olim questisunt Waldenses in Confess fidei suae
Vladislao Hungariae Regi, page 1. Nos homines depressi, contemptibili quoque
nomme falso amicti.
nicknamed; Missae fuerunt per prouincias literae Regiae maiestatis in quibus
nos dixerunt Haereticos, erroneos, and quod rebellia verba diceremus. Apolog.
Waldens p 34.
called Heretics, Rebels, and most injuriously handled. So that, though
there be here no Neroes, nor Boners, no Herod's, nor Gardiners, acting their
parts in bloody Tragedies, against the members of Christ Jesus (what desire
some may have that way, I leave to the searcher of all hearts) yet there are
Gen 21.9.
Ismaels, 1 Samuel 22.9.10.
Doegs, Isa. 38.13.
Rabshakehs, 2 Chronicles. 23.13.
Athaliahs, Est. 3.8.
Hamans, who are not ashamed (in open field) to Ier. 9.3.
bend their tongues like bows against them, and in open audience of they care
not whom, to shoot out the darts of bitter words, to harm them, besides the
wiles they frame, and lies they pen, to work their shame, and confusion. Call
you not THIS, persecution?

14 We have not condoled afflicted Joseph as we should.
In the 14. place. A great many of us are much unlike the members of Christ. Is
enim Sanctorum mos est, vt plurimum afflictis afficiantur, and compatiantur.
Chrysostom: in Genesis Hom. 43. c. 19.
They are wont to take to heart, the afflictions of the Church, and to mourn
with those that mourn. We do not so. There is great need both of Lachrymis
magis quam verbis opus est, ad exprimendum dolorem, quo corporis nostri plaga
deflenda est, quo, populi aliquando numerosi, multiplex lamentanda iactura est.
Cypr. Ser. de Lapsis. fol. 113.
words, and of tears, to express our grief for the losses, and crosses which
the mystical body of the Church has sustained, since the troubles began in
the Belgian-Countries, yet so far are we from tears, that we seldom have
thoughts, seldomer words (except it be for fashion, and noveltie) about the
breaches of Sion, about the troubles of our brethren, to show that we do
Sympathize, and condole them. If that question should be renewed, which an
Cypr. de Laps. fol. 114.
Ancient once made. Quis sic durus ac ferrtus, quis sic fraterna charitatis
oblitus, qui inter suoriu^ multiformes ruinas, and lugubres, ac multo squalore
deformes reliquias constitutus, siccos oculos tenere preualeat? Nec eru^pente
statim fletu prius gemitus suos Lachrymis quam voce depromat?
Who is so hard, so iron-hearted, so void of charity, as to keep dry his
eyes, and his heart without sighs, in the midst of those miseries his brethren
meet with? I may answer with a Negative retortion; Who is NOT so iron-hearted,
and void of compassion? Where is the man, or woman, who with Nehemiah, Neh. 2.1.
looks sad in the presence of the King? Who with Jeremy do pen songs of
Lamentation? Who can truly say (as that good Martyr once did) Cum iacentibus
iacere me credo. Iaculis illis grassantis in mic^ mea membra simul pe^cussa
sunt: saeuientes gladij per mea viscera transierunt Immunis and liber a
persecutionis incursis fuisse non potest animus: in prostratis fratribus, in me
prostrauit affectus. Cypr. de Laps. Ser. 5.
In the foyles of my brethren, I take my self foiled, the blows that their
enemies give THEM, smite my body: the swords with which their enemies slay
THEM, do pierce MY bowels: my BODY indeed is NOT amongst them while they are
thus persecuted: my SOVLE is, and mine affection cannot but participate with
their affliction. Who (I say) are thus? A caution.
I know indeed there is such affection betwixt the Est quidam consensus
electorum in cordibus ipsorum, et Sympathia veluti membroru^ in corpore
Christi. Qua propter vbi pius a potentibus huiusmundi adfligitur, semper sunt
viri boni qui si nihil aliud possint, in cord tamen illi fa^ent, and causam
ipsius Domino precibus commendant Muscul in Psalm. 118. Obs. v. 7.
Elect in their hearts, that when the Powers of the world do rise against
them, they cannot but condole the afflicted, and express their pity toward
them, by their prayers for them, when they cannot show it any other way, for
want of liberty, or ability: therefore I dare not say, All in England do
forget the affliction of Joseph. Nay (blessed be God) we have those who would
not spare their own blood for Sions good, if they should be called unto it.
Yet this, I say (and with grief I speak it) there is a generation amongst us,
so far (...). Is quem olierius inopia, atque agritudo commiseratione non
tangit, fera sane est rationis expers, perperam humanam indutus formam,
ipsamque naturam praua voluntate fallers, ac denique feris ipsis atque belluis
immanior. Aster. Hom. de Diu. and Laz p 8. and Philip. Reuben. Interp.
degenerated from the nature of Man, into the nature of Beasts, as that, for
want of compassion, to their own kind by creation, which are in affliction,
they are more merciless then beasts. (...). Aster. loc. cit.
Let but a swine be slain, the fellows will come crying unto it: (...). Id.
ibid.
kill an Ox, the Oxen will bellow about him: (...). Id. ib.
catch a Crane in a net, the whole flock of Cranes by their houering, and
howling will declare they lament it. But these persons ( (...). Id. ibid.
strange to consider, that man endued with a reasonable soul, made at first
after Gods own image, should be so incompassionate) can hear of the broiles,
and battles, of the murders, and massacres done upon the bodies of their
brethren, and not be once touched, nor affected with the same.

It is without all question, that the Papists amongst us bewail not the
Church, nay, rather like the Edomites, and Esavites in the days of Obadiah,
they rejoice over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction, and
speak proudly against them Obad. 12.
.

Again, touching the fifteenth sign, Experientia didicerat, etc. non facile
quenquam posse euadere quin libenter assentatorum canticis porrigat aures: and
laudatorum modulationibus delectetur. Cypr. de leiun. and Tent. Christ. f. 5
Experience proves that there is scarce any one amongst us but loves to be
soothed, and delights to Quicquid in nos adulatio sine pudore congessit tanquam
debitum prendimus, optimos nos esse sapientissimos affirmantibus assentimur,
cum sciamos illos saepe mentiri. Senec. Epist 59. l. 1. p. 632.
arrogate to himself his as due, whatsoever flattery casts upon him, be it
never so false, and untrue. Mitiss^mum ille se in ipsis supplicijs audit, in
rapinis, liberalissimum, in ebrietatibus, ac lib: dinibus temperatissimum. Id.
ibid.
Men will be cruel, covetous, drunkards, unclean; and yet they love to be
told, that they are merciful, liberal, sober, and chaste. Such faithful
friends as will tell us of our faults, we cannot away with; but let Parasites
extol us to the skies, for Si inuenimus, qui nos bonos viros dicat, qui
prudentes, qui sanctos, agnoscimus. Id. ibid.
good, wise, and holy persons, them we like, them 15. We love to be flattered.
we make of, yea, Nomullis assentator amico gratior est. Arist. Moral. Eudem.
l. 7. c. 5. Tom. 5. p. 444.
more then of our friends. And albeit it be very necessary for men to be
admonished (as the Senec. Epi. 92. l. 1. Necessariu^ est admoneri.
Heathen himself could confess) yet they cannot endure reproof, Oh it is as
bitter to them as gall and worm wood. They are much like the Greeks whom
Theodoret writes to, (...). Theod. ad Graec. Infid. De Prou. Dei. Sermon. 6. ^.
100. 101.
who will praise the Physicians of the body, for taking lances into their
hands, for rifling their wounds, for gaging their sores to the bottom, and
applying such medecines, as their Art prescribes: But the Physician of the
soul (be he a faithful Preacher, or some private admonisher) will they
dispraise, disgrace, and stomach at, if He rifles their spiritual sores, and
deals plainly, faithfully, and roundly with them for their sins. Children
can now scarce endure their Parents to reprove, Servants their Masters,
Subjects their Governors, Friends their Neighbors; and as for many of the
Great ones, they cannot endure Gods Messengers to speak against their courses,
be they never so contrary to Gods law, never so prejudicial to Gods glory,
and the good of those whose bodies and souls they stand charged withal. They
that applaud them, do they approve of; as for Michaiah, clap up that fellow,
feed him with the bread and and water of affliction 1 King. 22.27. 16.
Hypocrisy in England.
.

16. There are hypocrites amongst us; Sub magno professionis nomine viuimus and
positi Religione peceamus. Salu. de Prou. Dei. l. 4. p. 119.
we make a profession, and do contrary to Religion; we Nos qui Christiani esse
dicim^r, si simile aliquid Barbarorum impuritatibus facimus grauius erramus.
bear the name of Christians, and ( Atroc. us enim su sancti nominis
professione peccamus. Id ibid.
which is the more heinous) we do as bad as Barbarians. Let but the truth of
God, and the works of men be judge (as Operi nostro debemus credere non
opinioni, rationi non libidini, veritati, non voluntati. Id. ib.
it is necessary they should) and it will appear I write no lie. Aude.
themines improbissimi, iustitiae facere mentionem, qui se^as immanitate
vincunt, qui placidissimum Dei gregem vast^nt, etc. L^ctan. (...)
Some do counterfeit righteousness, and equity, and that they seek the peace
of the Church, when yet in violence, and cruelty they exceed beasts; wolvishly
spoiling and doing all the mischief they can to the Church. Some Qui curios
simulant and Baccthanalia vivunt. Iuuen. Satyr. 2.
counterfeit temperance, and are most intemperate. Some counterfeit honesty,
and square dealing with their neighbors, and are most deceitful Semperenim
simulationibus vtitur fraudulentus. Marul. ^u. l. 1. c. 15. p. 29.
. Some have oil in their mouth, and war in their heart; pretending love to
their brethren, and intending mischief against them. How many have we that
are Tamdiu hypocrita clarus apparet quam diu assistit spectantium multitudo,
imo nec tunc quidem, tunc ce^ram omnibus clarus est. Norunt enim videntium
plurimi, qui sit, quemnam esse ^e simulet.
no longer holy, then they are in the Congregation; by such as know them not,
thought to be very devout; by those that know them, known what they are, even
to be nothing less then what they seem to be. Yea, Quotum enim quemque
inuenies in ECCLESIA non aut ebriosum, aut helluonem, aut adulterum, aut
fornicatorem, aut Raptorem, aut ganeonem, aut le^ronem, aut homicidam? Salu. de
Prou. lib. 3. page 81.
drunkards, rioters, russiians, adulterers, fornicators, extorters, revellers,
thieves, and murderers, will many times be found in the Temple, and seem to
be as holy as the best for the present, but Consummatis solennibus sacris
statim ad consuetudinaria studia discurrunt. Salu de Prou l 3. 83. sup. cit.
when the public exercises are done, they appear what they are in their
colors, and fall to their wicked and wonted courses again? How many are there
that will Execrantur public, quod occulte agunt. Id. ibid.
speak against that in public, which they love to practice in private? Are
not these persons hypocrites? A caveat.
I know indeed that in some, there is a correspondency betwixt their
profession, and their practice. As they Hic est eorum actus, quae and
professio, ac per hac nihil mirum est, si agunt quod profitentur. Salu. de
Prou. l 3. p. 84.
practice wickedness, so (like brazen faced ones) they are not ashamed to
profess wickedness: as they profess piety, so they have the conscience to
practice piety: yet, such a difference and contrariety is there betwixt the
religious profession, and outrageous conversation in many others, that we
Ministers have just cause to complain, as Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 6. Hom. 21.
one once did: Gemere prorsus hoc loco, and amarum quiddam immugire nos
conuenit: Non solum enim hypocritas imitamur, sed illos quoque simulatione ipsa
transimus.
Oh grievous to think it, Oh lamentable to speak it, we do not only IMITATE
Stage Players (who counterfeit other men's persons) but we also EXCEED them in
dissembling. Neither do we only mock Sub religionis titulo Deum ludimur.
Salu. de Prou. l. 3. in fine.
GOD (if he would be mocked) by our hypocrisy, but also every man (almost)
hunteth his Mich. 7.2.
Brother in a net, such abundance of deceit and consenage is there amongst us.
Deceit in measures, deceit in merchandise, deceit in weights, deceit in
wares; deceit in men, deceit in women; deceit in strangers, deceit in
neighbors; so that a man now can scarce trust a friend, or put any confidence
in a guide.

Let Exper^ence show how guilty of the 17. sin England is.
In the 17. place; whereas it is the duty of every Minister to be no striker,
nor brawler 1 Timothy 3.3.
, I would to God, that experience did not show, that even some amongst them
(then Nihil fetidius, nihil damnosius, nihil leuius, nihil turpius in pastore
furio sitate. Aug. ad frat. in Erem. Ser. 36.
which what is more shameful, more fearful?) do delight ( Non licet
dispensatori furiosum esse. Id. ib.
contrary to their duty) to rage against, and with the evil servant Mat.
24.49.
, to smite (with evil language at least) their fellow servants in the
Ministry, who are more faithful then themselves. I would (I say) experience
did not prove it: for then surely, many a good Messenger of the Lord should not
have such cause as he has to complain against his envious brethren, as
Augustine did against Arrius and Fortunatus; Quia verum eis dixi, ideo in eremo
infidiat mihi posuerunt. Aug. ad frat. in Erem. Ser. 36. 18. Abuse of the
Tongue reigns in England.
Because I speak the truth, they set snares for me, and by all means they
seek to molest me as much as they can.

18. Is not the tongue abused amongst us? yes, yes. 1. By lying.
Our Land (as it was once said of Niniveh) is full of lies Nah. 3.1.
. Truth (the very Veritas sermonum nobilitas. Synes Orat. de Regn. p. 2.
grace and ornament of speech) is fled so far from the lips of many, that
Aliud habet animus, aliud resonat sermo. Optatus.
their hearts think one thing, and their tongues tell another. Oh how happy
were it for our Land, if all amongst us (yea, that profess Religion) did
justly deserve that commendation which an Cyrus Minor.
Heathen had, of whom it is said, that with great faithfulness he did keep
his word, neither was he ever noted to be taken in an untruth, or in the
least step tending to falsehood. 2. By swearing.
Oaths abound amongst us; Plures inuenias quia saepius peierent, quam qui
omnino non iurant. Salu. de Prou. lib. 3. p. 75. Quis est omnino hominum
praeter paucos, qui non ad hoc semper Christi nomen, in ore habeat vt peieret.
Id. lib. 4. p. 125.
A man may find more such as do for swear, and swear falsely, then such as
swear not at all. Optima fide seruauit faedera, and pacta, and nunquam, nec
vnquam in eo mendatij vestigium, animaduersum, aut ^otatum est. Strigel.
Comment. in Justin. hist. p. 180.
Besides the idle, superstitious, vain, and lesser oaths (which yet are so
great that they are able to damn a man) it is a very ordinary and usual thing
both among rich and poor, noble and ignoble, not to spare the sacred name of
the Ibi homo est mor^uus per quem iuratur, hic Deus viuus qui peieratur. Salu.
de Prou: l. 4. p. 127.
glorious God of heaven and earth: not to spare the names of Vnde etiam
pervulgatum hoc fere, and apud Nobiles, and ignobiles, Sacramentum est, PER
CHRISTVM: per Christi hoc facio, per Christu^ hoc ago, etc. Id. ibid.
Christ Jesus the sweet Savior of the elect; but to take them into their
black mouths, and tear them with their blasphemous tongues. Three more
evils of the Tongue amongst us.
Again, as touching three other evils of the tongue, slandering, cursing, and
backbiting, wha: more common then these? Cuius non sermo maledictio est. Id.
l. 2. p. 75. Quis est qui conuitio suo neminem laedat, qui silentio os
coerceat, ne in amaritudinem maledictionis crumpat. Id. page 79.
whose mouth (at some time or other) does not speak ill of his neighbor?
Esuriendi libido terminum habet, detrahendi libido terminum non habe^ Ibid. 75.
The hungriest stomach will be satisfied, but the desires, the delight to
detract, that some have, are insatiable. If they begin to back-bite, they have
never done. 4. Giving evil Counsel in England.
Fourthly, that there are such as give evil counsel amongst us, it is too
apparent: whence else could it be, that some fall to idolatry, some to
harlotrie, some to swilling, some to stealing, some to killing, and the like,
by the persuasions of evil companions? 5. There is needless silence here.
Finally, as concerning flattering and needless silence, soothing in sin,
and fearing to speak when Gods glory does call for it: the contemning of
piety, the favoring of popery, the winking at iniquity and other notorious
vices, are arguments too many to prove that these abuses of the tongue are too
too common in this Kingdom. ^ Caution.
I deny not, that the Lord has here his number of faithful admonishers; and
the Land is much refined since Gildas his time; yet, the truth of that which he
wrote concerning the manners of his time, is too evident in our time. So that
with him we may conclude: Brittania habet sacerdotes, sed nonnullos, plebem ob
peccata non corripientes, sceleratos diuites absque vllo verecundiae respectu
sicut Caelestes angelos venerantes, nefanda populi scelera, tacentes. Gild. in
Ord. Ecclesiast. corrept. in Orthodox. page 1018.
Britain indeed has men in place and authority to speak, and to speak
faithfully, but some of these reprove not the people for their sins, speak
not against their grievous enormities, and without all respect of modesty, or
honesty applaud the GREAT ONES, as though they were Angels, be their lives and
doings never so wicked. Just like those in Malachies days, that say, Mala.
2.17.
every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord.

19. Strange Accidents.
19. Furthermore, because of late we have not had many strange accidents amongst
us (I dare not say not any) therefore I pass that over.

And I would I could pass over the 20. Idolatry in England.
twentieth sign also, to wit, Idolatry: but I cannot, I may not. For although
our Land (like Judah) be not full of Idols Isa. 2.8.
, yet it is to be wished that it were more empty of Idolaters. What shall I say
of the whole troop of unregenerate ones, who (walking the lewdest and broadest
way) are more in number by far then Gods people be? are not they Idolaters?
it cannot be denied. For, Sicut bonus vnum habet Deum quem colit, ita mali
multos habent Deos quia multos scil. voluptates, multa desideria vana,
passiones diuersas quibus seruiunt. Annot. Incerti Authoris in Psalm. 15. in
Orthod. Patrum p. 1168.
whereas a good man has but one God to worship, and serve alone: They do
worship as many gods as they have lusts to serve, making every sin they take
pleasure in, a several Idol. Again, what say we of covetous persons? They
are Idolaters by Saint Paul's verdict Ephesians. 5.
and there is no question to be made of it. For Conueniunt siquidem and in
materia, and affectu, Idolatra^ and auarus. Vterque enim aurum praeponit in
affectu suo. Caiet in Colos. c. 3. Col. 156. I.
a covetous man and an Idolater do agree both in matter, and affection; both
of them preferring gold before God in their affections. Fitque ei (scil. auaro)
per omnia, vt alijae venture, ita huic and aurum and spes lucri pro Deo.
Cassian. l. 7. c. 7.
As the voluptuous man makes his belly his god, so does the miser his gain.

Besides, what say we of will-worshippers? They do more worship the fond
fantasies of their own brain, the superstitious customs of other men (which
they make their rules in the service of God) then the true God, whom they
pretend to worship: and so it must needs follow, that they also are guilty of
Idolatry. And is this all? All? when Romish Factors roue up and down amongst
us, to seduce the simple, to beguile unstable souls? When there is such
gadding to Mass? When Neuters think and talk, that Popery and our Religion
may be easily reconciled, when as yet it is as easy to reconcile heaven and
hell, God and the Devil? When as there are such a company of Papists and
Recusants amongst us? What! account we not these Idolaters? Who are, or ever
have been Idolaters, if these be not? A Caution.
The Gospel indeed is preached amongst us, as purely, as powerfully, as in any
age (except the primitive times of the Church) and as ever it was in any place.
We have no cause to complain, as Bernard. Apolog. ad Guliel. Abbat. Dicam,
dicam, praesumptuosus dicar, sed verum dicam Quomodo lux mundi obtenebrata est?
Quomodo Sal, terrae infatuatum est? fol. 306. B.
one once did, Our light is darkened, our salt is unsavory. His Majesty has
both protested the maintaining of the Gospel, and written against Antichrist:
Blessed be God for all this. But yet the Lord of his infinite mercy keep us
from a toleration of this sin, least Isreal's glory be Hos. 10.5.6.
carried unto Assyria for a present, and WE (as it was once said of the King
of Samaria Verse. 7.
) be cut off as the some upon the water.

21. Lesser punishments have lighted upon us.
In the 21. place, for lesser punishments, may we not take up the complaint of
the Prophet? The days of visitation are come Hos. 9.7.
, the days of recompense are begun already. First, concerning Famine: Albeit,
we cannot say that the seed is rotten under the clod, or the corn withered
Joel. 1.17.
upon the ground; for (God be thanked) there is great hope of a plentiful
Harvest Anno. 1623.
. Albeit we have no cause to complain; How do the beasts groan? the herds of
cattle are perplexed because they have no pasture, and the flocks of sheep
are desolate Joel. 1.18.
. For there is store of cattle to feed US, and store of pasture to feed the
cattle. Oh that we had hearts to be thankful accordingly! Yet this may we
say, and thus have we just cause to complain. The corn is wasted, the oil
is a languishing Joel. 1.10.
; and there is not that plenty, neither in City, nor Country, that has been
in former times. I list not to meddle with our Military munition; though I
could say something, because men for the most part have more skill to toss a
Pot, then a Pike; more courage to fight a battle for Bacchus in an Inn,
Tavern, or Alehouse, then a field for Mars, in defense of God, the King, and
their Country, if they should be called unto it. And who knows it not, that
the cunning Artificer goes down the wind, that Trading (a great prop to our
kingdom) grows daily to decay? Though there be some voluntary Bankrupts
amongst us, who break without need, ruinating of purpose other men's stocks to
raise their own. For whom it were to be wished there were as severe a law as
for thieves and robbers, (then whom they are a great deal worse) yet some (be
they never so honest) cannot hold, the times are so hard, but necessity
constraines them to give over that course of living, wherein they have been
instruments of much good to the Commonwealth. Again, Youth were never more
saucy, yea never more Otiosa iuuentus impudenter educata omni ferocissima
bestia immanior est. Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 11. Hom. 38.
sauagely saucy, and people never more lawless Nullus de legibus metus est.
Cyp. l. 2. Epist. 2.
: the Ancient are scorned (...).
, the honorable are contemned, the Magistrate is not dreaded De questore, de
iudice pauor nullus. Cypr. loc. cit. 22. We are incorrigible, impenitent.
. Add hereunto wars, and rumors of wars, that sound daily in our ears,
which our brethren have tasted of, and smarted under already.

To conclude all, notwithstanding all these lesser evils, all the former signs
of some future, some greater misery; yet how incorrigible, how impenitent do
we remain? Gods providence toward us profits us not; by him we are chastened,
and yet we are not bettered Sed cum haec tanta fierent Caelestis cura non
profuit. Adhibita saepissime est coercitio, sed emendatio non est secuta Salu.
de Prou. lib. 1.
. He spares us, he opens his bountiful hand unto us, what good does he not
offer us? and all to amend us, and yet we abuse this goodness of his, not
considering that it is to lead to repentance Romans 2.4.
. Well, to end this point (least the Arbitror, imo certus sumfastidiosum
plurimis styli huius, prolixitatem fore, maxim quia morum nostrorum vitia
castigat. Sal. l. 8. Circa init. Enimuero vitia carpens, scio meossendere
vitiosos. Bern. Apol. ad Gul. Ab. fol. 307. F. G.
detection of our vices make my speech seem tedious to some) consider I
beseech you of these things, roll them in your minds again and again. The
signs are worth the thinking on, and how contemptible to England these signs
be, is worth the taking notice of. And do but we think on them as we ought,
and it will furnish us with better skill, to foresee and foreknow some evil to
be approaching against us (God alone knows what it is) then all the threed-bare
rules of Prognosticators, and judicial Astrologers can. I have done with this
point. Go we on now to the last branch of the first part of the Text; viz.
the fruit of this foresight.

And hides himself. 2. Branch of the first part.
Look how a French Histor. 1408.
discreet Pilot does provide for an approaching storm: So does our Wiseman
here spoken of. He has not only a prudent foresight of the evil, but also
a provident forecast against the evil. Provision is the fruit of his
praevision.

About the meaning of the words all agree not. Some expound them thus;

Peltanus.
Upon the foresight which a Wiseman has of the great dangers that attend
places of dignity, he obscureth himself and does what he can to keep out of
such places. I would all that run into places either of Magistracy, or
Ministry, before they are sent, would take notice, and make use of this meaning.

Hieron. Bedae. Hugo. Dyonisius. Carthus. and alij.
Others thus; The crafty Rulers in Christ's time forseeing what troubles might
come by professing Christ, cunningly concealed their opinion of Christ, and
their affection to Christ from the rest of their fellows.

But we are to search after some other sense, if we mind to proceed according
to the tenor of that which has been handled already, and would have things
hang orderly together in the Text, as they should.

So the 70. Interpreters. (...).
Some render the words thus; Is greatly (or sufficiently) instructed, or
admonished.

In the Hebrew text they are as they are here translated, and usually in the
Latin Translations.

To hide has diverse significations, sometimes to conceal or to keep any
thing from the sight and knowledge of others. Sometimes not to confess, see
Pro. 28 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper. Sometimes it
signifies to forgive, Psalm. 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins.

But here, hiding a man's self is as much as putting a man's self under
shelter and protection. Such an hiding a man's self, as that he may not be
hurt. And therefore the (...) *.
Original word comes of a Root which both in the Nam (...) Chaldaice; (...)
A^rabice significat non solum abscondit velauit, etc. Verum etiam protexit,
defendit.
Chaldee and Arabian tongue, signify to protest as well as to hide, to defend
as well as to cover.

Doct.
The thing which we have to note from hence is this; That a prudent Christian
provides a shelter, and protection for himself against the evil day when he
sees the times dangerous, and threatening some future Calamity he seeks
Sanctuary, to which when the evil comes he may be take himself, and in
which he may be safe. This is that which Solomon makes good not only Prou.
27.12. where this text is repeated word for word, but also in the 28. Chapter,
Verse. 28.
where he says, When the wicked rise, men hide themselves, that is, when such
dangerous times be that either the Enemies of the truth do rise against the
Godly, or evil men are raised to places of command, (a notable mean to bring
judgments upon a people.) then good men, wisemen, seek Protection for
themselves as carefully as they can. Noah took sanctuary when the flood was
coming, by preparing an Arc for the saving of himself, and his family Genesis
6.22.7. Heb. 11.7.
Lot sought a shelter when Sodom was near burning Genesis 19.16.
. Memorable (to this purpose) are the Examples of David, of Paul. The one was
in danger of his life by the means of Saul, the other was in great hazard by
the lying in weight of the Jews, and both of them, (like wisemen) did hide
themselves, and seek shelter by the use of those means, which did serve Gods
providence for their safety 1 Samuel 20.5. Chapter 22.1. Chapter 23.14. Chapter 26.1. Act.
23.17.18.19. etc.
.

Use 1.
And wherefore serves this point, but first for our direction and instruction
what to do in the days of danger. And what must we do? Not as did Aristippus
a Philosopher, who, Cum aliquan, do nauigaret, didicissetque nauem esse
pyraticum, accepti aurum numerat, and lapsun e manibus, iactauit in Mare.
Laert. l. 2. c. 8.
when he was in peril of his life in a Pirates ship, took gold into his hand,
told it, threw it, and let it fall into the Sea, thinking by that means to
save himself. Not as Meton the Astronomer, who, (...). Aelian. Var. hyst l.
13. c. 12.
to save himself from an imminent danger, fired the house wherein he dwelt;
Nor as David who feigned himself mad before Achish King of Gath 1 Samuel 21.13.
, when he thought his life to be in hazard. But like a prudent man, (who has
his wits about him, and Grace within him) we must hide our selves, betake our
selves to some Refuge, some place of protection: that so, if the evil time,
Amos 5.13. V. 18.20.
and day of darkness Cant. 2.14.
should come, we may be found where Christ finds his Dove his Church, in the
Clifts of the Rock, in the Secret place of the Stayres Zach. 5.4.
.

If any demand what this refuge, this shelter is. I answer, not Gorgeous
chambers enclosed with walls of stone, with seilings of Cedar, for Gods wrath
can weaken the strongest house, and Eccles. 7.12.
consume the stones, and timber thereof; not iron Chests of earthly treasures,
or abundance of wealth and worldly possessions, for though (as the Preacher
speaks) money be a defense Pro. 11.4.
: Yet riches avail not in the day of wrath (...)
he that flows for the present, may easily be at a low ebb in a moment v.
Aster.
; not honor, and dignity, for that is a silly shelter which a man may have to
day and be without to morrow Iom. de Oecon. ^niq. p. 17. 18. (...)
; not yet the favor, and protection of great persons, for favor is Deceitful
Pro. 31.30.
, and he, that makes that his trust, leans upon a broken staff. What then?
Hear Solomon resolve you, The NAME of the Lord is a strong Tower, the
Righteous run to it and is safe Pro 18.10. Rules of direc^ion, how to ^ide
our selves
. The protection of the Almighty, the shadow of the most high, is the shelter
that we must seek after. The general Rule.
Now to the end that that may be our shelter, we must withdraw our selves, for
there is no hiding without withdrawing Special rules ^ubordinate to ^he
general.
. And because withdrawing is an action, or motion: and every motion has its
twofold term Terminus A quo ad quid.

Its FROM what To what.
therefore we must with draw our selves FROM something, and TO something 1.
Special Rule with the several branches.
. The things which we must withdraw our selves from are two 1. The Sinners
against whom the Plague comes. 2. The sins for which the Plague comes.


1. Branch.
First we must withdraw our selves from the SINNERS against whom judgments are
threatened. We must take no delight in evil company. They that by their example
do seek to corrupt us, and put sin into our souls by our eyes; (...).
Aster. Hom. de Oecon. Iniq. p. 22.
They that by their tongues go about to infect us, and in still sin into our
souls by our ears, must we abhor and fly from, as we would from some
venomous beast that spits poison at us, that seeks to destroy us. Lot withdrew
himself from the company of the Sodomites, and he was protected from the
calamity of the Sodomites. The Christians at Jerusalem a little before the
Sacking of that City, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
withdrew themselves from the sinful, and secure number of the Jews, and were
hidden from the wrath that fell upon them. Qui libenter vitusis copulatur, licet
moribus dissimilis sit, fauere tame^ vitijs eorum, videtur. Maris. Evang. l. 7.
c. 7. p. 348.
Come out of Babylon my people (says the holy Ghost Apoc. 18.4.
) that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plague. A caution.
Civil commerce with evil men I grant a man may have, and cannot but have so
long as he lives; neither must we (as the manner of Anabaptists is) refrain
the assemblies of the Saints, because gross offenders are mingled amongst
them, nor abstain from Gods public Ordinances, because notorious sinners do
come unto them. But so to be among the wicked, as to love their fellowship in
the works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11.
, to be brethren with them in evil Genesis 49.5.
, to flatter them in their evil courses, to take pleasure in their company,
so to favor their vices, though our own behavior does differ from theirs,
this kind of associating (I say) with them, do I dissuade from: For Sicut a
s^cietate malorum non abhorret, ita minime mirum erit, si poenae quoque eoru^
particeps efficietur. Id. ibid.
if we do not thus abhor and shun their company, if we be without shade in
the day of their misery, what wonder will it be? Are swaggerers, swearers,
gamesters, gibers, and other kinds of wicked persons thy only mates, the
chief companions thou take delight in, and yet think thou to escape in
the perilous times? Thou deceivest thy self I tell thee, (...). Greg. Nyss^
de Virg. c. 4. p. 56.
he cannot escape the sulphurious shower of brimstone and fire, that loves to
dwell amongst the men of Sodom; (...). Id. ibid.
neither can he shake off the bands of Egypt, that does not forsake the land of
Egypt: what company Judgment finds thee glued to, accordingly will it seize
upon thee. Be not therefore found in the company of the proud (for so David
and Solomon do call the wicked Psalm. 94. 2 Psalm. 119 21.51.78.12^ Pro 8.18 Chapter
13.10 Ch 15.25.
) mingle not thy self with this dust, this chafe Psalm. 2.4.
, this stubble Mal. 4.
. For Ob hoc quoque supe^bos fuge, neforas du^ illis iungeris* cum ipsi, simul
turbine diuinae vindicta* inuoluaru* Marul* (...)
if thou do, assure thy self that when the whirle-winde of Gods wrath does
surprise THEM, it will wind THEE in for company, and which way can thou
escape it?

2. Branch of the 1. Special ^ Rule with its ^ particulars.
Secondly, as from the sinners against whom, so likewise from the sins for
which tribulation comes, must we withdraw our selves. And this is done three
ways: First, by mourning for those sins. Secondly, by not acting them.
Thirdly by keeping our selves from being any way accessory unto them.

1. Mourning. Flere etiam debemus populorum peccata quasi nostra vuluera. Aug.
ad frat in Erem. Ser. 11. A. Quotidie fleas peccata quae commisisti, and quae
committere proximos videas. Id. ibid.
First we must mourn for the abominations of the times; that the Land is so
unthankful, that most sorts are so sinful, that the Word is so contemned,
that the offers of grace are so despised, the mercies of God so abused, the
Sabbaths so profaned, fawning Parasites so much respected (...). Aster. Hom.
de Oecon. Iniq. page 25.
, afflicted Joseph so little regarded, great men's vices so bepainted, and by
swearing, lying, slandering, and every way else the tongue abused; that there
is so much Idolatry, luxury, security, and all manner of vanity amongst us,
it must go to our hearts, and grieve our souls. This is another way to get
under Gods wing, and to be protected in the days of danger. I trembled (says
Habbacuk) that I might rest in the day of trouble Hab. 3.16.
. Jeremy mourned for the sins of Jerusalem Ier. 14.17.
, and how well fared He for that in the Land of Babylon? Whereas the Jews
(who mourned not) lay naked, and open to the Babylonians fury; HE (good man)
Ier. 39.11. etc.
was covered from the dint of their cruelty, and was very well provided for, in
a very evil time. Think on this thou that mournest not for the sins of the
Land, and consider how little cause thou have to expect protection in the day
of destruction, unless thy heart soften, and thy soul grieve in secret, more
then yet it does.

2. Refrayning the acts of sin.
Secondly, to withdraw our selves from the sins of the times, we must refrain
the practice of them. It is no where to be found in the whole book of God,
that ever any who delighted to commit such sins as have brought plagues upon
Kingdoms, did (without repentance) escape untouched when the plague came, or
were hid safe under the shadow of the Almighty. Noah escaped drowning in the
evil time that the old world saw, but Noah was upright Genesis 6.9.
, did not partake with the world in its corruption and violence. Lot escaped
burning in the dismal day that Sodom saw, but Lot did not live like the
Sodomites. Ier. 40.4.
Jeremy escaped chaining in the time of Judah's captivity, but Jeremy
refrained his feet from the backsliding steps of the rebellious Jews. Whereas
on the contrary, neither have Princes been covered, nor Prophets been
sheltered, nor Rich ones protected in such miserable times, but have all gone
to ruin when they have been found as actors in those evils that occasioned
that ruin. Zedekiah who was bound in chains, and had his eyes put out 2 King.
^5.7. Ier. 39.7.
. The Priests and Nobles that were slain at Riblah 2 King. 25.19.20.21.
, and the rest of the Jews that were carried captives, do very evidently
manifest this. Will thou go on in wicked courses, make no conscience to shun
those sins that procure Gods curses, and yet make account to shroud thy self
under Gods wing in the day of his wrath? I tell thee thou expectest that which
is very unlikely, yea impossible except thou repentest, and ceasest to do those
deeds of darkness, which as yet thou take such pleasure, and delight in.

Thirdly, 3 Denying consent to sin: or care to keep our selves vnaccessary
thereunto.
If we would withdraw our selves from those sins that do prognosticate some
general judgment, and so would be safe, we must no ways consent, nor be
willingly accessarie to those sins. For as Nec alienus a crimine, cuius
consensu, licet non a se admissum crime^ public legitur. Cypr. Epist. 7. l. 2
fol. 32. Assensus enim est participatio. Ambros. Tom. 5. p. 179.
He is as well guilty of sin, who consents to it, as He that commits
it, so are both Scimus quod similis poena maneat facientes and consentientes.
Bernard Ser. de Not. Ioh. Bap. fol. 46. K.
committers and consenters worthy of like punishment: and as little protection
in the evil day can the one look for as the other.

Now because a man may be accessory to the sins of the times four ways; 1.
(...). Aster. Hom. page 74.
By not stretching out the sword against them, nor laboring to restrain them
when he is in place to do it. 2. By Assentire est, si, cum possit
reprehendere, taceat. Ambr. in Epist. ad Romans c. 1. To. 5. 179. Est enim
consentire, silere, cu^ arguere possis. Bernar. in Ser. de Not. Bapt. f. 46. K.
Miseratio (in praedicatore sine iustitia^) peccandi praestat audaciam. Marul.
Evang l. 6. c. 13 p 314.
not preaching the Word against them, and fearing to reprove them when he is
called unto it 3. By Ita est, vt qui fomi^e^ praebea^t delictis eorum: ideoque
dignum est, vt pari crimine rei habeantur. Ambros. in Epist. ad Rom c. 1. To 5.
p. 179.
provoking unto them. 4. By concealing them. Therefore all these ways must be
carefully shunned by all sorts in their several places.

First Magistrates in their places, must as well tune the song of Judgment as
of Mercy Psalm. 101.1.
: they must be a terror to evil doers, their care must be that Judgment may
run down like waters, and Righteousness as a stream Amos. 5.24.
, to purge away and bear down before it the filth, and dross of those gross
sins, wherewith our land is defiled. If either the complement of a Jesuit,
the brag of a Papist, the smooth tongue of a Flatterer, the sower tauntes of a
Flouter, the stern looks of the mighty, the bribes of the Wealthy, the
entreaties of a Yoakefellow, of a Child, of a Servant, of a Friend, hired (it
may be) by the wages of iniquity, or any thing else, do make them remiss in
their places, and so, accessory to those vices of running to Mass, of breaking
the Sabbaths, of abusing Gods blessings, etc. for which vengeance hanges over
our heads: with what confidence can they hope to be protected, if that
vengeance should fall down, and the viols of the same be powered forth, according
to our deserts? David professes more then once, in the Psalms, that God was
his refuge Psalm. 91.2.
, and that he did believe, he would be his refuge, in the day of trouble, but
the same David was feign to behave himself faithfully in his place, by rooting
out, and cutting off all wicked doers Psalm. 101.8.
, with the same sword of justice and authority.

Secondly, the Minister in his place must be far from flattery Ab
assentatione procul abesse peccatorum castigatorem decet. Marul. Evan l. 6. c.
14. Neminem seculi nostri ingratitudo absterreat, quo minus off cio suo
fideliter sungatur. Gualt. in Act. c. 23. Hom. 151.
. He must reprove the sins of the times faithfully, and plainly, Jeremy
neither feared the faces of men, nor spared those vices of men which did so
preceede the Babilonish Captivity, and hence partly it was that he was hid,
when the rest of the Jews were hardly used. The like seed must we sow that
have such places in the Church of Christ as Jeremy had, if we would reap the
like crop. For if either for hope of advancement, or fear of abasement, we
should be like to the Idols of the Gentiles, have eyes and not see, mouths and
not speak Psalm. 115.5. Psalm. 135.16.
, and so be accessory to the peoples sins, we must look to have our share in
the common calamity that may befall the Land, for the common sins that reign
amongst us. And what Magistrates must do in the Commonwealth, and Ministers
in the Church, the like must Masters of Families do in their houses, use all
means, and give all diligence to restrain and reprove the vices, the abuses,
which they see in their charges.

Thirdly, all of us, Governors, and under government, must take heed of
provoking others to the committing of those sins which may bring some
judgment upon us. You that are over others, take heed you do not command
those that are under you to do evil; for Non est immunis ascelere, qui vt
faceret, impetrauit. Cypr. Epist. 7. l. 2.
that is to have a deep hand in their sin. You that profess the Name of
Christ, do not by your careless and uncircumspect walking, provoke the wicked
to contemn the Word. You that have this worlds good in more abundance then
your brethren, do not you either by base illiberality, or vain prodigality,
give example to others to abuse Gods blessings. By your murmuring provoke not
others to unthankfulness; by your evil counsel provoke not others to
drunkenness; by your filthy and unclean communication, provoke not others to
filthiness; by giving of bribes provoke not Rulers to unrighteousness; by
speaking favorably of Popery, provoke not others to Idolatry: In a word,
whatsoever you see may be an occasion to draw any man to, to harden any man in
any of these sins, which are the signs of an ensuing plague, be not you any
kind of way the givers of that occasion. If you be, it will make you accessory
in an high degree, to those sins, and so you should exclude your selves from
all share in any shelter under Gods wing, in the time of need.

Fourthly, because (as I said) to conceal villainy, is to be accessarie to
villainy; therefore we must not conceal the inquities of the times from the
Lord, in whose power it is to redress them. Not that God knows them not, or
has need to be put in mind of them by us; but because it is his pleasure
that we should in humility confess them to his Majesty, as common sharers in
those sins. To the end we might free our selves from that accessarinesse to
them, which without confessing them, we should be guilty of, and so by
consequent might Ad hoc enim Deus exigit confessionem, vt liberet humilem. Aug.
ad frat. in Erem. Ser. 30.
save our selves in the perilous season. I am persuaded that Nehemiah was so
protected in the service, and with the favor of Artaxerxes, when his
Countrymen were in great affliction, and reproach Neh. 1.3.
. And that Daniel was so sheltered in the Court of Darius Dan. 6.13.22.
, that neither the Envy of the Courtiers, nor the Cruelty of the Lions could
do him any hurt; when the rest of his brethren (excepting the three Children
Dan. 1.2.
) were in great slavery: because that BOTH of them did make open confession of
the sins of the whole people of the Jews, as though themselves had committed
that Idolatry, and those abominations which the rest did: when as indeed they
had no finger in the same. Read their Prayer and you shall see it, They speak
in the plural number, We; WE have dealt corrruptly against thee, and have
not kept thy commandments Neh. 1.7.
. WE have sinned and have committed iniquity, and done wickedly, etc. neither
have WE hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets. O Lord to US belongs
confusion of faces, to our Kings, to our Princes, and our Fathers, because we
have sinned against thee Dan 9.5.6.8.
. Well, let us do as they did, confess to God the sins of the whole Land, and
say unto him; WE have rebelled, transgressed, gone astray from thee, etc. And
we shall speed as they did, Gods providence will hide us either in the storm,
or from the storm, when it arises. Thus have you heard what we must withdraw
our selves from, with the branches thereof, and subordinate rules to further us
therein,

2. Special rule of hiding, subordinate to the general, with the branches.
Secondly, withdrawing has its ad quid, as well as its a quo. There are some
things which we must withdraw, or rather address TO, as well as withdraw from,
if upon the foresight of the plague, we would hide our selves. And they are
these two; 1. Righteousness. 2. Prayer.


First, we must withdraw our selves to Righteousness. 1. Righteousness.
Seek ye RIGHTEOUSNESS (says Zepheny) and it may be, you shall be hid in the
day of the Lords anger Zeph 2.3.
. What Righteousness may some say? The righteousness of their own moral or
natural works? Alas, Ruinosa est omnino haec habitatio, and quae sustentari
magis opus habet, and fu^ciri qua^ inhabitari. Bern Ser. 2. in Psalm. Qui
habitat fol. 78. C.
this is a shelter that has need of a shelter, it self a Periculosa
habitatio eorum qui in meritis suis sperant, periculosa quia ruinosa. Id. ib.
ruinous shelter, a perilous shelter. What Righteousness then? I answer, there
is a Rock or Robe of Righteousness, and there is a Rule or Guide of
Righteousness. The one is Christ the Righteous, the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world Ioh. 1.29.36
, who is to us what the (...). Aster. Hom. de Diu. and Laz. page 2.
sheep coat is to our backs; A covering, an hyding from heat, from cold:
The other is the Law of Righteousness. Both these must we betake our selves
to; to the former by Faith; to the Idem sapiens facere debet: omnes virtutes
suas vndique expandat, vt, vbicunque aliquid infesti oritur, illic parata
praefidia sint. Sextius. in Senec Epist. 59. l 1. p. 631.
latter by Obedience.

Concerning the first, note well the speech of Iehosaphat to the people of
Judah 2 Chronicles. 20.20.
; Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; that is, Get but
faith to believe in God, and you shall be preserved in the battle: neither
Ammonites, nor Moabites, nor any of your enemies shall be able to hurt you, or
to overcome you. The Apostle Paul knew very well, that, if he were but found
in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but the righteousness of
Christ, which is by faith, he should be safe even in that great day of
Judgment (a day evil and terrible to the wicked) how much more safe then in
the midst of the troubles of this transitory life. And therefore this is the
thing he did so much seek for, and sue for: accounting all things loss in
comparison of this Phil. 3.9.
.

For the second, the Mat 24 ^5.46.
wise, and faithful servant knows, that it will be happy for him, and that
he shall be hid from that vengeance which shall seize upon the unprofitable,
faithless servant V. 51.
, if he be found well doing at his Masters coming: and therefore betaketh
himself to that working of righteousness, and to that course of obedience,
which his Master has enjoined him in his Law.

Good Lord then, what will become of you that are unbelievers! that have no
faith in Christ, that by faith are not joined to Christ, that had rather seek,
wealth, honor, pleasures, places of command in the world, then the righteousness
of Christ, whom any robes please better then that robe: who seek rather to any
Rock, to any refuge then to that? What will become of you also, that wilfully
transgress the Rule of righteousness, that will not be religious, that will not
do good duties? Who hear not, relieve not the wants of your brethren with
that abundance which you have, who watch not over your hearts, who bridle not
your tongues, who will not do all things which God in his righteous law
commands, who will not do any thing, because He commands you? What (I say)
will you do in the day of vengeance? Where will you hide your selves? Where
will you shroud your selves? Under Gods wing? Why that shall be spread over
none but those that are in his beloved Son, over none but those by whom his
sacred will is done. None but such as believe in the righteousness of Christ;
none but such as yield Evangelical obedience to the righteousness of the Law,
have right to the special protection of the Almighty. I beseech you therefore
seek the righteousness of Christ, by believing; submit to the righteousness
of the law, by obeying: And do not think that without either of these, yea
without both of these, it is possible for you to escape in the day of trouble.

2. Prayer more then ordinary.
Secondly, We must betake our selves to prayer. Prayer may prevayle both for our
own hiding, and the hiding of others. It may (peradventure) avayle to divert
the Judgments which the signs do portend. If not so, yet it may cover us for
our parts from the dint of the Judgments. Pray therefore that God would
forgive the sins of the Land. Pray that God would remove the evil begun,
prevent the evil to come, if it be his will, or, howsoever, that he will take
us into the pauillion of his protecting providence, that the days of
extremity may rather profit us, then hurt us. Pray will some say? Persuade you
us to that? Your persuasion is needless; for we do that already. I know some
of you do, but I persuade you to that, which is much neglected, (I fear me)
by good Christians; I mean extraordinary prayer, such as is joined with
fasting. This, oh this, (if any thing will) will prevayle mightily with the
Lord. The King of Nineueh, and all his Subjects, no sooner got themselves into
sackcloth, and fasted, but they hid themselves from the destruction threatened,
which otherwise, within forty days would have come upon them Ion. 3.5.10.
. When great wrath was toward the Jews, in Iehosaphats time, a great
multitude of Ammonites, and Moabites coming up to battle against them, it is
said that Iehosaphat set himself to seek the Lord by prayer, and fasting, and
all Judah with him, and they were heard, they saw the salvation of the Lord,
and the dead bodies of their enemies fallen to the earth, so that none escaped
2 Chronicles. 20. the 3 and 4. Verses compared with the 17. and 24.
. When the poor captiued people of the Jews were at the next door to death,
and Letters, to dispatch them suddenly, were under the Emperors seal gone
out against them, Hester, and her Maids, Mordecay, and the rest of the Jews,
fell to Esth. 4.
Prayer, with fasting, and what an admirable refuge that mean procured them,
the sacred Story Chapters 5.6.7.8.9.
relates at large. When such have gone before, shall not we follow after. It
may be, some profane ones may disgrace this course, as frivolous, and foolish,
yet let that be no discouragement unto us. The laws of our Land do not deny
us liberty to perform this duty by our Libertas est Christiano per omne
tempus ieiunandi. Confess Taborit. p. 238.
selves in secret, and with our families. And if we do not use this our
liberty, which we have for the present, the Lord may even deprive us of that
too, and so make us sharers in those common miseries, which for our sins, he
may send upon us. Good people therefore, spare one day in a week, or a
fortnight, or more, if you can, if God has given you ability of body so to
do; and take heed you do not frame excuses where none is. Our ordinary
prayers have prevailed to hide us thus long; oh, what may our extraordinary
do, if now when there is so great need, we will but send them up to the God
of heaven! This first Use has held me somewhat long, because of the many
particulars it has run into. I will now rid my hands of it, desiring GOD to
bless it, and come to another, which is for Consolation to all the Children of
God.

Use 2. Consolation.
The wicked are wont to say of the Godly what Solomon would have them Not to
say, Eccles. 6.8.
What has the wise more them the fool? But if any would know what they have,
I answer they have protection in the midst of tribulation. This privilege
they have, to be hopeles in noe misery, to be helples in no calamity
whatsoever. For, if upon the foresight they have of the evil, they be careful
to seek an hiding place for themselves against that evil (as the point in
hand shows they are) then let that evil come when it can, or how it can,
hidden they are from the danger of it, and Quid ei nocere poterit eorum quae
sub Caelo sunt, quem Deus Caeli protegere and conseruare voluerit? Bern. in
Psalm. Qui Hab. Ser. 1. p. ^8. H.
what hurt can it do them? A Goodman cannot but be safe, be the times never so
troublesome Virtuti vaecans in securo constitutus (...) nihil insi^^tite fert a
rebus turbulentis. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 22.
. What says David to this purpose? He that dwells in the secret place of the
most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. He need not be
afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flies by day, nor for
the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes
at none-day Psalm. 91.1.5.6.
. You cannot go through the sacred Stories in the Scriptures, but you shall
find, that the Lord has been Deus cultores suos inter mill pericula seruare
consueuit. Gualt in Act. c. 23. Ho^. 151.
wont to preserve his Servants in a thousand dangers. When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee (says the Lord) and through the rivers, they
shall not ouerflow thee, when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee Isa. 43.2.
. Be of good Comfort therefore whatsoever thou art that fear the Lord:
Whatsoever plagues the times do threaten, run but thou to those six Cities of
refuge, which Bernard. Senten. p. 132 K. L. Sex sunt refugij civitates
Interdictae praeuaricationis cautio: sequendae praeceptionis obeditio,
propitiandae Diuinitatis ambitio: Mundanae fabricae consideratio: vrbis
tirannicae iugis inspectio: and supereminens Dei verbi cognitio.
one speaks of: take heed of sin forbidden, do carefully what God
commands, aspire to Gods favor and fellowship, Consider the vanity of the
world; look into the miseries of this life, and acquaint thy self well with
the word of God, and thou for thy part, shall be safe, and secure enough Si fi
at captiuitas, and civitates disperdantur, and regiones, aurum, argentum, and
omnis possessio pereat. Orthodox. Pat. 1446.
. Should our bodies be emprisoned, our Cities destroyed, our substance and
possession spoiled, our Country consumed, should famine, sword, pestilence, or
any scourge else, make hauock amongst us, yet, as Sapientis sapientiam nullus
potest auferre. Ibid.
no man can take thy wisdom from thee, so nothing (except sin) can make the
Lord un willing to protect thee: but either with Baruch Ier. 45.5.
thou shall have thy life given thee for a pray, or else, if thy outward man
should perish 2 Cor. 4.16.
, thy soul shall be taken away from evil Isa. 57.1.
, to abide with Christ for ever in the heavens, which is best of all. And so,
which way soever the Lord deals with thee, thou art sure to be no looser, but
a great gainer, Say therefore to thy self, as David did: Wherefore should I
fear in the day of evil Psalm. 49.5.
. And let the Congregation of the faithful, comfortably, and confidently,
conclude, as the Church does Psalm. 46.1.2.3.7.11.
. God is our refuge, a very present help in trouble; therefore will not we
fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though
the mountains shake with the swelling thereof: the Lord of hoastes is with us,
the God of Jacob, is our refuge.

Use 3. Terror. In which is summarily handled the 2. part of the Text.
Well, to draw to a conclusion, and to knit up the other Proverb, the second
part of the text, [But the simple pass on and are punished] in the third use
of this Doctrine. Here is Terror to all wicked, and ungodly wretches. For if
only the Godly hide themselves against the day of wrath, they Viz. Those
wicked ones.
(poor miserable Creatures) for there part shall be without hiding, without
shelter in that day. They are Imo ipsis brutis beslijs deteriores sunt. Cartw.
in Prou. col. 1095.
worse then brute beasts, then unreasonable creatures: The Sunt enim aues (vt
grues et Ciconia) quae sensu quodam and praeceptione ingruentis hyemis se in
calidiora loca opportune recipient. Id. ibid.
Crane, and the Storke when the winter approaches, withdraw themselves into
hotter Countries: the Beasts of the field run to their dens, and sheds when a
storm is rising, when rain is coming, Iumenta etiam praesagio plunia mox
ventura, se ad sua latibula conserunt.
and so, in their kind provide safety for themselves. But the Fatui vero isti
suis cupiditatibus occatatipraecipites in pericula acti pereunt^ tanquam enim
oculis captine ea quidem vident quae ante pedes posita, sunt sed tanquam be^es
ad mactationem nihil cogitantes cupiditatum suarum funiculo ducantur, Ibid.
ungodly (like stalled Oxen that are fatting against the day of slaughter) are
so blinded with their lusts, that be destruction never so near their doors,
they run on, seek no shade, and so throw themselves headlong into the very
mouth of the danger, and perish by it. Think on this all you Simple ones, not
you that are Innocently and holily Simple, (for so the word is not to be
understood in the text,) but you that are Sottishly, sinfully Simple. Every
word in this clause of the text sounds Terror in your ears, But the last word
most terror.

1. But, a word of terror.
First, that you differ from the children of God, and are as contrary to them,
as darkness to light, as black to white, as infants to men of learning, as
ignorants to men of deep understanding (as this particle BUT gives to
understand) this is matter of terror. For if you be contrary to the Godly, you
have no part in their privileges; neither is God your Father, nor Christ your
Brother, nor the Holy Ghost your Comforter, nor Grace your maintenance in
present possession, nor Glory your inheritance in future expectation.

2. Simple, full of terror.
Secondly, you are fools. I know indeed you are wise in your own eyes; for it
is as natural for a natural man to glory in his own wisdom Ier.
, as can be. I know also, that the men of the world will so repute you: for it
is (...). Athanas. de Virginitat Tom. 1 p. 824.
ordinary with them to deem those wise, which have any cunning but to buy and
sell, to defraud and sin, to make two halfe-pence of one, as one speaks.
But whatsoever conceit either the world has of you, or you have of A^t Deus
stulte vbi tibi sapiens videris ibi stulte, vel stultus es. August de Verb.
Apost. Ser. 19. and lib. 50. Hom. Ser. 7.
your selves, you being wicked, are fools in Gods account for all that: Yea,
such you are Chronicled to be in HIS books, in HIS Records, as the title
Simple, in this Text, and the term FOOL, in other Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 92.7.
Pro. 1.22.3.35.7.22.10.1.14 3. etc.
places do declare. And I am sure this is as great a ground of terror unto you
as the former, if not greater. For alas (wretched creature) being a fool, thy
understanding is darkened Ephesians. 4.18.
; the God of this world has blinded the eyes of thy mind 2 Cor. 4.4. Sectatur
imprudentiam inscitia. Arist de virt. lib. Tom. 5. p 481.
: Thou know not good from evil, nor evil from good Qui enim stultus est,
quid sit iustum ac bonum nescit. Et paulo post. Rectum autem discernere a prauo
quis potest nisi sapiens? Lactan. de lust. l 5 c. 18 p. 163.
, thou call (as it were) quid ergo? no^ne diem nocte^ vocant? Solemn
tenebras? Id. ibid. c 20 p. 165.
day night, and the sun darkness; thou Imprudentiae est iudicare perverse de
rebus, deliberare perperam. Aris. lib de Virt. Tom. 5. p. 481.
iudgest of things peruersly, thou deliberatest of matters corruptly. Being a
fool, thou art Stultus semper peccat Ducitur enim quasi captiuus a vitijs, nec
resistere vllo modo potest. Lactan. de Just. l 5. c. 18. Stultus etiam malus
est. Et paulo post. ^tultus omnia vitia habet Senec. de Benef. l. 4. c. 26. p
448. Non hoc dicimus sic omnia vitia esse in omnibus, quomodo in quibusdam
singula emine a^t, sed malum ac stultum nullo vitio vacare, Idem. lib. dict.
cap. 27.
sins bondslaue: no Idiot is a more slavish drudge to the basest works that
he is set about, then thou art to the Devil, to corruption, and to the deeds
of darkness; then which, what service more base, more miserable, nay, to
which, what service is Est enim se^u^tus eius (viz. Diaboli) and vilissima, and
vitiosisima, and durissima, and notentissima. Diet. Postil. Dom Trin. 15
comparable, in illness, in vileness, in hardness, etc?

Again, being a spiritual fool, though thou have never so plotting, and
plodding an head, for earthly things, yea, as deep a reach as any, to make the
best of thy commodities (as we use to say) yet thou Stultus nulla re scit vti
Senec. lib. 1. Epist. 9 page 538 Imprudentiae est vti nequire presentibus
bonis. Arist. libel. de Virt. Tom 5. page 481. in 16^.
know not how to use any thing aright, of that which thou enioyest. (...).
After. Hom. de Occon. Iniq. page 21.
Thou have indeed a body composed of proportionable parts, endued with
profitable senses, very useful to thy life and being, and thou have a soul
endued with reason and understanding: it may be thou have wealth, it may be
friends, it may be honor, it may be credit; and all these things are not to
be used as (...). Ibid. page 23.
thy self please, but as God prescribes, but alas, thou can not use any
of them so as God would have thee. God has given thee his Word, his
Sacraments, which are rich gifts, great blessings Audissapientem irridentem
stultum, quod bona naturae, and bona gratiae, quae forte per lauacrum
regenerationis acceperat, tanquam illam, quam plantauit Deus, and non homo,
primam suam vineam, in non vineam, negligendo redegit. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 63.
fol. 184. H.
; thou know not what use to make of any of these: thou can not tell what
use to put the Word to, what use to make of thy Baptism, of the Lords Supper,
no more then a babe knows what use to make of a pearl, or a piece of gold
that is put into its hand, when it throws it about the house, and is ready to
lose it. That very Nam stultus quod viuit mortem potius quam vitam esse
censuerim. Quomodo vita cum sterilitate? Arborarida and in sterilitatem versa,
nonne mortua iudicatur? Et sarmenta mortua sunt. Sic stultus eo ipso quod
inutiliter viuit, viuens mortuus est. Bernard. ibid.
benefit of life it self which God has lent thee, thou have so little skill
to use aright, that it is little better unto thee, then a very death.

Being a Nihil stultitia pacatum habet, tam superne illi m^tus est, quam infra.
Sen^c lib. 1. Epist. 59. p. 632. Quid ergo inquis? Stulti ac mali non gaudent?
Non magis quam praedam n^cti leones. Idem ibid. page 633.
fool, no sound joy belongs unto thee, a trembling heart is always within
thee. Thou art afraid of Hic alter imperitus est, rebus suis timet Senec. lib.
1. Epist. 56. p. 623.
thy self, afraid of Videhis illum (scil. imperitum) comitique onerique
timentem Ibid.
thy friends. Be there Psalm. 53.5. Illi enim saepe hostem timuere sine causa,
tutissimumque illis iter, quod suspect^ssimum fuit. Senec. lib. 1. Epist. 59
page 632.
no danger at hand, thou are subject to fear: be there Sequuntur pericula,
and occurrunt; ad ^mnia pauet stultitia. Ibid.
some danger at hand indeed, thou art subject hopelesly to quake: yea Imparata
est, and ipsis terretur auxilijs. Ibid.
help it self in the time of danger, terrifies thee, scares thee. There is no
child that is without the use of reason, more timorous of a bug-beare, of a
thing of nothing, then thou art of every noise, upon every light occasion. Thus
comfortless (I say) is thy condition. Lay now these things together, thy
blindness, thy slavery, thy ignorance to use Gods blessings aright, thy want
of right to any true comfort. (All which are as so many fruits of thy folly)
and tell me whether these do not show, that to be a spiritual fool, is a
thing most terrible, most fearful.

3. Pass on] A phrase of Ter^our also.
Thirdly, as you differ from Gods children, and are fools, so also do you
pass on, you are desperately heedlesse, and dreadlesse in the greatest
dangers. Though you cannot but Imperitus, est ad omnem crepitum expauescens,
quem vna quaelibet vox pro fremitu accepta deiecit, quem motus leuissimi
exanimant. Senec. lib. 1. Epist. 56. circ. fin.
Quod autem non dicit Propheta illos nihil praeuide^e, sed transiretantum and
mulctari, eo docet, fieri aliquando, vt isti fatui mala futurae praeuidean^,
sed tamen ita a suis cupiditatibus trae^suersos rapi, vt viuentes, videntesque
(quod dicitur) pereant, et tanqua^ Amphiaraeus, ad interitum scientes
properent. Cart. ad loc.
foresee the plague, that is threatened against you, that is approaching near
you, yet you are so violently transported by your raging lusts, beyond all
bounds of any forecast, and provision for your selves, that you wittingly and
willingly go on to your own ruin: this also is another ground of terror.
But 4. And are punished] A phrase of terror.
lastly, that you come to be punished (that is) uncovered, vnsheltered, in the
day of vengeance, so that though you should see the plague as plainly as you
can with your Tanquamoculis praediti ad vtdendum malum, pedibus capti, ab illo
fugere nequeunt. Cartw. in Pro. col. 1096.
eyes, yet your feet cannot possibly escape hampering in it, this even this (I
say) may be a double, a treble terror, yea a terror of terrors unto you. For
in this case, what, O what misery do you not lie open unto! your houses may
be fired over your heads, your wives deflowred before your faces, your husbands
murdered in your presence, your children quartered before your eyes, your own
bodies cast to the beasts of the field, to the fowls of the air, and (which
is worst of all) your souls plunged into the lake of fire; thereto be
tormented for evermore: from which Lake he save us, who shed his blood for us,
even Jesus that just and righteous one, to whom, with the Father, and Eternal
Spirit, be all praises in all the Churches, throughout all ages. Amen.

FINIS.

