THE SOVLE IS Immortal: OR, Certain Discourses defending the immortality of
the Soul; against the limbs of Satan: to wit, Saduces, Anabaptists,
Atheists, and such like of the hellish crew of Adversaries.

Written by JOHN IACKSON.

Imprinted at London by W. W. for Robert Boulton dwelling in Smithfield near
Long-lane. 1611.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
THe Arch-enimie of mankind, Satan, that old Adversary, as he dared to give
the assault upon the Author of Salvation himself; so has he not rested from
the beginning, to lay battrie to the fortress of Faith, seeking by all means
to beat it down, and utterly to raze the very foundations of it. And to this
end, has he not left unshaken any one article of our Christian belief, both
by old and new Heretics, the wicked instruments of his infernal warringes.
So maliciously is he set against us, that like a ramping and roaring Lion, he
goes about seeking whom be may deuower: And where GOD has his Church, be
evermore adioyneth his Chapel, with his counterfaite, false, and feigned
Religion, odious to God, and wonderful to the world. Amongst the rest, he
has not only of old, but even of late, battered the soul, yea even the life
of the soul of man: yea even now does he most stoutly batter it; by persuading
some, that it is corruptible and mortal; and putting into their mouths the
most venomed swords of poisoned sophistical Arguments to maintain the same,
against the most certain and necessary truth of the Souls immortality. For
not only the Saduces did dispute against the immortality of the Soul; yea,
and they in like manner, who said in Saint Paul's time, that the Resurrection
was past already to him that believes; and made no other resurrection,
besides the resurrection of the regenerate. But also the Anabaptists of later
years, do deny the Soul to be immortal. And Paul the third of that name,
Pope of Rome, when he was breathing out his Soul and ready to die, said; that
now at length he should try and know three things: First, whether there were a
GOD: second, whether the Souls were immortal: third, whether there were a
Hell or no; whereof all his life time he was in much doubt. Yea verily even at
this very day, there are now wicked Epicures, and graceless Atheistes, whom
the Devil to lull them faster a sleep in their sins, and enforce them to
heap sin upon sin, has so suggested them, that they are fully persuaded
that there is no reward for the Good, nor punishment of the Wicked; but that
Man perishes as Beast, and the Soul to come to nothing: according to that
wicked verse of Horace: Et redit in nihilum, quod fuit ante nihil. For they
affirm, that the Soul of man, like as of brute Beasts, is nothing else, but
Life, or the vital power, arising of the temperature and perfection of the
Body; and therefore dies, and is extinguished together with the Body. And
some again say, that the Soul sleeps, when the Body dies that is, is
without motion or sense, until the raising of the Body: which indeed is
nothing else, but that the Soul is mortal; that is, a mere quality only in
the Body, which when the body is dissolved, becomes nothing; because if it
were an incorporeall substance, it could not be without sense and motion.

Wherefore having my self met with some of this badde sort, and hearing of
more, I thought good every way to fight in the cause of Christ Jesus, with the
weapon put in mine hand by my grand Captain, and with might and maine, to heaw
at these two Monsters, and utter Enemies to the Soul. Therefore seeing that
the print of the Pen may come unto the eyes of more, than the sound of the
voice into the cares, I (by Gods assistance) have set my talent on work,
against them both, proouing the contrary: First, that the Soul is not (as
they say,) mortal, but immortal: Secondly, that the Soul is not a form,
perfection, temperament, force, power, or agitation arising out of the
temperature of the Body; but a substance incorporeall, living, understanding,
dwelling in the Body, and susteining and moving it. And this latter, is
proved true by these Scriptures, Psalm. 48. His Soul shall be blessed in life.
Heb 12. God is called the Father of Spirits. And it is said of the faithful;
Ye are come to the Celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable
Angels, and to the Spirits of just and perfect men. 1. Cor. 2.11. Noman
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man, which is in man. In
these, and like places of Scripture, both the Soul of man is called a Spirit,
and the properties of a living and understanding substance are attributed unto
it; therefore it is a substance. And therefore to no purpose, do the
adversaries of this Doctrine, oppose those places wherein the soul is taken
for the life and will of man; as Mat. 6. The Soul is more worth then Meat.
Job. 13.14. I put my Soul in my hand. For by the fore alleged places, it is
manifest, that this is not general, but is used by figure of speech; whereby
we call the effect, by the name of his cause. Now for the former, that the
Soul is not mortal, but immortal; and also for a further declaration of this
latter, I have translated forth of latin (for their sakes that understand
not latin) a certain Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul; and thereunto
have adjoined other men's judgments and reasons, for the help of the matter,
and Scriptures confirming the same, and confuted the Adversary.

GVILERMVS HOVPPELANDVS: Of the immortality of the Soul.
THat the ancient Philosophers flourished in Wit, and profited in Study, it
is no common opinion, but unto all men a sure and certain persuasion: For by
Study and Exercise, they on every side made themselves away unto those
things that are by Nature, almost incomprehensible: And by their benefit,
there are many things publicly left unto all posterities, which we are glad
of, and do marvel at their inventions. They measured the World, subjected
Heaven to their Rules, searched out the sundry causes of Nature; and in some
sort, with their eyes contemplated the Worke-man of all the World. But of the
state of man's Soul, and the Immortality thereof, sundry sects have in their
Writings, left sundry opinions.

Some say, that Souls are Mortal, and die together with their bodies. Some
do say, that they are Immortal, and always remain in a fixed stabilitie.
Heraciuus affirmed, man's Soul to be a Vapor; Thales, a Moisture; Empedocles,
Blood; for he taught, that the Soul is Blood infused in the Heart. Diogenes
and Anaximenes, Air. The Storkes, whereof Zeno and Chrisippus are the chief,
do say, it is a Fire. Democritus affirmed the Soul to be made by a certain
chauncing course of certain light and round matter. Aristoxenus, an Harmony:
Aristophanes, a due proportion of qualities. The Saduces (so called of Sadoc,)
denying both Honors and Punishments; and universally both Spirit and Angel,
doc impudently say, that men's Souls are Mortal, and die together with their
Bodies. The Epicures also affirming the Soul to be Mortal, do place the
chiefest Good, in Pleasures. For Epicurus, who, (as it pleases the greatest
men) did moderately use Herbs and Apples, and such mean Meat, was
afterward, by those that came after, being a beastly and filthy company,
reproched with infamy; for his sottish unbridled Scholars, fell into
voluptuousness, and counted themselves to be most happy, with the use
thereof. All these, and many other more, in the reckoning up of whom, it is not
profitable for us for to stay, thought man's Soul to be Mortal. Whom Pliny
seems to favor, when he says in his second Book of his Natural History
that God cannot give men Eternity, nor call again the Dead. And also many
Romans, (renowned both for fame and learning,) for Valerius in his second
Book of the Immortality of the Soul, seems to mock the Frenchmen, when he
says, That old custom of the Frenchmen comes to my remembrance, who, as it
is written, do lend Money that it might be paid them again in Hell; because
they were certainly persuaded, that the Souls be immortal. Fools are they
to think, that they there, wear long Garments; as Pithago^as believed them to
wear Cloakes. Moreover Caesar, and Cato (as Salust witnesses,) plainly said
that men's Souls were Mortal: and many others also; of whom it is not
necessary to speak particularly. Against whom it is said in the second
Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, The ungodly say, (as they falsely imagine
with themselves,) our life is short and tedious; and in the death of a man
there is no recovery; neither was any known that returned from the Grave: For
we are borne at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we had
never been; for the Breath is a Smoke in our Nostrels, and the Words as a
Spark raised out of our Hearts: which being extinguished, the Body is turned
into Ashes, and the Spirit vanishes as the soft Air: Our life shall pass
away as the trace of a Cloud, and come to naught as the Miste that is driven
away with the beams of the Sun, and cast down with the heat thereof: Our
name also shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall have our works in
remembrance: for our time is as a Shadow that passes away; and after our end,
there is no returning: For it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again.
Come therefore, and let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and let us
chearefully use the creatures as in youth, etc. Then it follows at the. 21.
verse. Such things do they imagine, and go astray; for their own wickedness
has blinded them. And they do not vnderstaud the mystery of God, neither
hope for the reward of righteousness, nor can discern the honor of the
Souls that are faultlesse. And in the third Chapter: The Souls of the
righteous, are in the hand of God, and no torment shall touch them: In the
sight of the unwise, they appeared to die, and their end was thought grievous;
and their departing from us. destruction: but they are in peace. And though
they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full of immortality etc.

There are also others, of every sect and nation, as well Poets as
Philosophers, in wit, learning, fame, and glory, more excellent then the
former, who speaking more rightly of the state of the Soul, have taught, that
the Souls of men are not dissolved together with their bodies; but are
immortal, or rewarded with eternity: For Hermes talking in his Dialogues with
Asclepius, about the eternal Word, confesses, that the Souls of men are
immortal; and that the Evil are punished, and the Good eternally rewarded.
Go to, says he, We must now reason of the Mortal, and Immortal way or
manner: The fear of death, vex and trouble many, being ignorant of the true
way. And a little after; When the Soul shall depart from the Body, then shall
the trial of his merit pass into the power of the great Judge: and he, when
he shall see it to be just, shall permit it to abide in places fit for it: But
if it be unrighteous, it shall be thrown down into the great deep, and
condemned to the storms and whyrlewinds of the Air, and the Water; and be
snatched up betwixt the Heaven and the Earth, and be here and there tossed,
haled, and turmoyled in eternal pains. But in this, is eternity hurtful
unto the Soul, that by the immortal sentence, it is tied to eternal
punishment. And thy Graunfather Esculapius, O Asclepius, says he, the first
finder out of Physic, to whom is consecrated a Temple upon a Mountain of
Lybea, about the shore of Cocodrilli, a man of a very godly life; is gone back
again into Heaven.

The Pharesies also and the Essies do say, that the Judgment of God shall
come, and that the Souls of men be immortal. Josephus in his second Book of
the Wars of the Jews, says this: It is a confirmed opinion amongst us, that
our Bodies are corruptible, and that the matter of them, is not perpetual; but
our Souls always remain immortal: And when they be losed from their carnal
bonds, as though they were delivered, or set free from a long servitude; so
do they forthwith rejoice, and are carried up on high. The Pharesies also
believed the same: which two sects, were best allowed of among the Jews, as
the same Josephus affirms.

And of the Esseis being put to torments, the same Josephus says: They
smiling in the midst of punishings, and laughing those to scorn that eschewed
torments, did constantly yield up their Souls with a certain hilaritie, as
though they should at length receive the^ again: And what is meant by that in
the Sentences of the Greeks, that assure them that remain content with good
things, that they shall live beyond the Occean, where is promised unto them a
full fruition of the chiefest Joys? For there verily, (say they,) is the
Region which is aggrauated neither with Rain, Cold, Heat, nor any Maladies;
but the Occean orient and gentle blowing Zephirus is there very pleasant. But
for evil souls, they choose and appoint stormy and wintery places, which are
full of wailings, schrikings, and howlings, of pains intolerable, whose
continuance is everlasting, and world with out end. According to this same
intelligence, the Greeks have feigned, that for those whom they call Heroes. 1.
noble and half Gods, Semidij, are sequestrated the Islands of the blessed, but
for the Souls of the wicked, Hell is destinated, wherein also they faigne,
that there is tormented certain Sysiphos, Tantalusses, Ixions, and Licias: For
the Greek say, that Her^i, noble and well deserving Souls, endued with
immortality, dwell up very high in the Air; whereof Jsiodore says: Heroas
dicuntur a Junone traxisse nomen. Greece enim luno a herba appellatur, etc. 1.
Heroas are said to have drawn their name from Juno; for in the Greek tongue,
Juno is called an Herb, and therefore I know not what Son of hers according
to the Fable of the Greeks, was called Heroes, which Fable has a mystical
signification, because the Air is deputed to Juno; where in they will have
Heroas to dwell: for when the Poet Virgill described the Elisean Fields, where
they think the souls of the blessed Saints do dwell, he did not only set
down that those do dwell there, that have been able to come thither by their
own merits; but adds also, and says: Those also that by deserving, have
made others mindful of them; that is to say, who have so deserved, that by
their deseruings, they have made others mindful of them. Moreover, as
concerning the Greeks, Histories do make mention of two kinds of
Philosophers: One, Italike of that part which in times past was called Magna
Graecia: The other, Jonicke, of that part which is now called Graecia. The
Prince and chief of the Jtalke kind, was Pythagoras; of whom they say, that
Philosophy first took the name; who was of such authority among the
Ancients, that by a prejudicial opinion, he covered and overcame all others
sentence, and was sufficient enough for the confirmation of every sentence
whatsoever, if so be any thing was taught, to be that that he said. For
writings do testify, that Ferecides the Sirian said, first, that the minds
of men are sempiternall; who was indeed an ancient man in the time that Oeneus
reigned: which opinion, his Disciple Pythageras most greatly confirmed; who in
the time that Tarquinus superbus reigned, came into that part of Italy which
was called Magna Graecia; wherein the name of the Pythagoreans flourished with
such authority, that a long time after, no others seemed learned,

Of the Ionicke kind, Thales Milisius was the Prince: a man very notably well
learned and wise, and therefore so much the more admirable to his Scholars,
because he was able by the knowledge of Astrology, to foreshew the Eclipses of
the Sun and Moon. To whom succeeded Anaximander, who left his Scholar
Anaximenes, the Master of Anaxagoras and Dyogenes. After Anaxagoras, succeeded
Arch^laus his Scholar: After Socrates arose, who by the Oracle of Apollo, was
judged the wisest of all men, and left very many followers of his Philosophy;
whose study was chiefly conversant in the disceptation and reasoning of Moral
questions. After him, followed Plato, who, as Apuleius testifies, was first
called Aristotle: but afterward, because of the largenes of his breast, he was
named Plato: who was endued with such an excellency of Philosophy and
finenesse of Manners, that as it were, sitting in the throne of Wised^me,
seemed, by a certain received authority to bear rule over all Philosophers,
both those that were before him, and those that were after him. Afterward
arose his Disciple Aristotle; a man verily of great Wit and Eloquence, who
far excelling many; succeeded Plate in the office of teaching: for this man
shined unto men as the Morning star, and enlightened the world with manifold
precepts, and sundry beams of Philosophy: and the mist as it were, being
wiped away from the eyes, repaired the minds of men, that the truth for ever
might be continued among them. After the death of Plato, there succeeded also
in the School, which is called Accademia, Pseusippus his sisters Son, and
Zenocrates: and for this cause, both they themselves, and also their
successors, were called Academickes, whom it pleased rather to follow Plato
then Aristotle, who instituted the sect of the Peripatetickes, because that he
was accustomed to dispute walking: amongst whom was ennobled Plotinus,
Porphyrius, and Apultius Afer, and also many other; of whom it is not deedfull
for us now to speak in singularity.

All those therefore, whom with others, we do see not unworthily renowned for
their fame, learning, and glory, have said, that the Souls of men do obtain
the state of immortality: which sentence Varro, Seneca, Salustius, Tullius,
Boethius, and Macrobus, do approve. Hereof Tullius in his Prologue Super
somnum Scipionis, says; Omnibus qui patriam seru^uerunt a^xeruntque, certum in
calum defruitum esse locum, vbi beati cuo sempiterno fruuntur. First, that for
all those that have saved and enlarged their Country, there is a certain place
appointed in Heaven, where the blessed enjoy everlasting life. Moreover, the
Poets Virgil and Ovid, thought the very same: For, in the fifth Book of
Metamorphosis Ovid says:

-- Morte carent animae, semperque relicta Sedenouis domibus, viuunt
habitantque receptae. That is to say:

From death are free the Souls of men, and are immortal all:
Which when their rooms they do for sake and Corpse does dead down fall:
Then habitations new they have, received by Jove's decree,
Wherein he will for evermore, their dwelling place shall be.
All also, that think that Gods are made of men, or that men are translated to
the fellowshippe of the Gods, have thought the same. Did not Mercurius
Trismegistus speaking of Esculapius, Hermes, and Osiris, how they were deified
and made Gods, say; The Idols that you every where worship, were first of
Egyptians called, Holy living creatures, and their Souls worshipped throughout
all Cities, to whom they were dedicated while they were alive? so that they are
governed by their laws, and named by their names, and in a manner al Sects and
Nations are Attlanticks, as Libians, Egyptians, Frenchmen, Romans, Spaniards,
Perseans, Chaldi^s. Did not the great King Cyrus (as Tully does witness) say
unto his Sons when he lay on his deathbed: Do not think, o my sons, that
when I shall depart from you, I shall never be again or be none at al? for all
the while that I have been with you, you never did see my Mind or Soul: you
saw nothing but this Body that I bear: believe therefore that I am, and
shall be, although you shall not see me.

Moreover, Galdisfa the Mahomet, and the ancient elders of the Mahomets,
according to the traditions of their Law, do believe and preach, that the dead
shall rise again, and shall eat and drink delicate things, and shall have
many fair Women, which they shall embrace and use at their pleasure: For
Marcus declaring the conditions of the East Countries, says, that the
Tartarians do so impudently deceive themselves, that if a Young man and a
Maid do die unmarried, they cause them to be espowsed and that very solemnly,
before they be buried; that so in the life to come, they may more freely enjoy
their pleasures.

Touching Aristotle what he thought of the immortality of the soul many had
rather doubt with the subtle Doctor, then rashly to define: seeing that
amongst those things that are read of him, whether they be those things that
he wrote him self, or those things that others say that he spoke, his
opinion can not easily be found out: for almost in all places of his doctrine,
he seems to favor the immortality of the Soul: For in his second Book of
the Soul, after the definition of the Soul, putting a difference between the
parts of the Soul, he says, that there are certain parts that are not
separable from their Matters, or the things whereof they be made, or receive
the name: and some are separable; as, Nauta a Nauj, The Mariner from the Ship,
Vt rationalis anima a ratione: and therefore he concludes, that it is
separable from other things, as that which is perpetual, from that which is
corruptible. And in the third Book of the Soul, putting a difference between
Sensus and Intellectus, the Sense, and the Understanding, he says: Excellens
sensibile corrumpit sensum, excellens autem intelligibile non corrumpit
intellectum: 1 The excellent sensible thing, corrupts the Sense; but the
excellent intelligible, corrupts not the Understanding. Also, in the first
Book, where the translation that Auarroys expounds, the Understanding does
seem to be a certain substance, which is made indeed, and is not corrupted.
And in his Book, De Animalibus, the Philosopher enquireth, whether all Souls
do come forth of their bodies? and he answearing, says: That it is not
possible for corporal Souls to come forth of the bodies. It therefore
remains (says he) that it is the Understanding that comes forth, and
only is divine. And he in his twelfth of Metaphysuks, ca. 8. says: The moueing
causes as they were made before it, so do they come forth of it. And in the
Book of the death of Aristotle, it is written, that he, lying on his deathbed
comforting his scholars concerning the fear of death, said unto them. Et vos,
vt quid turbatis et de morte timetis? quae est via et incessus animae
recedentis a corpore, et ad comprehendendum gradus diuinos, et coniungendum se
animabus sapientibus et letis: 1. And you, why are you troubled, and are afraid
of death: which is the gate and entering in of the soul departing from the
body, to comprehend the heavenly ways or degrees, and to join it self to the
souls that are wise and joyful. After whose death, his scholars prayed for
him, saying Deus qui recolligit animas Philosophorum, recolligat animam tuam,
et reponat eam in thesauris suis. 1. The God that gathers together the
Souls of the Philosophers, gather thy Soul, and lay it up in his treasures.
And Libro secundo posteriorum, he recites Pythagoras saying, That God does
thunder and sound as one that threatens, that those that are in Tartarus, or
in Hell, may be afraid. And in the 4. Book of his Ethics, he says: Although
they sin, yet they suffer whatsoever punishment is laid upon them; because
they say, that immortality is life everlasting: for the passion of life
seems immortality. etc.

On the contrary part, Aristotle does sometime seem to be against the
immortality of the Soul: for in his Praedicaments he says: Corrupto animali,
corruptitur scientia, non autem scibile, scientia autem non est anima, ex quo
videtur sequi animam interire cum corpore: 1 The living creature being
corrupted, the science or knowledge is also corrupted; not the thing that may
be known, for the science is not the Soul, whereof it seems to follow, that
the Soul does die with the Body. And in his Book De longitudine et breustate
vitae, Of the length and shortness of life, he says; The living creatures
being corrupted, the science is also corrupted, and likewise the
healthfulnesse; and therefore who of these shall reason for the Soul? for if
it be not of Nature, but as science in the Soul, so also shall the Soul be in
the Body. And of the same another corruption, besides the corruption wherewith
the corruption is corrupted with the Body: therefore it must needs be, that it
has communion with ye body. And in the third, De anima: Non reminiscimur post
mortem little qui in vita sciuimus: We have no remembrance again of the^ after,
whom we knew, while they were alive. And in the third Book of Ethickes:
Terribilissimum autemmors, terminus enim, etc. Death is a most terrible and
fearful thing: for it is the term or end. And there seems thencefoorth to
be unto the dead, neither good nor evil. And Septimo Metaph, he determines
of the Intention, that, Omnes parts quae possunt manner seperatae a toto, sunt
elementa; hoc ect, parts matcriales: All parts that may remain, being
separated from the whole, are Elements; that is to say, parts Material. And
Primo de Caelo, he seems to hold it for impossible, against Plato, Quod
aliquid sit factum perpetuu^ et incorruptibile, et hoc de mundo. etc. That any
thing can be made perpetual and incorruptible: And this is proved of the
world by two reasons; which I omit for breuities sake. And Quinto phisico, he
says: Cuius est principtum, eius est finis: As is the beginning of a thing, so
is the end of it. Out of which sayings, it seemed to Scotus, and to many
others also, that Aristotle was always doubtful of the immortality of the
Soul, yea even unto the day of his death. And he seems sometimes to come
nearer the one part then the other; and sometimes to agree to that, he seemed
before to condemn; accordingly as the matter whereof he entreated, was more
consonant to the one part, rather then the other. Yet notwithstanding, by
Scotus leave, in the foresaid sentence, he seems to me, not to differ from
his master Plato in this matter: and herein my witness is Bessario, the
Cardinal of Nicea, in that which he wrote in the defense of Plato; and Cicero
also, whose testimony amongst all men, is most of authority, says in the
first Tusculan question: Post multorum Philosopherum de animi quidditate
recitatas opiniones, Aristoteles long omnibus; Platonem semper excipio, etc.
After the recited opinions of many Philosophers touching questioninges of the
Soul, Aristotle is far above all: but I always except Plato, a man very
excellent both for wit and wisdom, and diligence, seeing he embracing,
receiving, and allowing those four known kinds, thought that there was also
a fifth Nature: The mind is equal for to cogitate, and to provide, to speak
and to teach, and to invent somewhat, and to remember so many several things;
to love, to hate, to covet, to fear: these things, and such as be like unto
them, are not to be found in any one of these four kinds, and therefore he
thinks there is a fifth nature, that is without name, and so he calls the
Mind it self, (...) Endelcia, quasi quandam contanuatam motionem et perennem:
As it were a certain continued and everlasting motion.

And speaking also of the sentences of the philosophers, which we have put in
the first place, he says: His omnibus sententijs, nihil post mortem pertinere
ad quenquam potest; By all these sentences, nothing can belong to any man after
death. But of the sentence of Aristotle and Plato, he says afterward:
Reliquorum sententiae spem afferunt, posse animos cum e^corporibus excess runt
in caelum quasi in domicilium suum peruenir^: The sentences of others do bring
hope, that souls after they be departed forth of their bodies, do come unto
heaven, as to their own proper dwelling place. Seeing then, that Aristotle
supposes that the Soul is not of the nature of the Elements, as Cicero
says; and also Saint. Augustine in the 22. Book De ciuitate dej, but of that
fifth nature, whereof he will have heaven also to be made: It seems
contrarily, that as it is thought that Heaven is incorruptible and eternal; so
also our Souls are incorruptible and immortal; for either of them may very
well be proved with the same arguments that the other is: for even as Heaven
has the nature of no Element; and neither heavy neither light, neither has
any contrary: it follows then; that the Mind and Soul it self, like as
Heaven, can neither be generated and bred, neither corrupted and brought to
naught.

Seeing then it is thus, that he thinks an infinite multitude of things
separated, a thing impossible, he might have confessed with Pithagoras and
Plato, believing that the Soul does flit forth of one body into another: for
so had I rather have him to think, then to believe with wicked Auarroys, who
would have but one only Soul, and that to be common to and amongst all men.
And that same fellow Auarroys, although he concluded with his Master, that
the Soul is immortal and eternal; yet in his second Comentarie upon the
third Book De anima, he plays Ambidexter, and holds on hoth sides.

The understanding which is called Natural, as we have said, does not happen,
that sometime it understands, and sometimes not, unless in the respect of
the form of Imaginations, existing in every Indiuiduum, or thing that can not
be divided: But in respect of the Species, kind, or sort, it always
understands, unless humane kind do fail; which is impossible. Yet
notwithstanding, in this, he foulely erreth, not only against faith, but also
against Philosophy, in that he put all men's Souls into one Soul, making
them all but one Soul, and would not that every man should have a several
Soul: For he sets down three false and erroneous things, having no
likelihood of truth, but altogether strange from the mind and meaning of
every one of the Philosophers. The first thing is, that the reasonable Soul,
is not Actus primus hominis, etc. the first act of man, or man's substaunciall
form, giving unto him, to be, name, and reason, whereby man is, Hoc aliquid,
This something; but a substance, separated, and a thing outwardly like unto
this. For he sets down the understanding to be possible, separate; which
he calls, the pure material power in the kind of things that are
intelligible. Secondly, he concludes, that such understanding, does not come
unto man, a principio sui esse, from the beginning of his being, but then
only, when he is of years of discretion; for then is it in some sort coupled
unto him, and continued, so that by it, he is able to understand. Therefore
when he says in the Fifth, that it is contimed in a Boy in his childhoode, and
afterward in the 36. Now we have found the manner how this understanding is
continued in a Child, and seek the cause in the beginning: But he sets
down the manner of the continuance, when man by imagined intentions does
concur with the agent understanding, to cause the intention in the material
understanding: so that to cause understandings in act, he calls Abstrahere,
to draw away: but to receive understandings possible, he calls, Intelligere
hominis.

Thirdly, he concludes, that all men have but one understanding. Against
these things, it is first argued on this wise. Anima est actus primus corporis
organici physici, igitur anima est forma substantialis hominis: 1. The Soul is
the first act of the natural organicall body; therefore the Soul is the
substantial form of man. The antecedent is plain: for the Philosopher in the
second of the Soul, affirms, the Soul to be a Substance, and not an
Accident. And afterward deuideth the substance into matter and form, and
compounde; and showing that it is neither matter, nor compound; concludes,
that it is Form, or the first Act of the body. etc. Neither is it available
to say, that the Philosopher sets down a common definition of the Soul,
but speaks conditionally, saying. But if we must say that there is some
common thing in every Soul; it shall verily be that first Act of a natural
isntrumental body. And that it is so, it is very plain: for in the third
Chapter, he says: But of the understanding, nothing is yet manifest, but it
seems to be an other kind of Soul. And then straight after that clause, the
Philosopher says. Vniuersaliter dictum est, quid sit anima: We have
universally declared what the Soul is. And an other Book has: Iam diximus
quid est anima vniuersaliter. And in the Chapter following, he says. Sicut
figurae est vna communis definitio, conueniens omni speciei figurae: sic et
animae oportet esse vnam definitionem conuenientem cuiuslibet partium cius: As
there is one common definition of a Figure, agreeing unto every several
Figure; so also should there be one definition of ye Soul, agreeing to all the
parts thereof. Amongst which, he expressly names the Understanding: And
thereunto he adds, that such a definition is that which he has given; to
wit, that it is. Primus actus. etc.

Neither is the second Allegation of any force; because the Philosopher when
he says: De intellectu aure^ nihil adhuc manifestum est: As concerning the
Understanding, there is yet nothing manifest: refers that Word, to a
doubtful premisse; to wit, whether every one of the parts of the Soul be
separable, as it seems to the man that does consider it. Secondly, it is
evident, that the Soul is. Forma substantialis hominis: the substantial form
of man. Out of the twelfth of the Meta. in the Chapter beginning, Mouentes
autem causae superius allegatae: where the Philosopher puts a difference
between the formal causes, and the efficient causes. Also, so it should
follow, that a child, before that natural understanding were coupled unto him
by the spices of imagination, should not be a man neither endued with reason,
and should in specie differ from an other man, and also from him self the
elder he waxes.

Neither is the solution of Auerroys any thing available, that man is taken
dupliciter, in a double manner: one way, for the essence, by it self only,
compounded of the body, as it were the matter and the soul together, as it
were of the specifying form thereof; which is sometime called of the Doctors,
Ratio particularis, the particular Reason: Sometime of the Philosopher,
Intellectus.

After an other manner; Man is taken for a certain Substance compounded of
Man, Primo modo, after the first manner; and the Soul intellectiue, or the
natural Understanding: and so man is, per se vnum, one by him self. After the
first manner, a Child is not Homo, Man; of the same kind with himself when he
is old, nor with other men. After the second manner, he is not Man, neither
endued with reason, Nisi potentia, but in power. Contrarily it should follow,
that a Child should not be endued with Reason; neither Men inwardly reasonable:
which is absurd. Also, Man understands not, seipso primo, not by himself
first: therefore by his substantial form. The Antecedent is well known, by
experience: the Consequent is plain, because the proper operation agreeing to
any thing compounded, cannot be competent unto it self per mate^^am, by
matter: therefore by the former, is the Soul the substantial form of man. This
is confirmed, because then by no operation of an Animal brute creature, it
could be convinced, that the sensitive Soul should be the form thereof, giving
unto it esse, to be; but the Adversary might say, that it gives it operari
et non esse, to work, and not to be Add hereunto, that it is an express
determination of the Church, in Clemen. Extra de summatri: et fide Catholica.
Against the second, that the proper bodies, and all things shall return
again unto the same. But such a continuation is not intelligible, but feigned,
vain, and unprofitable: Because that by such continuance, man neither after
the first manner, nor yet after the second, could understand. Otherwise the
painted Wall, or the thing wrought on the Wall, and offered to the sight, should
see; because the color that is on the Wall does cause the vision, and the
sight receives it.

Against the third: It should follow, that contraries should be together in
the same thing; for it is plain, that in the understanding of one man, is
Assent and Insent: and in the understanding of another, in the respect of the
same, is Dissent and Intent. And of that thing whereof one man has Science,
another has only Opinion, and an other Ignorance. Also according to this, we
should hardly understand nothing, but that whereof the Fantasy should cause
Intention: But this is false; as experience does prove, by the acts as well of
the Understanding, as of the Will; and by many others. For the notice or
knowledge Intuitiue, is known by beholding or intuitiueely, and is cause of
the Notice reflexed.

But of the immortal state of the soul after death, the foresaid Philosophers
are severed among themselves; for some set down, that the souls when they do
depart forth of the bodies, do straightway enter into the bodies of Beasts,
correspondent unto their Merits: As for example; the Souls of Princes, into
Lions; of Soldiers, into Bores; of others, into Swine; of some, into Wolves;
of others, into Birds and Apes, etc. Neither in these, does the pain and
deiection cease, until they had put on forms agreeable to those of the wild
outrageous Beasts: Whereof it came to pass, (as Ambrose says, in his Book
do bono mortis,) that some said, that the chiefest good, or summum bonum, of
the great Philosophers, does consist in this, that their Souls, after their
death, do enter into Apes or Birds. Others there have been, that said and
affirmed, that they do change their sex or kind, and do turn unto the
infirmity of Woman's nature. Others will, that they go into strange human
bodies: as that fabulous History of the Greeks does witness: for it shows,
that Menelaus, after that Euphorbus was overcome, laid up his Buckler in the
Temple of Juno; which Panthoydes took away: whereof they said, that the Soul
of Euphorbus was entered into Panthoydes, and that he was Euphorbus himself;
whereof Ovid. makes mention in his fifth Book of Metamorphosis.

Ipse ego nam memini Troiani tempore belli,
Panthoides Euphorbus eram cui pectore
Hesit in aduerso grauis hasta minoris Atridae.
That is to say:

For I my self remember well, in time of Trojan War,
Panthoides Euphorbus was my self, and deep and far
A mighty spear did pearce my breast which dead did down me throw:
Atreus mighty younger son, did strike this deadly blow.
And to speak nothing of the rest of the Philosophers, Plato had the best
judgment, what becomes of Men, if notwithstanding (says he,) they lead
their lives righteously and holily, then so soon as the Souls are delivered
from their bodies, they are received into the bosom of the Gods themselves:
But they being unmindful of supernall things, do refuse them as things
connexed, and do again begin to be willing to enter into their bodies again.
For speaking of which out of Plato his doctrine, Virgill is very greatly
commended: Therefore he thought, that the Souls of mortal men, were always
able to abide in their bodies; but through the necessity of death, must needs
be dissolved: And that they are not able neither to endure perpetually without
their bodies; but thought, that by enterchangeable courses, the living became
dead, and the dead become living indefinitely and for evermore. But in this,
do Wisemen differ from others; that straightway after death, they are
carried unto the Stars; and that every one rests very long in that Star
that is agreeable or meet for him: and at length, forgetful of his old
miseries, and ouercommed with desire of having his body, returns again to
the labors and sorrows of mortal men. Therefore by a most hard condition does
Plato make the Souls of men, yea even of the wisest, to be happy and blessed.
Unto whom are not such bodies distributed, as with which they may live always
and immortally; neither without them can endure in eternal purity, but do
sometime, though not immediately, yet at the length, desire to return unto the
bodies: And so indefinitely do by course, return again into diverse bodies,
until the great year, in the which they shall have again their own bodies,
and all things shall come again unto their first estate. And those that have
led a foolish life, he thought, should come unto bodies due to their
deserts, whether of Men or of Beasts: and so long to live miserably in them,
until they be scoured from their filthiness, and their errors moderated, be
redacted unto the rule of reason and temperance; and so at length, deserve to
come unto the honor of their first estate. But Porphirius does not only
remove from men's Souls the bodies of Beasts, but also will have the Souls
of Wisemen so to be delivered from the bonds of the body, that fleeing
utterly from every body, are kept blessed with the Father for evermore.

It is a foolish thing to speak of that life which cannot be most blessed,
unless there may be a most sure certainty of the felicity of it: and for the
blessed Souls to desire the blot of corruptible Bodies, and to return back
again unto them; as though there needed a great Purgation, and an iniquination
and defiling to be required.

Truly the sentence of Porphirius is to be preferred before theirs, that will
evermore have a changing of blessedness and misery: Yet notwithstanding, he
will have the souls of wicked men, to go into other human bodies, that they
might be purged in them: And then when they be purged, without any returning to
their old miseries, he places them in eternal felicity: For it shamed
Porphirius to say, that the Souls of men are posted back again into
beastiall bodies.

If Plato and Porphirius had agreed between themselves, I believe that they
also should have seen that it is a consequent, that Souls do return to
their Bodies, and should receive such things, as whereby they might live
blessedly and immortally: Because according to Plato, the holy Souls also,
shall return to human bodies: According to Porphirius, they shall return to
the evils of this world. Porphirius therefore may say with Plato, they shall
return unto bodies: and Plato with Porphirius, they shall not return to evil
ones. Therefore that the Souls may be blessed, every body must not be
eschewed; but a body proper and incorruptible, must be received; wherein they
may more conveniently rejoice, then wail and lament in any that is
corruptible: So shall there be in them no direful wretchedness and calamity;
which Virgill concludes out of Plato, when he says:

Rursus et incipiant in corpore velle reuerti. That is to say:

And lo they now begin, to have a willing mind,
For to return so corpse again.
So, I say, they shall not have a desire to return to other bodies, seeing
they shall have bodies eternally with them, into the which they shall covet to
return. It is therefore a more honest thing to believe that which the Saints
and holy Angels have showed, which the Prophets have spoken by the instinct of
the holy Ghost, which the Messengers of Christ our savior have preached, which
the blessed Apostles have taught and written; to wit; That there shall be a
Resurrection of our mortal Bodies: or, that men's Souls shall once return
unto their own proper Bodies, and those immortalls There now remains for us,
so far-foorth as the Lord shall vouchsafe to help us, godlily and humbly,
according to our small Talent, to show, or to persuade the Immortality of man's
Soul, or the reasonable Soul, whereby we have sense, move, and understand.
And this will we do so much the more humbly, as we do suppose it the harder
to be done: for there is scarcely any truth more obscure, and out of human
strength, or the principles of natural Philosophy more difficile to be
persuaded; which certainly ought to be counted a work hard and wonderful.
Seeing that it is the greatest thing that may be for the mind it self, to see
and know the mind it self: For as the corporal eye does easily see other
things, but can not see it self; so our Mind does not so easily,
contemplate, or look upon it self, as it does other things: For verily this
force (as Cicero says in the first Tusculan question) has that Precept of
Apollo, in qu^ mouet se quisque noscat: 1. Wherein every one moves, let him
know himself. For I do not believe, that he gave that Precept, to the end to
have us to know our members, or stature, figure, or shape, but that we should
behold the purity and dignity of our mind. To know this therefore, cannot be
any otherwise, but divine and strait. This Precept given of the GOD, could not
belong to any sharp and cruel mind. Every one therefore, that is not
content with the persuasions, and probable and demonstratiue reasons, in this
obscure, difficile and hard matter, which exceeds, passes, or goes beyond
all man's wit; he (I say) is worthy to be despised, and to be left unto him
self in the vain inquisition of such like reasons: For the hard things of
our Faith, ought rather to be considered by the Oracles of the Fathers, then
discussed by the understanding. For often times human sense, while it seeks
the reasons of certain things, and can not find it, does drown it self in
the gulf of Desperation: And when it seeks to find out by reason, the force
of the Immortality of the Soul, it falls (for the most part) into the
bottomless pit of Desperation. Therefore least through rashness and
temeritie, we should deserve to be rebuked about the foresaid doubt, we will
(God willing) assay to reason and dispute in three Conclusions, according to
the sentence and judgment of the ancient Fathers.

The first Conclusion.
ALthough the Immortality of the reasonable Soul cannot be proved, neither
demonstrated by effectual and evident reason; yet by probable reasons it may
apparently be persuaded both to the saythfull and to the vnsaythfull. The first
part is plain; for Augustine in 3. de Trin. speaking of the life Mortal and
Immortal, says: Hac vtrum caveat humana natura, nec parua est quistic;
humanis quippe argumentationibus ^anc muenue con^utes, vix pauci magno praediti
ingent^, vacautes octo, doctrinisque subtilissimis crudite, ad indagandum
solu^s animae im^ort^let^tem peruenire potuerunt. That is to say: Neither is it
a small question, whether human nature does want this or no: for because that
they that go about to find out this by human argumentations, scarcely a few
endued with good wits, having sufficient leisure, and learned in most subtle
doctrines, could attain to the searching out of the Immortality of the Soul
only. By reason thus: We cannot naturally know the reasonable Soul in it
self, neither intuitiuely nor abstractiuely, by a perfect and distinct
knowledge: therefore we can not evidently and by effectual reason, conclude the
Immortality thereof, which naturally and necessarily do follow it. The
Antecedent is clear, of the intuitiue: of the Abstractiue it is plain;
because such a knowledge naturally gotten, does presuppose the intuitiue
knowledge touching the same thing. Secondly thus; every thing demonstrated of
the subject, is first and more according to knowledge, spoken or predicated of
that thing by which it is demonstrated, then of the subject wherein it is
demonstrated and showed for to be. But it is not naturally, neither evidently
known unto us, that Immortality is first and more according to knowledge,
spoken of any other thing then of the reasonable Soul: Or that proposition
wherein Immortality is spoken of another, is not to us former or more known
then this proposition; The Soul is Immortal. The Mayor is plain, because the
demonstration is of things former more known, and the causes of the
conclusion. It is confirmed, because this Conclusion, Anima rationalis est
disciplinabilis: The reasonable Soul is disciplinable: Although it be evident
and known by experience, yet it is not demonstrable: therefore neither this
Conclusion; This Soul is Immortal, because it is neither evident nor known
by experience, is demonstrable. The Antecedent is plain; because that
Proposition is immediate, then the which there is not another that is former,
and principal to conclude this, Homo est disciplinabilis, Man is
disciplinable: For I do not believe, that the Cause can be given why the Soul
is Disciplinable or Immortal; but that of it own nature it is such.

For the persuading of the second part of the Conclusion, we have excerpt three
reasons out of Cicero his first Tusculan Question, and out of Cato the elder.
The first, he draws from (as it were) a natural and inbred opinion of all
men; but especially of old ancients. The second Argument he draws from the
hope and expectation of prudent and good Men. The third, he fetches from the
nigh similitude and likeness of our Minds unto GOD: Afterward we will induce
other familiar Reasons. The first Reason that must testify this truth, is
Antiquity: which the further it was gone from the birth, and difference of
progeny, the better peradventure it did behold those things that were true:
Therefore (says he) it is sure, that old men have a sense and feeling in
death; and that man is not so blotted out by the departure out of this life,
that he should utterly perish. And this to be so, may be understood by the
Ceremonies used at the Sepulchers, Graves, and Burial of the dead; where is
used such Rites toward them, as if they were still endued with most excellent
Wits. Neither would they have worshipped with so great regard, nor used so
devout Religion, unless it had cleaned to their minds, that Death could not
destroy all things: but is as it were the Guide, Captain, and Leader of
worthy Men and Women, that do go from hence into Heaven; and change this
frail, brittle, miserable, and wretched life, for a life permanent,
everlasting, blessed, and joyful. From which opinion it is sprung, that many
(whose names it is not now needful to reckon up or rehearse) are, for their
good life and virtuous behavior, while they lived here in this world amongst
men, counted after their death, amongst the number of the Gods. This same may
hereof be understood, that all men have a care, that these things should be
after their death; to wit, Propagation of Name, Procreation of Children,
Adoption of Sons, and fulfilling of Testaments; with many other things. It
is a most great Argument amongst the Philosophers, Why we ought to believe
that there is Gods; although there be no Nation so savage and outrageous, whose
mind is not endued with opinion of Gods. If any one would have this Reason
reduced, and brought unto that strait form of Logic wherein it shall have
less force, they shall summarily have it thus: All men, and especially those
old ones, who as they seem to have excelled us in stature of body, so also in
excellency of wit; because they found out all good Arts, (which was an hard
thing to do) judged by nature, or were naturally inclined to judge, that the
Souls of men be Immortal: Therefore the Souls of men are Immortal. The
Antecedent plainly appears to be true, of the diligence that all men use
about their Sepulchers or Graves, about the propogation of their name, fame,
and glory; about the generation of Children, adoption of Sons, and of many
other things, which men would not do, unless they were naturally inclined to
judge, that after they be departed out of this life, there belongs something
unto them, whereunto they have a natural appetite.

The second Reason is, because that Plato (whose authority is of such force
with Cicero, that he counts him worthy to be believed in what he says,
although he show no reason why,) writing unto Dionisius in that Epistle that
begins, Audiui ex Archidomo, does persuade, saying; Natura fieri viaemus, vt
ignauissimus quisque nihil curet, quae sit de eo futura opinin. Sapientes
auten^ et boni viri cuncta faciunt, quo futura secula been dese existimant: 1.
We see that it comes to pass by nature, that every slothful sluggard,
takes no care what opinion shall hereafter he had of him: But wise and good
men, do all things whereby the ages to come, may think well of them.
Whereby, I do conjecture, that his meaning is, that they that be dead, have
some sense, feeling, or knowledge of our matters, or the things that we do.
This Reason, Cato the elder following, does thus reason in Cicero his Book De
Senectute. Nemo vnquam mihi Scipio, persuadebit aut patrem tuum, etc. There
shall never any man persuade me; Scipio, that either your Father Paulus, or
your two Graundfathers Paulus and Affricanus; or that Affricanus Father, or his
Uncle, or many other excellent men; whom now it is not needful to reckon up,
did endeavor so great things, which might belong to memory of their
posterity, unless they did see very well in their minds, that the posterity
should pertain unto them: Or do you think (that I may glory somewhat of my
self, as it is the manner of old men to do,) that I would have taken upon me
so great labors both night and day, at home and in war, if I were persuaded
that my glory should end with my life: Had it not been a great deal better
for me to have spent my time in ease and quietness, without any labor and
contention: This speech Cicero handling more largely in the first Tusculan
question, says. Quae natura in hominum genere melior, quam eorum, qui se natos
ad homines iuuandos, tutandos, conseruandos arbitrantur, etiam vsque ad mortem
fortiter sustinendam. Quis autem sapiens sine spe immortalitatis se offerret ad
mortem? Quid enim imprudentius, quam sine vsto premio, se et vita et virtute
propria priuare? Cum aut seruitutis aut egestatis labores, etc. 1. What Nature
in Mankind can be better, then theirs, that think themselves to be borne unto
this end, to the intent that they may help, defend, and preserve men, yea even
unto the abiding of the bitter bruntes of direful death. But what wiseman will
offer himself unto death, without ye hope of immortality: for what part can a
man play more unwisely, then without any reward, to deprive himself of life,
and his own proper virtue: when be might, with the rest of the Citizens,
patiently abide the labors either of servitude, or of poverty: Who will
affirm, that Glory does profit the dead, if they have no sense or feeling of
it: What good can this glory do to those famous worthy men, so diligently and
notably cammended and described of Poets, if so be they do know nothing of it?
Whether is it our parts then, to condemn all those worthy men of
foolishness, who have valiantly sustained death for their Country; or to
believe that they looked for the immortality of their souls? whose minds,
sentence, and judgment, to find fault withal, or to reprehend, seems to
come the nearest unto temeritie or roshnesse. This Reason diffusedly handled,
may be brought to form, under a double manner. First, wise and good men, do
judge and hope, that their Souls shall be immortal: therefore it is so. The
Antecedent is very plain: for otherwise they would not have so endangered
themselves, nor willingly died, that their valiantness might be left to them
memory of posterity, unless they judged that the posterity did belong to
them. The Consequent is plain; because the diuinations and opinions of good
men are seen, as well as of the wicked. The second, If the Soul were not
immortal, no man (in his right mind) would offer himself to death for his
Country, or the Commonweal; nor yet sustain death for his Friends. The
Consequence does not seem false: For the Philosopher says in the ninth Book
of Ethickes, That every one ought to suffer for his friends; yea and to die
for them also, it need so required. The same he says in the 3. Book of
Ethics. The Consequence is plain; because none (that is in his right wits)
ought by good reason to deprive himself of the chiefest good, or without hope
to get some good thing either in this present life, or in that which is to
come. But if the Soul be mortal, then it does by death, deprive it self of
the chiefest good, yea of all good things, without any hope of reward. It may
be thus confirmed: Death does not profit of it self, or by it self, to the
conservation of the Commonweal, but is indeed against it: Therefore, if the
Soul be mortal, and is not to be rewarded in time to come; then no wise man
ought to stand to the truth in the right of his Country, even unto death. The
Antecedent is plain, Simile est de vno ciue, et multis: What is the duty of
one Citizen, is also the duty of many. But it is a foolishness to say; that
all Citizens ought to die for the conservation of the Weal public, seeing
that the Public weal is the life of the Citizens: For what profited them the
pertinacie of the Saguntines unto the safety of the Commonweal? If the
Saguntines would have chosen the safety of their Commonweal, they should
either have forsaken their Faith, or else never have made such Oath: But if they
must needs keep their Faith, then must they needs loose their Commonweal;
as it came to pass. Secondly, the Consequence is plain. No man of sound
reason, ought to sustain a great evil, unless it be to eschew a greater
evil; or for the obtaining of a greater good, then that good is, whereof by
such evil he is deprived; because that of two evils, the less always is to be
chose^. But if the Soul be mortal, and after death have no being; then no
such good can be given, or be imagined.

Neither does it avail, that Scotus says, alleging the Philosopher in the
ninth of the Ethickes, that he that dies for his Country, gives to himself
great good, by exercising that great act of virtue. Et hoe bono priuaret se,
omnino vic^ose viueret: He should deprive himself of that good thing (says
Scotus,) and should live viciously, or in reproach and defame. If the Soul be
mortal, there can not the^ be unto the dead, either good or evil, or sense:
For what can either praise, or fame, or glory, profit the dead, if the dead
know not of them? for after their death, they cannot give unto themselves for
the said work, either reward, joy, or rejoicing; for these are the affections
of the mind.

Neither again is that true, or by any means to be received as true, or for
any color of truth, which the same Sootus says, that, Potest dari common
bonum, propter quod debet se exponere morti: et totum bonu^ exponere
destructioni simpliciter, etiamsinesciat anima^ immortalem: There may be given
a common good, for whose sake every one ought to offer himself to death: and
what good soever he has, to endanger it to destruction simply, although he can
not tell whether the Soul be Immortal or no. Because it is not certain
whether the common good be always rather to be chosen, then the particular and
proper good. Yea, this is universally true at no time, but then when the
particular good is included in the common good: But where the common good
includes the particular good, who is there of sound judgment, and in his
right mind, that loves the particular and proper good, more then the common.
For the Philosopher says in the 8. Eth. Amabile quidem bonu^ ouique, etc.
Every one loves his own good: therefore by good reason, every one loves his
own, better the^ an other man's. And 9. Eth. Amabilia ad alteru^ mensurantur,
ex his quae sunt adseipsum* Lovely things are measured unto another, by those
things which a man loves him self.

The third Reason (because I study to be short:) The Soul of man, according
to the most excellent operations, is like unto God: And therefore of some it is
believed, to have a divine nature. But of men of our Religion, it is called,
The image of God: Therefore it is to be esteemed like unto him in immortality.
The Antecedent is plain, and very well known a confessed truth amongst all.
The Consequence is proved out of Plato, alleged by Eusebius Praeparationis
Euangelicae, lib. 11. cap. 14. where are recited these words of Porphirius,
handling this Reason. Firmam cortamque rationemeam Plato putauit, quae a
similitudine ^^iquorum vim accepit. Nam si Deo immortali similis est anima,
quomodo etiam ipsae sicut exemplar suum immortalis non erit? Plato thinks
that to be a firm and sure Reason, which takes force from the similitude of
some things: for if the Soul be like to God that is Immortal; how shall not
then it self be Immortal, like as the examplar: I pass over the rest. Which
Reason (as the same Eusebius says) is drawn out of Moses, who first taught
that the Soul is Immortal, because it is the Image of God: yea, he affirms,
that assuredly it is the Image of God. Whom the Wiseman following in the 2.
Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, does most briefly touch the same Reason,
saying. Deus creauit hominem inestimabilem, ad imaginem similitudinis suae
fecit illu^: 1. God created Man inestimable, or without corruption; and made
him after the Image of his own likeness. This Reason also Salust touches in
the beginning of his Book of Catalines Conspiracy, where he affirms, Animum
nobis cum dijs communem, et virtutem claram, et aeternam: That we have a mind
common with the Gods, and a clear virtue, and eternal. Which Sentence, in the
beginning of the War of Iugurtha, he uses again. Ingenij egregia facinora
sicuti et anima, immortalia sunt; id est, The worthy works of the Wit, like
as the Soul, are Immortal. Which also may thus be persuaded. These Acts to
will, to understand, to remember, to love, to hate, wherein the Souls have
conueniencie with God and Angels; may both be, and be exercised without the
body: therefore it is not repugnant to the Soul, both to be, and to live
without the body. The Antecedent is well known; and the Consequent is plain:
because the Accidentis not more abstract then the Substance, from which it is
said to flow. Seeing then we do prove in our selves, that the Soul existing
in the body, does know many things, which can not fall under our sense; and
that without the mediation or using the means of the body: (for we prove or
find by experience, that it knows the relations following Nature, and
insensible relations of reason: we find by experience, that it assenteth to
the complections without possibility of contradicting, or erring, and many
other things:) seeing therefore (I say) that these Acts have no conueniencie,
neither can agree to other forms and things corruptible, it is most like and
agreeable to reason, that these Acts are sufficient to prove, that the Soul
is immortal. Moreover, the Immortality of the Soul, is proved by certain
reasons of the School Doctors. First: In whom there is power and virtue
always, Proficere, to profits: in the same also, there is power and virtue
always to be. Seeing that the subsistence of the Accident cannot be naturally
without the Essence of the subject. But in the Soul there is always power and
virtue, proficere, to profits: therefore there is in the Soul, power and
virtue always to be. The Minor is evident, by the saying of a certain Wise
man, who says. Cum consummauirit homo, tunc incipit: 1. When man shall make
his ending, then is his beginning. And in an other place. Multitudinem
ingressus saepientiae quis intellexit? Who has ever known the multitude of
Wisdoms entries: Which speech seems to have this sense, that by the
prosecting and increasing of Wisdom, the entrance in unto her is multiplied;
because he seems more and more to enter in unto her, that more and more
profecteth in her. This Exposition is helped by the speech of the Prophet that
says to his Soul: Post me ingredi non cessabis: Thou shall not cease to enter
in after me. The Answer of Plato does also further it: For he being asked,
when a man can have profited so much in Philosophy, that there can remain
nothing for him to know more; or when he can have learned so much, that there
can be nothing left for him to learn? He answered. Hoc solum scio, quod
nescio: 1. This only I know, that I know not. As if he should have said,
Solum cognosco ignorantiam meam: 1. I know only mine ignorance. This I thus
confirm. The perfections and dispositions that the reasonable Soul can
acquire or get, are not limited: therefore the life of the reasonable Soul,
or the existence thereof, is not limited; and so by consequence, it must
needs be Immortal. The Antecedent is plain; because the Soul cannot know so
many things, but it may know more. The Consequence is plain; because it is
impossible for the virtue and power of every subject, to be of those
dispositions and perfections from the which the subject is naturally
prohibited: For this mortal life cannot suffice naturally for the getting or
participating of infinite perfections, seeing that every one of them requires
time.

A second Reason is this: If the Soul should be corrupted, and so mortal, it
should be either through the action of the contrary; or else through the
corruption of the subject. But it is not corrupted by means of the action of
the contrary; because it has no contrary. Neither can it be corrupted, by
reason of the corruption of the subject: because nothing is corrupted in that,
wherein it consists by it own perfection: For these are contrary mutations;
to wit, of Corruption, and Perfection. But the Perfection of the Soul,
consists in a certain abstraction from the Body: for the Body waxing old in
men, living moderately and temperately, the Soul is perfected, according to
the science and knowledge thereof, and according to the virtues thereof.
According to the science and knowledge; because in ancient old men, is
Wisdom; and in much time, is Prudence. According to the Virtues; because such
men, are temperate, neither give place to wicked Concupiscence, nor have any
great difficulty in act. But young men, have wicked Concupiscences, and are
delighted therein: neither can they refrain them, without great difficulty.
This Argument is confirmed by a double Reason. The first is this: That when the
Body is weakened, or some Organ thereof has received some hurt, the Soul is
more fortified thereby, and made more stronger and virtuous in the other senses
and powers, as though it were unto them a more inward supply of those things
that seem to be taken away by the defect of the members: Therefore, when the
Body dies, the Soul does not die. The Antecedent is known to be true, by
experience: for a blind man is more sharp and quick in hearing and in
understanding, and in other senses, then he that is well sighted. Whereof
Guilermus Parisiensis says; That a certain Blind man was so cunning, and had
so much prosited in experience, that he could infallibly tell only by the
touching, handling, feeling, or croping, any piece of Money of his own Country
coin, though there were never so many and sundry sorts of them. And a
certain blind Boy in the fourteenth year of his age, learned all liberal
Arts, knew and understood all the sacred Scriptures, and taught them, and
wrote most largely and amply upon them; as is mentioned in the Tripartue
History.

The second Confirmation is thus. As is the whole Body to the whole Soul, so
are the parts of the Body, to the parts of the Soul. But when one part, or
some Organ of the Body is corrupted, there is no part of the Soul corrupted,
nor hurt, nor suffers in it self; but remains sound and perfect: Therefore
when the Body dies, the Soul does not die. The Antecedent is plain by the
Philosopher: Si senex haberet oculum neuenis, videret vtigque vt iuuenis, etc.
If an old man should have the eye of a young man, he should see as a young
man: therefore when part of the Body is hurt, the Soul is not hurt in it
self, although it be deprived of the act. For when our Savior Christ restored
sight unto the blind, he gave not, nor conferred unto the Soul any strength or
actiuitie; but only repaired the hurt, or indisposition of the Organ. Also the
reasonable Soul, by how much more it understands and knows things
intelligible, by so much more perfect is it made, and more disposed to
understand. But the Souls of all mortal men, by how much more they feel and
exercise their operations, by so much more are they weakened, and made unfit
for the exercising of their operations. Experience does teach both these, to be
true: and so does the Philosopher also, where he says. Excellens sensibile
currumpit sonsum; excellens autem intelligibile non corrumpit intellectum: 1.
The excellent sensible thing corrupts the sense: but the excellent
intelligible thing does not corrupt the understanding. Therefore there is
another kind of the Soul, from that which is corruptible; and so by
consequence, it must needs be Immortal.

Morcouer, the forms or Souls, which all men judge, or do think to be
corruptible, and to be of themselves wholly corrupted, and the corruption of
the whole to be as is the corruption of the part, are corrupted as the part is
corrupted: because they are extended, having part without part; and are greater
in a great body, and lesser in a less body. This Scotus does very notably
deduct in the fourth Book; That in Nutrition, is required a new form; and in
the Diminution there flows not only the matter, but also the thing
compounded of the matter and the form: Therefore the Nutrition or Nourishing,
is called a certain Generation. And it is very manifest, that in Nutrition,
there are more parts of the matter in the whole, then was before; or else the
new part of the matter is in the whole without form: which is not to be
granted neither under the whole form, because so it is extended, having part
without part; or else under a new form, and so we have our purpose: or else
under part of the form that was before; and then even that, leaves off to
perfect part of the matter, which before it perfected: and so one and the same
part of the material form, shall slit from one part of the matter unto to an
other part, which is inconvenient: or that part of the form, being the same it
was before, does in like manner perfect part of the matter that it did before;
and this part of the matter, now new: And so it shall together perfect two
perfectable things; either whereof, is fully matchable to it serfe. But the
reasonable Soul, is not extended or stretched out; neither greater in a
greater body, and lesser in a lesser Body: but it is whole in the whole Body,
and wholly or altogether indivisible in every part: therefore it is an other
kind from the corruptible forms, and mortal Souls.

It is a thing well known, that all men do desire blessedness; and that it
is the end of good men. It is also known by reason, that blessedness cannot
be otherwise, then sempiternall: Therefore it is well known, that Man is
ordained to some everlasting perfection; which proves, that the Soul is
Immortal The Minor does Saint Augustine prove, 13. de Trin: ap 8. Si beata
vita bearum d^^erat, etc. If so be the blessed sife do forsake the blessed
man, he being thereunto either willing, or not willing, or neither of them: If
not willing, how is it a blessed life; which is so in the Will, as it cannot be
in the Power: If willing, how could that life be blessed, which he that had it,
would not have it verily and indeed: But if neither, Then such a life, cannot
in any wise be blessed, in such a case, when he that it makes blessed, is a
stranger from the love thereof. This may in this wise be confirmed. Man's Soul
is made to be partaker of blessedness, to receive it and enjoy it. For this is
certain, truly proved by the clamor of every Appetite natural: Therefore the
Soul is made to receive either eternal and perpetual blessedness, or else
temporal. If the first, then the Soul is Immortal, and at the length shall
be perpetually blessed. Now the second cannot be; because like as sorrow
comes of those things which happen unto us against our wills: even so does
it of those things that depart from us against our wills. But blessedness,
if we should be unwilling unto it, should perish, and become no blessedness at
all: for how can we be blessed against our wills? And so blessedness
perishing, our Souls, by a consequent, should have in them selves a fear and
grief, and be always sorrowful: whereby it should follow, that they should
be miserable.

Also, in every well ordered civil government, there are appointed rewards,
to provoke men to the doing of good; and punishments, to sound the retreat
from vices. But in the whole government of Mankind, good and virtuous men are
not sufficiently rewarded; nor evil and naughty men sufficiently punished:
yea, they cannot sufficiently be rewarded, nor punished; the one, by reason of
Gods Promise; the other, because of his Justice. Therefore there is another
life, in the which shall be given to every one according as his works shall
be. For no man could say, that the virtuous be rewarded with the pleasures
which Epicures enjoy, and wherewith all they are delighted. Neither can it be
said, that the goods of Fortune (as they call them) can sufficiently reward the
virtuous; seeing that for the most part, we see the evil men flow in riches,
delights, prosperity, and all pleasures that their hearts can desire. On the
contrary part, the Virtuous do often want these pleasures and delights, and
are excruciated with many sundry sharp showers of Adversity. What then shall
be given unto the just man, that has abstayned from delights, even unto the
day of his death, and sustayneth sorrows, poverty, adversity, and
tribulations?

Moreover, the work of Virtue is better, incomparably then the goods of
Fortune. And as Aristotle witnesses, Honor and Fame, and chiefly of those
things which are outward goods: hence he says, Maxim grauiter quisque fert
suo honor priuatus? (as we use to say in our English,) Who is so woe begone,
as first a man, and then none? But Honor is not a meet or worthy reward for
Virtue: as the same Aristotle says in the seventh Book of Ethickes. Virtuti
perfectae non vtique dignus honor: Honor is no worthy reward for perfect
Virtue. Neither is it available to say, That the Virtuous are sufficiently
rewarded with essential goodness, that inseparably follows a good Act. And
that the Evil are punished with the pain that inseparably accompanies an
evil Act: which the Doctors call, Paenam derelictam, Punishment left off; and
not Punishment inflicted. Of which Augustine says, in his Book of
Confessions: Thou have commanded Lord, and so it is, that every sinner is a
punishment to himself. Of the which good, (as some say) the Philosopher
speaks in the 9. Book of Ethickes, saying: That every one that dies for his
Friend, does purchase to himself the greatest good that may be. Moreover, a
less delectation, for the most part, does follow a greater operation; and
peradventure none at all; as of the operations of Fortitude: Whereof it is that
the Philosopher says, in the third Book of Ethickes, That in all Virtues, a
man can not be occupied with delight. Neither is it of force to say, that man's
felicity does consist in Sciences speculatiue, or in the operations of
Wisdom, and in the knowledge of most high causes: And so by a consequent, by
such like operations of Wisdom, a man should sufficiently be rewarded in this
life: As the Philosopher and Auerrhois do seem to say. For the Co^mentator
upon the first Book of Physics, says: That it is proper to a man concerning
his last perfecttion to be perfect according to the Sciences speculatiue. And
this Disposition is unto him his utmost felicity: And that heavenly life
consists in this Science; because that for Felicity, a man ought to be good
and perfect. But perfection, according to the Sciences speculatiue, does not
make a man absolutely neither good, nor the best: for many in such things, may
be perfect, which are dishonest and vicious. A man dishonest and full of vices,
may be very skillful and perfect in speculatiue Sciences: for the disposition
to felicity, is made better by virtues Moral, Heroical, and Divine. Whereof
the Philosopher says in the 2. Book of Ethics, That it is a very mere beast
lines to say, that we can be better, then by virtues Heroical and Divine. Even
as Homer feigned, that Priamus said of Hector; That because he was so very
good, he seemed not to be the son of a mortal man, but of a God. Wherefore
if it be so, as they say; that Gods be made of men, because of the notable
excellency of their Virtues; then such like habit shall be opposite to
beastliness. And in the 10. Book of Ethics, the Philosopher does teach; That
a man must so frame his works and his life, that all be directed to this end,
to wit, to get Felicity. Upon which, Auerrhois says; If God have a care of
Men, as it is believed, and as it is meet he should; he rejoices of the
better, and is delighted in those that do well; and it is meet and a worthy
thing, that he do well unto, and reward those that love him more then others,
or all things in the world, and honor them, and visit them often, even as it
is the disposition of one friend with another: therefore must we do our
endeavor to become good. This is thus confirmed. First, That then those men
that give themselves to Speculation, or do practice and exercise themselves in
Speculatiue sciences, howsoever they lived mortally and desormedly, Virtuous
should not be reputed blessed and happy, nor rewarded for their Merits.
Secondly, If so be that God have a care of Men, it is meet and most agreeable
to reason, that his delight concerning men, should be of that thing, which is
the best in them, and which is most known unto him, and most nigh and
agreeable unto him; that is to say, which is most like unto God; which is, to
live virtuously, according to the understanding: And also, that he do well
unto, and reward those that do love him: And bestow benefits on those, that
for his sake do cast away, contemn, and neglect worldly wealth, and
delightful pleasures, and patiently sustain and suffer Adversity, and
willingly abide all Miseries, even unto the day of their death. But he cannot
sufficiently reward them in this life: therefore the Soul is Immortal. The
Minor is plain; Because man is even unto death, vexed with Miseries, Poverty,
and Adversities. The Mayor is manifest, by the Philosopher, in the tenth Book
of Ethics, saying; Seciendum intellectum autem operans, et hunc curans, etc.
He that works according to the understanding, and cares for it, does seem
to be the best of all disposed, and to love God most: for if the Gods have a
certain care of human things, as they seem to have; it shall then be most
agreeable to reason, that the Gods themselves do rejoice and delight in that
thing which is the best and the nighest of kin unto them. etc. Also it is
thus confirmed: Because, if the Soul should be Mortal, and there should be no
life after this; then infinite evils should remain unpunished, and good deeds
should not be rewarded: Which does seem derogatorie to the equity of Justice,
and to the comeliness and fairness of human civil government. For what
pain, punishment, and misery, does here happen unto those evil men, who
being given to delights and pleasures, do continually even unto their death,
heap evils upon evils? Who (I say) shall punish and take vengeance of those
Kings and Princes; by whose decrees, commandment, power, and authority,
Commonweals are tossed and turmoyled, shaken and spoiled, by so many plagues,
torments, vexations, violences, injuries, and adversities? Who shall in this
life be sufficiently able to punish those most grievous sins, that are done
in secret, evil minds, and inward affections? What punishment then, I pray
you, and misery, shall there be of these evils? Which if it be called the
Privation of blessedness, then shall all be equally punished: which seems to
be derogatorie to the equity of Justice. Therefore it seems most agreeable
to reason, that there is a life of man's Soul after this; wherein every one
shall receive worthily as he has done in this life, whether it be good or
evil.

Moreover, if man's Soul should not live after this life, in vain then, and to
no purpose should we serve God here; seeing that in this life, the worship
of God and Religion, is cruelly persecuted, tormented, afflicted, and
cruciated: and then is there after this life, no reward for it. In this point,
it were better for the Soul, and more profitable by much, altogether to deny
God; and wholly to give it self to every vanity and pleasure, then to live
holily and justly, with so many miseries, and to worship the Creator with due
honoring and devotion. Whereof the Apostle, in the first Epistle to the
Corinths the fifteenth chapter says: If in this life only, we hope in Christ,
then are we of all men most miserable. For if God has no regard of his
Servants and Worshippers, where is his Power? seeing that neither in this
life, (for this thing) he cannot be worsse; neither in an other, better: seeing
that after this, there is not another. But if he do not care, nor have any
regard, Where is his Wisdom and his Goodness? Wherefore he should seem to
be ignorant, not to know, or not to love his lovers and worshippers; if there
be not another life after this: whereof the one destroys his Wisdom, the
other his Goodness.

Out of these things above declared, is very easily enough disprooued the rash
and erroneous opinion of Auerrhois, putting human felicity, to consist in
the every way and Actual conjunction or copulation with the Understanding: And
that Understanding, he would have to be but one of all men, that all men have
but one understanding; as we have before said. For he said, That man is then
happy and sufficiently rewarded, when that Understanding shall be every way
coupled unto him. Which he affirmed to be done, when a man shall actually have
all Understandings speculatiue. But this is impossible; because that then
there should be together in act, infinitely infinite things in the
Understanding.

Moreover, we find by experience in our selves, that the Attention to one
thing, does draw back again the perfect Attention, about another thing.
Seeing therefore the Understanding is of a finite virtue, it shall never be
able to be coupled perfectly and actually to all speculations. Who (I pray you)
is found at all times, to be all one; the same in one thing, he was in another,
skillful alike in all things? Who so skillful, that he can not be deceived in
any thing? Who is so perfect, that he is perfectly quieted in all things, and
fully satisfied? Was not Aristotle deceived in many things, and found
ignorant in many things; as about the Eternity of the World, and the
Perpetuity of generation and corruption? and in very many other things also,
he foully erred.

The second Conclusion.
Faith secluded and set apart, in the light of natural Reason, it is more
agreeable to Reason, and more probable to affirm, that the reasonable Soul is
Immortal, then to say, that it is Mortal: Or that the opinion of those
Philosophers that avouch, that the Soul is Immortal, is more reasonable, and
more probable: yea, Faith being secluded and set aside, then the opposite or
contrary thereof. First, it is very manifest, according to the Philosopher,
that that is probable, which does seem to the most, even chiefly to the
wisest. But very many of the Philosophers, and those whom we see to be
preferred above all others, of every sect and nation, in fame, glory, and
wisdom, have verily thought, the Soul to be Immortal. And but a few, and
those of the meanest of the Philosophers, of no fame and reputation, have said,
That it is Mortal; as has been showed before: therefore the Soul is
Immortal.

Hereof the Philosopher says, in the ninth Book of Ethics, that, Opinionibus
sapientum oportet acquiescere, habent enim fidem quandam: 1. We ought for to
rest and stay our selves in the Opinions of Wisemen: for they have a certain
Faith. Whereof he also says: That the opinions of Wisemen do sound together,
etc. Also that Opinion is more reasonable and probable, whereunto there are
more effectual persuasions, or more dialecticall reasons. But for this
Opinion, That the Soul is Immortal, there are more effectual persuasions,
and more Topicall reasons, then for the contrary opinion: Yea for that part,
the reasons are most slender: neither have they scarsely any shadow of
probability; for all the reasons wherewith they go about to impugn the
Immortality of the Soul, are founded in error, or on a false ground; as are
these whereunto all (for the most part) do lean. If the Soul should be
Immortal, it should follow, that all the Souls should be perpetually idle and
deprived of their proper act. But this Reason is grounded on two things:
whereof both are false and erroneous. The first is, that the Body being
corrupted, cannot be repaired and brought again to the same form and manner
that it was before. The second is, That the Soul cannot understand but in the
Body, and by the means of the Body: of which things at this present, it is
not needful to speak. Also, Reasons dialecticall, how effectual or forceable
soever they shall be; or multiplied out of the nature of them, or from the
Empire or Godly affection of the Will, cannot cause but an opinion or assent,
with a fear of the opposite. From the same feate, are Reasons bred with the
empire of the Will, and the godly Affection thereof, to cause a greater assent
in the kind of opinion: yea verily, sometimes Faith, or a firm Assent without
fear of the opposite; whereof the Philosopher says, in the seventh Book of
Ethics, that, Aligui ita firmiter harent his de quibus habent opinionem, sicut
alij his quibus habent scientiam: 1. Some do so firmly cleave to the things
whereof they have opinion, as others do to those things whereof they have
full knowledge or skill. And this proceeds of the empire and godly Affection
of the Will: Whereof the Text thus lies: Some that do hold Opinions, do not
doubt, but esteem or think that they do surely know that whereof they hold
opinion, and do nothing less believe those that are of opinion, then others
those that know. But every one well disposed, is inclined, Ad esse, et non ad
non esse. To be, and not to not be; to the affirmative, not negative; and is
affected to always to be, if it be possible: therefore others being like,
every one well disposed is borne to have a greater Assent, yea a firmer and a
surer, that the Soul is Immortal, then of the opposite thereof.

Therefore it is more agreeable to reason, and more probable in the light of
natural reason to suppose, or to think, that the Soul is Immortal, then the
opposite thereof. Whereof our Cicero thought it more saf and secure, to err
with those Philosophers that hold that the Soul is Immortal, then with those
mean and base accounted on Philosophers, that do affirm and hold of opinion,
that the Soul is Mortal.

If the Soul be Mortal, then they that hold it to be Immortal, do not thereby
get any detriment, loss, hinderance, or evil: neither can they be blamed in
an other life, nor noted of ignorance. If it be Immortal, then they that hold
it to be Mortal, are worthy in an other life, to be reprehended and laughed to
scorn. Therefore it is more agreeable to reason in the light of natural
reason, to say, that the Soul is Immortal, then to say, that it is Mortal.
For so says Cicero: Quod si in hoc erro quod animos hominu^ credebu^
immortales esse, lebenter erro. Nec mihi hunc errorem quo delector dum viuo
extorqueri volo. Sin mortuus vt quidam minuti Philosophi censent, nihil
s^ntiam. Non vereor ne hunc errorem meum Philosophi mortui irrideant: If so be
I do err in this, that I believed the Souls to be Immortal, I do willingly
err: Neither while I live, will I be wrested away from this error wherein I am
delighted: But when I am dead, as certain mean Philosophers do think, I
shall feel nothing; I do not fear, least the dead Philosophers should scorn
this my error.

Therefore the foresaid Philosophers, of whom we have spoken above, not
overcome by evident reasons and demonstrations, but fully settled and grounded
in the foresaid persuasions, and all other reasons probable; which for
breuities sake I omit, have concluded; That the Soul is Immortal. For the
Philosophers in following Natural reason, have written and taught those
things, which they have not proved evidently, neither by demonstratiue
reason: but perswasiuely and dilectically. They also supposed, thought, and
concluded, many things without any great proof, by mingling and conforming
themselves to the opinions of the common people, and the sentences of the
Philosophers that were before them. Whereof the Philosopher says, Secundo de
caelo, cap. Of two hard Questions (says he,) it is to be tried, which thing we
should say, is the worthy thing. Reputing Promptitude to be imputed a point of
shamefastness, rather then of boldness. If any do stand on Philosophies
part, and does love few sufficiencies of that thing whereof we have very great
doubtinges, whence few sufficiencies and persuasions usually have sufficed
Philosophers, where they were not able to attain to greater things; neither
did they contradict the principles of Philosophy, or the opinions of their
predecessors; wherein Philosophers on all sides rested, because of their
probable probations, and sometime for the assertions of their formors; because
of necessary reason.

And in the same Chapter, De alijs astris, dicunt Aegiptij et Babilonicj, etc.
Of other Stars, do speak the Aegiptians and Babilonians, from whom we have
many things that we do believe of every our of those Stars: But in the
sciences of Astrology and Astronomy, have flourished the sons of Seth, Noe,
Abraham, Solomon, and the holy Fathers; which have taught Philosophers, of
secrets Celestial and Divine: unto the which they could not have attained by
human strength and natural reason. But Josephus in the first Book of the
Antiquities of the Jews, says: That Seth, when he came to that age, that
could discern good things, gave him self to the study of Virtue; and when
he was become an excellent man, he left his Sons to be followers of himself;
they all being the Sons of a good Father, tarryed in the same Land, living
most happily without any vexation; and first found out the discipline and
learning of things Celestial, and the trimnesse of them. And least they
should slide away from men, and utterly perish, seeing they had learned of
Adam, that there should be one extermination of all things by Fire, and an
other by the power and force of Water; they made two Pillars, one of Brass,
and an other of Stone, and wrote therein what they had found out of Celestial
things, that they might leave unto men, the knowledge of Celestial secrets.

And in the Secrets of Secrets, it is said; That the glorious GOD, has
ordained the mean and remedy to temper Humors, and preserve Health; and how
to get many other things. And has revealed it to Prophets and Holy men, and
others, whom he fore-chose and illustrated with the spirit of his Wisdom. Of
these, the men that followed, had the beginning and original of Philosophy;
Aegiptians, Greeks, Latins: from whom the latter have drawn and written the
principles of Arts and Sciences. And (says he to Alexander,) it is meet and
worthy, that he know noble Physic, which is said to be a glory inestimable,
and is called, The Treasure of Philosophers. I truly have never truly or
perfectly enough learned it: neither do I know who it was that invented it.
Some affirm, that Adam was the inuentor thereof. Some say that it was
Esculapius, and Hermogenes the Physician Hirsos and Domasti^^, and Mati^dos
hebrews, and Dioris, and Carus, glorious Philosophers. Many say, that Henooh
by a vision knew this secret: whom many will have to be that great Hermogenes
whom the Greeks do praise, and to him commend all Science secret and
celestial. Wherefore in the Prologue of the Books of Hermes Mercurius Triplex
Trismegistus, it is thus said: We read in old Histories of Divines, that there
were Three Philosophers: whereof the first was Henoch, who is also called
Hermes, and Mercury. The second, Noe; who was called Hermes: for he (as
Albumuzar witnesses) was a great Prophet, and first builded and peopled
Babylon after the Flood, and instructed them in knowledge and learning. His
son Sem also taught the Babilonians or Caldeans, and delivered unto them the
science of the Stars. The third, was called Hermes Mercurius Triplex, because
he was a King, a Philosopher, and a Prophet: he flourished after the Flood,
and with great equity governed the Kingdom of Aegipt, and clearly brightened
Astronomy. And in the Book of the Death of Aristotle, it is said; that, After
Noe, was Abraham borne, who being wiser then all, did thoroughly come to the
great degree of Philosophy: for he knew that Sol and Luna had a first moouer,
and therefore he followed not the way of his Father, neither of his Kindred,
that worshipped Idols: But (as Josephus witnesses in his Book of the
Antiquities of the Jews,) he prevailed to change and innouate that opinion,
which then all had of God: for he first presumed to pronounce God, one God to
be the only Creator of all things: for he, according to the Histories of the
Caldeans, taught the Aegiptians Arithmeticke, and also Astronomy. These, and
many other secrets, were planted in Aegipt, which are known to have come to
the Greeks.

By the doctrines therefore of these Fathers, illuminated from Heaven, the
Philosophers that came after, being informed, as it were strengthened by the
Oracles of Prophets, have conscribed many glorious Sciences, which they could
not attain unto by the force of man's wit. Did not Plato go into Aegipt to
learn Astrology? And there (as it is thought of all for the most part) he
learned what great things soever were there had and taught. And chiefly these
things which are known to be agreeing to our Faith. Not that Hieremias, as
some suppose, saw or read the Translation of the Seauentie: For Plato was borne
almost an hundred years, from the time that Jeremie prophesied: Who seeing
that he lived fourscore years and one; from the year of his death, to the
translation of the seauentie Interpreaters, are found threescore years:
Wherefore Jeremy could neither see nor read the Translation of the holy
Scriptures, seeing he was dead so long before they were translated into the
Greek tongue. But because he was a man of a very sharp wit, as the
Aegiptians are, he so did learn the foresaid holy Scriptures by an
Interpreater; as those things in Timaeo, which he there wrote of the truth
of our Religion, do witness. Out of Aegipt, they say, that Plato came into
Italy, and there learned all the doctrine of Pythagoras. But of the
Immortality of men's Souls, he did not only perceive and know the same that
Pythagoras did, but also brought and added thereunto reasons, which they before
him (in a manner) did not. Whose Book of the Immortality of the Soul; a work
most elegant, Cato the later (before he flew himself) did twice read over, as
Plutarch reports: which when he had read, he so departed this life, that he
rejoiced that he was borne to the end to die; so great surely was the force and
power of this Book, to persuade the Immortality of men's minds, that
Therebrotus a certain man of Ambrochia, when no adversity would befall him to
end his life, he got him up upon a very high Wall, and cast himself into the
Sea, after that he had read the foresaid Book of Plato; of whom Saint
Augustine in his first Book, De ciuitate Dej, and the 22. chapter, writes
thus. Therebrotus libro Platonis vbi de immortalitate animae disputauit se
praecipitem dedit e muro, vt sic ab ista vita migraret ad eandem quam credidit
mehorem. 1. Therebrotus, when he had read over the Book of Plato, where he
has disputed of the Immortality of the Soul, cast himself down headlong
from a Wall, that so he might flit away from this life, unto that same which he
believed to be better.

The third Conclusion.
BY undoubted Faith and Belief, it is to be holden, that the Soul of every
man is Immortal: And first, it is manifest by the words of our Savior Christ
himself, in the Gospel.

Mat. 10. verse. 28.

28. Fear ye not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul:
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.

Mat. ca. 18. v. 9.

9. It is better for thee to enter into Life halt, then having two feet, to be
cast into Hell.

Mar. 9.43.44.

43. Wherefore, if thy Hand cause thee to offend, cut it off: it is better for
thee to enter into Life maimed, then having two Hands, to go into Hell, into
Fire that never shall be quenched.

44. Where the Worm dies not, and the Fire never goes out. etc.

Mat. 25.

31. When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him: then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory.

32. And before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them one
from another, as the Shepherd separateth the Sheep from the Goats.

33. And he shall set the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left.

34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand: Come ye blessed
children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.

41. Then shall he say to them on his left hand: Depart from me ye curssed,
into everlasting Fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

John 10.

My Sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them eternal life.

Of these Places, I do conclude, that the Soul is Immortal: because it
lives eternally, or is punished everlastingly.

In the Book of Wisdom, cap. 3.

1. The Souls of the Righteous, are in the hand of God: and no torment shall
touch them. 2 In the sight of the Unwise, they appear to die: and their end
was thought grievous. 3. And their departing from us, Destruction; but they are
in peace. 4. And though they suffer pain before men: yet is their hope full of
Immortality. 5. They are punished in few things, yet in many things shall
they be rewarded: for God proves them, and finds them meet for him. 6. He
tries them as Gould in the furnace, and receives them as a perfect fruit
offering. 7. And in the time of their vision, they shall shine, and run through
as the sparkles among the stubble. 8. They shall judge the nations, and have
Dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever.
Ecclesiastos. 12.

Because man shall go to the house of his eternity. Also in the last
judgment, every man that is predestinate to salvation, shall rise again to
life everlasting, with the same Bodies they had here, according to that saying
of Job.

Job. 19.

25. I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise again out of the
earth at the last day.

26. And though after my skin, Worms destroy this Body: yet shall I see God
in my flesh.

27. Whom I my self shall see; yea, my self shall behold, and none other for
me.

So that hereby it is very manifest and plain, that all the Souls of men,
shall every one of them take again their own proper Bodies being become
Immortal, or brought unto the state of Immortality of the good and blessed.

1. Thessal. 4.

14. If we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen: even so them that sleep
in Jesus, will God bring with him.

16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shoute, and with
the voice of the Archangell, and with the Troumpe of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first.

17. Then shall we which live, and remain, be caught up with them also, in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

Romans 6.

5. If we be dead with Christ to the similitude of his death, even so shall we
be to the similitude of his resurrection.

8. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we also shall live with him.

9. Knowing that Christ, being raised from the death, dies no more; death has
no more power over him.

Of all good and bad, is plain in the Epistle to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 15.

51. We shall not all sleep; but we shall be all changed.

52. In moment of time, by the last Trumpet: for the Trumpet shall blow, and
the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

53. For this corruptible, must put on incorruption: and this mortal, must put
on immortality.

The Conclusion.
OF these Authorities and Reasons, there may in the mind of every faithful
man, that undoubtedly believes the holy Scriptures, be bred a sufficient Faith
of the Immortality of the Soul, sufficient (I say) to salvation: yea, it does
not seem possible, that those that are instructed in the foresaid Scriptures,
should doubt of the Immortality of the Soul: For it does not seem
natuturally to be possible, that some one evidently Assent, that the Antecedent
cannot be true, without the Consequent; and undoubtedly Assent to the
Antecedent, but the must undoubtedly Assent to the Consequent, which he does
evidently know to be concluded and deducted out of the Antecedent. But the
Reasons Topicall, or Persuasions Probable, which we have before set down, to
persuade the second part of the first Conclusion; although (as it is said) it
be not of their nature, to breed nothing else but an Opinion or Assent with
fear of the Opposite; (for Opinion is the acception of one part of the
Contradiction, with fear of the other:) yet not withstanding, out of the
empire of the Will, they may breed a firm and sure Assent, of the Immortality
of the Soul, above Opinion, and beneath Science; by reason of the same
evidence, and not adherencie.

From hence may such persuasions or reasons be able manifoldly and sundry
ways, to profit and avail the faith of the faithful, for they help our
Faith; for by them, in the unfaithful, is begun the Faith of the Immortality
of the Soul. By them, is the same Faith pres^rued and strengthened against the
Wicked, and Heretics: By the same, is it suslayned and defended: thereby, are
the simple (at the length) thoroughly moved and provoked to true Faith.
Wherefore Peter commands, To be ready prepared to render to every one that
asks, a reason of the Faith that is in us. But the faithful man, having such
like reasons and persuasions, does not lean to the first truth and conclusion
of Faith, or that the Soul is Immortal principally for those same reasons,
but rather does assent to them, and uses them, which do consent to the first
truth, that it is well: as the Lord says by the Samaritanes that worshipped
in the Mount: By whom are figured and signified the true believers; who seeing
JESUS by Faith, are called Samaritanes. This is to human reason; Now we do
not believe because of thy saying, but because we our selves have seen and
heard.

Of these things, it most plainly and most evidently appears, how great
thanks are to be given unto the most high GOD, and Father of Mercies, and to
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has most certainly assured, and fully
persuaded his Faithful ones, in these things, where unto the most Witty, and
the best Learned men that ever were in all the World, could not, by the light
of Natural reason, prevail sufficiently to attain: to wit, of the Last end
of the reasonable Creature, of the Resurrection of the Dead, of the
Immortality of the reasonable Soul, and of the perpetual Eternitic of the
same. And this, has that Almighty Lord and most merciful Father, so done in
such sort; that now it is not lawful for us, neither is there any need, to
doubt in these things, or to flow out, or run any where else to seek for
props or stays of our Faith in these matters. Neither is it needful from
hence forward, and after this time of so great Grace revealed to seek, or put
to new reasons or probable persuasions: because we are most firmly holden,
without fear of the opposite: or without any Ambiguitie, to believe that the
Good and just do gloriously live eternally with Christ. And that the Evil are
tormented perpetually with the Devil and his Angels: according to that in the
fifth of John. And they that have done evil, shall come forth unto the
resurrection of Judgment: and they that have done good, to the resurrection of
Life; Which God shall give to them, which never change their Faith from him.
Which God grant unto us, who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Of the Immortality of the Soul, out of Palingenius in Capricorn.
BEcause thou shall believe, I will declare to thee,
By reason good, the state of Soul, Immortal for to be.
For if that God in better things, does Cunning still express,
As Wisdom tells, and as the good, and virtuous must confess:
Then doubtless must we judge he gave, the Souls no time to die,
Since better far it is for them to live continually.
Then with the flesh to be extinct, and feel a full decay:
Which thus I prove. If death do take from us the Soul away,
If that we have no other life, but in this body here:
Then God may be accounpted ill, and shall unjust appear.
For thousands every day we see, that flourish prosperously,
In Riches, Substance and Renounce, in Reigns and Empires hie.
Yet idle Lubbers, naught, vnlearnd, that sin at liberty,
And run the race of all their life in great prosperity.
On the other side we may behold, the just oppressed to be:
With spightfull chance, a wretched life and pitious poverty:
Thus either God unrighteous is, that does this thing permit:
Or after death, has every man, as he deserves fit:
Or else he does disdain the deeds, of mortal men to know,
Besides, what gracious mind in God, what goodness does he show?
If this be all that he does give, a life so short and vain,
That swiftly runs to an end, and does no time remain:
The half whereof is spent in sleep, the rest in grief and toil?
And dangers great as fast does fleet, as Rivers swift in soil.
Therefore go to, o^ wretched men, build gorgious Churches hie,
And let with costly Offerings great, your Altars pestred lie.
Set up your joy full branch of Bays, your sacred doors about:
With pomp of proud Procession pass, let Hymns be ratled out.
Spend Frankincense, and let the nose of God be stretched wide;
With pleasant smoke do this, and add more honor much beside.
That he preserve your goodly life, wherein does you torment,
Sometime great cold, and sometime heat, now plague, now famishment.
Now bloody war, now sickness great or Chance to sorrow at:
Sometime the busy Fly, sometime the stinging Gnat,
The Chynch and Flea; rejoice I say, that here you lead your life,
With thousand painful labors great, in travail, toil, and strife.
And after, in a little space, in pain you drop away:
And lumpish lie in loath some Vault, to Worms a grateful prey.
O worthy life, O goodly gift: Man in this world is bred,
Among the brutish Beasts and fools, and knaves, his life is led,
Where Storms, and flakie Snows, and Ice, and Dirt, and Dust, and Night.
And harmfull air, and clouds, and mistes, and winds, with hellish fight,
And grief and wayling reigns: where death beside, does work his feat.
Is this our goodly Country here? Is this our happy seat,
For which we owe such service here, unto the Gods above:
For which it seems meet with vows the heavenly Saints to moon?
And if none other life we have, then this of body vain:
So frail and full of filthiness, when Death has Carcass slain.
I see not why such Praises should, of God resound in Air:
For why we should such honor give, to him in Temples fair;
That has us wretches framed here, in this so wretched soil:
That shall for evermore decay, after so great a toil.
Wherefore least God should seem unjust and full of cruelnesse,
Shall well deserving counted be, we must of force confess,
That Death does not destroy the Soul, but that it always is,
None otherwise then Spirit in Air, or Saints in heavens bliss:
Both void of body, sleep, and meat. And more, we must confess,
That after death, they live in pains, or else in blessedness:
But let this reason thee suffice, for if thou do it show
Unto the wicked kind, they laugh; no light the blind does know.
But thou, believe for evermore, and know assuredly.
(For ground of saving health it is) that Souls do never die.
Exempted from the Sisters power, and fatal Destiny.
Palingenius in Libra.
We need not doubt, but Soul proceeds and does from love descend,
And never dies: whom he permits, the World to comprehend.
What if so be, the Atomies, which some Wise men do feign,
The Soul is rather thought to be, than body to maintain.
All Bodies be of quantity, and may divided be:
But Soul is indivisible, and of no gross degree.
And as a Center does she seem, where many Lines do meet:
Which Senses all to her convey, as Floods to Seas, do fleet.
Wherefore I marvel much at such, as think a like decay:
And judge the Soul no more to be, when Body fades away.
For if so be it might be prooude, yet should it not be said;
Nor Published to the common sort, nor every way displayed.
For many wicked men, and ill there are, which if they thought,
Their Souls as nothing shall remain, when corpse to grave is brought:
Nor that it feels, or suffers ought, when it goes hence away,
And that no punishment remains, for prancks that here they play:
A thousand mischifes would they do, (take fear from them among)
And fall to every vilonie, confounding right with wrong.
Besides, a number now that think in blessed state to be,
When death has them destroyed, and hope the face of God to see:
And evermore with him to joy, and therefore virtuously
Do seek to pass their present life, with godly modeslie.
If they shall see that after death, do no rewards remain:
Amassed all, their virtuous works, shall cease and perish plain.
So many stately Temples trimde, so many Altars hie,
With Gold and Marble garnished, and decked sumptuously.
Beside Religion, Godly zeal, Honor and worshipping
Of God, shall come to naught, if after death remain nothing,
That men may hope for, if the Soul as Wind does pass away.
Of wild and frantic common sort, Religion must be stay,
And fear of smart: for mischiuous, and full of fraud their brain,
Is always seen, nor of themselves, they well do mean, or plain.
The common sort do Virtue loath, and evermore her hate.
Religion is the comeliness, and glory of our state.
Which makes the Gods to favor us, which we win Heaven by.
No wise nor good man therefore dare, attempt her openly,
To teach that Soul shall come to naught and so corrupt the minds,
Of rude unskillful common sort, that waver like the winds.
Now must we teach by reason good, that Souls shall never die;
But free from sting, or dart of death, do live eternally.
Which every Christian man does hold, and Greshop eater Jew,
(Who our foreskins abhorres) believes: which God that all things knew,
Would not have made, if he had thought they had been needless, sure:
And Nations all besides, do think that Souls shall aye endure.
For first the thing resembling most, the mightiest Lord of all:
Of longer lasting life we count, and perfecter must call.
For that which does not long endure, but shortly does decay,
That it should be vnperfecter, who is that will say nay?
And therefore do celestial things, a greater while endure:
Because they are more perfecter, and more Divine and pure.
But things that nearer are the earth, and farthest off from skies,
Imperfect since they are; do fade, and soonest ever dies.
Shall then our Soul, since life in it and knowledge does appear,
Most like unto the state Divine, be closde and shut up here
With Body for to end? Nor shall it here have longer place,
Then fading flesh? Or shall it live no more, nor larger space?
Besides, that Souls cannot decay, this Reason witness shall:
Because it is of single state, and void of matter all.
Add this, that when the Body fades, the force of Mind does grow
As weak and aged Fathers old do more good Counsel know,
Then youthful bloods of younger years and often he lacks wit
That does excel in strength and force, for rare does God permit
Both strength and wit to any one. Wherefore, if force brought low,
By space and course of many years, the Mind does stronger grow.
Of Body does it not depend, but of it self consist
Another thing: and after Grave does live, and death resist.
Does not beside when foot does ache, the Mind judge thereof plain?
It is no doubt. But how can grief, to tower of Mind attain?
Does it ascend from lowest parts as Smoke does upward fly?
No: for many parts, not foot alone, (if so) should ache thereby.
Nor of the foot, but of the part that nearest is to Mind
The ache should grieve. This shows that Soul is not of Bodies kind;
And is so free from death, since it in distance needs no mean,
Add this, when we would call to mind the thing forgotten clean;
Or else devise some worthy fetch, from Mind, the Senses all,
It then behoues to gather up, whereby does often fall,
That many better for to muse, do shut up close their eyes:
Or else forsaking company, some secret place devise.
Or when the night with darksome cloud the earth does over spread;
And creatures all with heavy sleep, do take their rest in bed:
They still do watch, and silent all upon their beds do rest;
And light put out, in darkness whet their Mind with Body pressed.
For Senses do the Mind disturb, Affections it destroys,
Amazing it with Dullness great, and Blindness it annoyes:
None otherwise then Clouds do hide, the Sun that clearly shines;
If therefore, when it does remain within his own confines,
And flying far from Senses all, and cares that Body bringes:
It wiser be, then shall it know, and understand all things,
In better sort, when it is free, and from the flesh does fly;
More perfect of it self it is, and lives continually.
Again, since Man as Mean consistes, the Saints and Beasts betwixt:
Some part with each, he common holds with Beast his Body mixed.
And with the Saints his Mind agrees; one of these parts does die:
Of the other, death can have no power, but lives continually.
Death therefore takes not all away: for why? his deadly darts,
Do never harm the Soul a whit, when it from Body parts.
And more then this, I have to say, if nothing do remain
Of us, when Carcass lies in Tomb, God shall be called plain
Unjust, and one that favor shows to such as naughty live.
For such, for term of all their life, no Sorrows do them grieve:
No Riches lack, nor Pleasures great, but happily rejoice;
Exalted with Promotions hie, and with the Commons voice.
On the other side, the Virtuous men, a thousand Griefs molest,
now sore diseasd, now plagued with need In fine, always oppressed.
Therefore the Soul lives after grave, and feels deserved pains:
And if it have done justly here, a Crown of Glory gains.
By these, and many other ways, I could declare, no doubt,
That Soul of man does never die, and Body lives without.
But thi's enough time bids me end. Not ignorant am I;
That some, the soul (although unapt) do term an Harmony.
And as of sundry voices moved, proceeds a melody:
Of sundry Compounds Medcine made, which heal with sovereignty.
So of the joined Elements, by certain mean and way,
Created of the Heavens eke the Soul to be, some say;
A part whereof in Body dwells, and part abroad does lie:
As sight does spring of outward light, and virtue of the eye.
But this opinion is not true; for if it should be so,
The Soul with flesh should never strive nor once against it go.
But evermore in one agree. As every power does show,
That wonted are of mixed things, By spirit Divine to grow.
As in the kind of Herbs appears, and in the precious Stone.
Some think the Soul does not remain, when flesh from it is gone:
Because the heavy sluggish sleep, the nearest thing that may,
Resembles Death, and seems to take, both Sense and Mind away.
Or for because they see the Mind, with sickness diversely
So vexed, and harmd, that it cannot the place it has supply.
And with the Body to increase, with which it eke decays:
As well appears in Children young, and men of elder days.
Fond is the child, the man discreet, the old man doteth still:
For weak vnwealdie withered age, does Mind and Body spill.
And more say they, if that the Soul, of substance be Divine:
And severed from these fleshly limbs, may lead a life more fine.
Then why should it in wretched flesh, so seek it self to place;
by whose defect so many illes, and mischifes it deface?
But fond she is therefore, if that she do this willingly:
And if perforce she be compeld in Carcass cave to lie,
Who does constrain? does God himself? then her he naught esteems.
Nay, what in Prison vile he puts, to hate he rather seems.
More, of it self (except it learn) since it does nothing know,
And oftentimes forgetfulness the Mind does overthrow:
Therefore they judge it nothing is, when Body here does die:
For learn it cannot, senses dead, which it knows all things by.
Some other say, that Soul there is in all the World but one;
Which gives life to every thing, as Sun, but one alone
There is, that makes all eyes to see, Eternal think they this:
Though Body die, or eyes put out, the Sun eternal is.
These trifles fond, it is not hard, with Reason to disprooue:
But here I longer am, I fear, then it does me behooue.
There shall not want, that such demands shall answer once at full:
And all the doubts therein assoyle, and knots asunder pull.
O man of sharp and pregnant wit, thy praise shall live with mine.
Our labors (doubt not) shall commend the men of later time.
Thy famous works attempt, and seeds of Heaven on Earth go sow:
This one thing will I more put to, that every man may know,
The Soul Immortal for to be, and sprung of Heavenly grace;
If Senses and Affections all he will restrain a space.
If that despising worldly joys, and earthly thought resignde,
With daily labor he attempt, to God to lift his mind.
Then perfect Wisdom shall he have, and things to come foretell,
A wake, or else in heavy sleep, perceive the same as well.
In this sort did the Prophets old, the things to come declare.
The sober mind therefore does come more near to heavenly fare,
The farther from the flesh it flies, and from the earthly care.
But like to Beasts the greatest sort does live, as sense does will:
And think none other good to be, but flesh to have his fill.
Hereof it comes that many think, the Soul with Body dies:
Because they see not things Diui^e, with weak and fleshly eyes.
But of the Soul, this shall suffice.
Palengenius in Pisces.
ANd when escapt from mortal chain the Soul has passage straight,
Conueighing with her self these three, that always on her wait:
The Mind, the Sense, and Moving force unto the Heavens hie;
Shall joyful go, and there remain, in bliss perpetually.
Matheus Dresserus, libro de Anima.
A Confirmation of the Immortality of the Soul.
THe Sentence of the Souls immortality is twofold. 1. Philosophical. 2.
Theological.


What is the opinion of Philosophers touching the Immortality of the Soul?

Some affirm, that the Soul does die with the Body. Others do hold, that
after the separation of the Body, it remains alive, and immortal.

The Argument of Panaetius.
What soever is bred, or has a certain beginning.
The same also dies, or has a cetraine ending:
But the Soul is bred, or has a certain beginning,
Therefore the Soul dies, or has a certain ending.
The Answer.

The Mayor is to be distinguished: for some things are bred, or have their
beginning of the Elements, and do die again. But others have a Celestial
and Divine original; as the Soul, which does not die. Things that are borne,
bred, or have beginning, are of two sorts. Some are Elementarie, some
Celestial. The Elementarie do die or perish: But the Celestial, do not die
or perish. But on the contrary part, Cicero, Plato, and Xenophon, have judged,
the Soul to be Immortal, and they prove it thus. 1. Because the original
and nature thereof is Divine; or, as the Pythagoreans said, the Soul is drawn
from the universal Heavenly mind. Cicero in 1 Tuscul.

That which is Divine, that does not die:
The Soul is Divine, Ergo,
The Soul does not die.
2 Because unto the Soul there is nothing mixed, nothing concrete. i. the Mind
and Soul is not compounded of the Elements: therefore it can not die with the
things that are compounded of the Elements.

Whatsoever is compounded, the same is conflated or compounded of the Elements.

But the Soul is not compound of the Elements:
Therefore the Soul does not die.
3 Because the works or effects of the Mind are Divine and Celestial, as to
perceive and know things past, and to come: therefore the Mind it self also,
is Celestial and Incorruptible.

As is the effect, so is the cause:
But the effects of the Soul are Divine:
Therefore the Soul is also Divine.
4 Because the order of Divine justice does require, that rewards be given to
Just, and punishments to the Unjust. But in this life, there often chance no
rewards to the Just, nor punishments to the Wicked: therefore after this
life, there remains another life, wherein it shall go well with the Godly,
and ill with the wicked.

5 Plato in Exiocho says; Discessus ex hac vita est mutatio mali in bonum;
that is to say: The departing out of this life, is a changing of evil into
good. Therefore after death, the Soul also lives, and somewhere remains
alive; that it may enjoy that so great a good.

Of the Place of the Soul after the separation from the Body.
SOcrates thought, that the Soul when it departs from the Body, does return
to Heaven, from whence it is sprinkled and strowed into man's Body. But
Philosophy does plainly deny, and is utterly ignorant, that the Soul shall
be joined together to the Body at the universal raising again of the dead.

Cicero also, although he did excellently dispute many things of the Souls
Divinity; yet he confesses, that he is in very great doubt and staggering,
even as the Ship is tossed in the mids of the raging Seas.

And Atticus says, That he, while he reads Platos Phaedo, does truly
Assent; that is to say, Approve the Opinion of the Immortality of the Soul:
But when he had laid the Book away, and began to cogitate with himself;
then that Assent slided away.

Socrates, when he was going to his death, says in Plato: It is time for me
now, to go away from hence, that I may die, and you live: but whether is
better, God knows; I think truly no man knows.

There was a Philosopher of great Authority, who being called to end his life,
was very sore vexed in mind; doubting of the flitting or departure, in what
state his soul should be after death: And when he found no other Haven, he
sent for two Philosophers, and bade them dispute of the condition of the Soul
after the departure forth of the Body, saying: Lo, I must flitte hence away,
and forsake this mortal life: wherefore tell ye me, what shall become of
me; whether my Soul shall live, when this Body is extinct, or no? for unless
this can be proved unto me, and I therein persuaded, with what mind can I
depart out of this life? Here the Philosophers began sharply to contend about
the Nature of the Soul: and the one reasoned it to be Mortal, and the other
Immortal. And when they had a long time disputed, neither part prevailing: Go
to, says the sick man, all sorrowful, I shall now prove, whether of you
does think more rightly.

But Theology does discreetly affirm, both that the Soul is Immortal, and
also that it shall at length, return into the tabernacle of the Body: and does
name the very place also, wherein the Soul shall remain and be kept, until
the last Judgment.

That the Soul does not die, is thus proved by the holy Scriptures.
1 BEcause it is a Spirit; which cannot die. Genesis 2. Math. 10. Do not fear
those that can kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul. Genesis 2. He breathed
into him the breath of life.

2 Because; God is the God of the living. God is the God of. Abraham.

Therefore Abraham lives, although his body be dead. Mat. 22.

3 From Examples. Moses and Elias talked with Christ in Mount Thabor. Luke 9.
although Moses was dead a thousand and five hundred years before: Ergo, they
live.

4 From the testimony of Christ. Ion. 11. He that believes in me, he shall
not die for ever. Therefore the Soul is not extinguished, but lives always.

5 There is also a firm Argument from the Cause unto the Effect, or from the
nature of Relatiues.

Christ is risen, and lives.
Christ is our Author and Head.
Therefore we also shall rise again: And the Soul at length, coupled with the
Body shall live for ever.

For what is of force in Christ, the same must needs also avail in his
members. 1. Cor. 15.

Now that the Body being renewed, shall of us be recciued again in the
resurrection of the dead, the testimony of Job in the 19, chap. teaches
plainly. I know that my Redeemer lives; and that I shall rise again out of
the Earth in the last day and shall see God in my flesh.

The Place or Seat into the which the Soul does flitte, being loosed from the
fetters of the Body, and rests in the same, is called, Paradise. Luke 23. The
bosom of Abraham, Luke 16. The hand of God Sap. 3. Scheol. 1. Hell Genesis 43.

The Immortality of the Soul proved by manifest places of the holy
Scriptures.
1. Numbers 23.10.

I Pray God I may die the death of the Righteous; and let my last end be like
his.

2. Psalm 84.1, 2, 4, 10.

1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, o Lord of Hosts?

2. My Soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the Lord: for my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House: they will ever praise thee. Selah.

10. One day in thy Courts is better, then a thousand other where. I had
rather be a Dore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
Tabernacles of Wickedness.

3. Ejay. 51.6.11.

6. Lift up your eyes to the Heavens, and look upon the Earth beneath: for the
Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like a
garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner: but my
salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.

11 The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with joy unto Zion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and mourning shall be away.

4. Esaj. 32.18.

My people shall dwell in peace, and in sure dwellinges, and in safe resting
places: in assurance for ever.

5. Esaj. 49.10.

They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty; neither shall the
heat smite them nor the Sun: for he that has compassion on them, shall lead
them; even to the springes of waters shall he drive them.

6. Esaj. 65.17.18.

17 Lo, I will create new Heavens and a new Earth; and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind.

18 But be you glad and rejoice for ever in the things that I shall create.

7. Dan. 12 1.2.3.

And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which stands for
the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since the time that there began to be a Nation, until the same time. And
at that time, thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the Book.

2 And many of them, that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake; some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt.

3 And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament: and
they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, for ever
and ever.

8. 2. Esaras. 2.35.36.37.

Be ready to the reward of the Kingdom: for the everlasting light shall shine
upon you for evermore.

36 Flee the shadow of this world: receive the joy of your glory; I testify
my Savior openly.

37 Receive the gift that is given you, and be glad: giving thanks unto him
that has called you to the Heavenly kingdom.

9. Sap. 3.

The Souls of the righteous, are in the hand of God; and the pain of death
shall not touch them.

In the sight of the unwise, they appear to die, etc. Yet is their hope full
of Immortality. etc.

10. Sap. 5.

The Faithful are counted among the Children of God, and their portion is
among the Saints. The Righteous shall live for evermore: their reward also is
with the Lord, and their remembrance with the highest. Therefore shall they
receive a glorious Kingdom, and a beautiful Crown of the Lords hand.

11. Tob. 3.

O Lord, deal with me according to thy will, and command my spirit to be
received in peace.

12. Ecclesiastes. 7.

The day of death is better then the day of birth. For precious in the sight of
the Lord, is the death of this Saints, says the Psalmist in the 116. Psalm.

13. Mat. 13.43.

Then shall the Just men shine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their father.

14. Mat. 19.29.

They shall inherit everlasting life.

15. Mat. 25.34.

Come ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world.

16. Mat. 22.29.30.31.32.

29 Ye are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

30 For in the Resurrection, they neither marry Wives, nor Wives are bestowed
in marriage; but are as the Angels of God in Heaven.

31 And concerning the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read what is
spoken unto you of God, saying:

32 I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living.

17. The same is recorded in the 12. of Mark, verse. 24, 25, 26, 27.

By all which places, it is a plain consequent, that the Soul is Immortal.

18. Luke 16.22.

Lazarus is said to be carried into Abraham's Bosom. Now what Abraham's Bosom
is, let venerable Beda witness against the Papists, that so much boast of
him: who in his Homily on the Gospel for the first Sunday after Trinity,
writes thus. Sinus Abraham requies heatorum pauperum, quorum est regnum
coelorum, quo post hanc vitam recipiuntur: That is; Abraham's Bosom, is the
rest of the blessed poor; whose is the kingdom of heaven, whither after this
life, they are received. So by the judgment of Beda (agreeing with the
truth,) Abraham's Bosom, is the Kingdom of Heaven, with Lazarus was carried.
Out of the same place also it is apparent concerning the Souls of the Wicked:
For the Rich Glutton is said on the contrary, to be carried down into Hell.
Therefore the Souls live after the Body.

19. Luke 23.43.

Christ hanging on the Cross, said unto the Thief; This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Now that Paradise is Heaven, is proved by Saint Paul in
the 2. Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. where he says, He was taken up into the third
Heaven: which he calls Paradise. But the Thief could not be with Christ in
Paradise in the Body; because that was dead and buried. Therefore his Soul was
with Christ's in Paradise: and so consequently the Soul lives, and is
Immortal.

20. Luke 23.46.

Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.

21. John. 16.

Your joy shall no man take from you.

22. John. 5.24.

He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life.

23. Joe. 6.54.

Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life; and I
will raise him up at the last day.

24. Joh. 11.26.

Who soever lives and believes in me, shall never die.

25. 1. Cor. 2.

The eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither can it enter into
man's heart, what things God has prepared for them that love him.

26. 2. Cor. 5.8.

8 We love rather to remove out of the Body, and to dwell with the Lord:
Wherefore the Souls sleep not, as some Anabaptists will have them; but enjoy
Immortal life, and celestial glory with God.

27. Phil. 1.23.

I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. He speaks of the rest and joy,
which he should enjoy with Christ. But they who feel nothing, what can their
joy or happiness be? Wherefore they also are refuted in this point, that say,
That men's Souls sleep, and so withal, deny the Immortality of the Soul.

28. 1. These. 4.

So shall we ever be with the Lord.

29. Revel. 2.

To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God.

Be faithful unto the death, and I shall give thee the Crown of life.

Reave. 3.

Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of God; and he shall
go no more out.

To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my seat.

31. Reu. 4.

The 24. Elders that sat on the Seats, were clothed in White raiment, and had
on their heads Crowns of Gold.

32. Reu. 7.15, 16, 17.

15 They are in the presence of the Throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne, will dwell among them.

16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, neither any heat.

17 For the Lame, which is in the midst of the Throne, shall govern them,
and shall lead them unto the lively Fountains of waters: and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes.

1. Cor. 15.19.

If in this life only we hope in Christ, then are we most miserable of all men.

If Christians in this life only, do hope in Christ: 1. If they hope of Christ
for the blessedness of this life only, and not of one to come, then are they
most miserable of all men. But Christians are not most miserable of all men:
Ergo, they do not look or hope of Christ for the blessedness of this life
only, but also of the life to come: and by a consequent they shall rise from
the dead, that they may be partakers of that blessedness in an other life.

These testimonies of Scriptures, do teach and confirm most evidently, that
not only in the Body before death, and after the resurrection of the Body; but
also in the whole space and time coming between, the Souls are, live, feel,
understand, out of the Body; though the manner of their operations be to us
unknown. Wherefore also this gift of Immortality, has some similitude with
God; who alone, is the only fountain of life, has Immortality: as says
Paul 1, Tim. 6.16.

The Adversaries of this Truth, the dear dearelings of the Devil, fighting
with weapons of their graund Captain Satan; even as he in tempting our
Savior Christ, wrested the Scriptures to his purpose: even so they perverting
the true sense, allege sundry places of the Scriptures to disprooue the
Immortality of the Soul, and to approve their own wicked assertion, that
the Soul is Mortal. Of which hellish Champions, and their vain and wicked,
not reasons, but words, I with a reproof, will bring a double disproofe, and
so thereby give our side a stronger approofe, by enterpreating their false
alleged places, according to the right sense and meaning.

1. Genesis 2.

In the day that thou eatest of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, thou
shall die the death. Lo, (say they) the death of Body and Soul both.

Answer, interpreating the place.

The Lord in this Scripture, does not threaten to Man, the destruction or
extinguishing of his Soul, but eternal Death; that is, the horrible feeling
and terror of Gods wrath and judgment, and to live forsaken and cast off from
God, subject to all miseries and torments: unto the which eternal death the
separation and parting asunder of the Soul and Body by temporal death, is an
adiunct; which at that time, through Gods mercy was deferred, that, that
mankind might be saved: For so was Adam dead, while he yet lived in Paradise,
even so soon as ever he had eaten the forbidden Fruit: So in eternal death
live all the damned and reprobate; whose Fire shall not be put out, and their
Worm shall never die. So in the second to the Ephesians are they said, To be
dead through sin, that live in sin without repentance. And Ephesians. 5. He
who from sin is reclaymed to God, is willed to rise from the dead. And Romans
7.5. Paul says, That through the knowledge of sin and the wrath of God, he
was dead.

2. Eccles. 3.19.

19 The condition of the Children of men, and the condition of Beasts, are
even as one condition to them. As the one dies, so dies the other: for they
have all one breath; and there is no excellency of Man above the Beast: for
all is Vanity.

20 All go to one place, and all was dust, and shall return to the dust.
Therefore the Soul is not Immortal.

Answer interpreating.

Here they are deceived by a fallation, taking that to be spoken simply, which
is but, secundum quid, i. in some fort, or, in some respect. For the Preacher
does not simply say, That Men die as Beasts, and so do utterly perish: for
this sense cantradicteth other Scriptures. But in two respects, the death of
Men, and the death of Beasts, are like. 1. Because Men must needs once die
and depart out of this life; because Men are not here to continue for ever,
nor have here a settled place. 2. Men die as Beasts; that is, In the sense and
judgment of the Wicked, they seem to perish.

3. Psalm. 78.39.

He remembered that they were but flesh: yea, a wind that passes away, and
comes not again. Ergo, Mortal.

Answer.

By these, and such like speeches, is described and be wayled the frayltie of
all human affairs, that with God do perish and come to nothing. For as in
this place, they are likened to a Wind that soon vanishes away: so in Psalm.
103. they are compared to Dust, Earth, and Flowers of the field. So Job. 14.
Man comes up as a Flower, and is cut down. Isa. 40.6. All flesh is grass.

4. Psalm. 88.5.

I am counted as slain lying in the Grave; whom thou remembrest no more.

Answer.

In these words, the Psalmist does not mean, that either he himself, or the
dead, are exempted from Gods providence. But he complayneth that he is
forsaken of God, even as it seems to men, that God cares not for the dead.
And therefore he speaks not according to the sense of Faith, but of his own
opinion, weakness, and misery, who judges those things to be forsaken and
neglected of God, whose delivery for a while he does defer.

But what Faith in the mean season does suggest and tell the Godly, even when
they strive and wrestle with temptation? he shows in the ii. Psalm. and verse
2. The just shall be had in an everlasting remembrance.

5. Psalm. 146.4.

His Spirit departs, and returns to his earth; and then all his thoughts
perish. Ergo. etc.

Answer.

He does not here say, That the Spirit or Soul of men does not die, or
vanish, or is bereaved of sense: But, that it departs; to wit, from the
Body, wherein it dwells: and that not the Spirit, but the Body, returns to
earth, which was made of earth. And where he says, That all his thoughts
perish: he means not, that the Soul is after this life, bereaved of Reason,
Judgment, and Sense of Gods mercy, or wrath; but that man's Purposes and
Counsels are made frustrate, which in his life he had settled him self to
bring to pass: In which sense it is said in Psalm. 112.10. The desire of the
Wicked shall perish.

6. Psalm. 88. 10.

Will thou show a miracle to the dead? Or, shall the dead rise, and praise
thee? Whereunto we add all such places as take away worshipping of God from
the dead, which must needs prove the Soul not Immortal.

Answer.

In such speeches, Death and Hell, or the Grave, have two significations. They
who are spiritually dead, whether before or after the death of the Body; that
is, they that are deprived of Gods grace, and forsaken and rejected of God, and
are in Hell, that is, in the place and torments of the Damned; or else in this
life, despayring and destitute of comfort, shall not praise God at all, neither
in this life, nor in the life to come. But they who are dead not spiritually,
but corporally only, although they shall not praise God while their Bodies are
in Hell, that is, in the Grave, (for which this word Hell, is often used in the
Scriptures;) yet in Soul they shall not cease to acknowledge and praise God,
until, when they have received their Bodies again, they shall magnify him
both in Soul and Body, in the Celestial eternity.

But in the mean time, since God will be acknowledged and magnified of men in
this life also, therefore both the whole Church, and every one of the
faithful, not only pray that they may not fall into that forsaking, and that
sense of Gods wrath, wherewith the Wicked are oppressed, but also desire, that
they may be preserved and defended in this mortal life, until the end thereof
appointed by God, be expired: for the Saints do not simply stand in fear of
the bodily Death and Grave; but that they may not be forsaken of God, neither
fall into desperation or destruction, or their enemies insult against God, when
they are overthrown. This with daily and ardent prayers and petitions, they
beg and crave continually.

7. Psalm. 146. 2.

I will praise the Lord during my life: as long as I have any being, I will
sing unto my God. Here he restreyneth praises to this life only.

Answer.

This place, makes nothing to the purpose: For he does not limit praises to
this life; but this he only says, that he will spend all the time of this
mortal life in Gods praises: which notwithstanding in many other places he
extends to continual eternity; as Psalm. 34. I will praise the Lord
continually. But often times this particle, Until, or, As long, signifies a
continuance of the time going before some event, without any excluding of the
time following: as 1. Cor. 15.25. He must reign, Until he has put all his
enemies under his feet, I think they will not say, that when Christ's enemies
are put under his feet, that then he shall reign no longer.

8. Job. 10.20.

Let him cease and leave off from me, that I may take a little comfort before
I go, and shall not return: Ergo, the Soul is Mortal; there is no
Resurrection.

Answer.

In these words, he denies that he shall return into this Mortal life, and
converse amongst men in this World: But he denies not that he in the mean
season, has his being, and does live, until again he see God in the flesh;
even the same Job, who then was afflicted: as himself says. chap. 19.26.

9. Job. 3.11.

Why died I not when I came out of the Womb? so should I have lain quiet, and
been at rest.

Answer.

Job in these words, does not deny, that the Souls after death do live,
feel, and understand: but only he says; the Miseries of this present life
are not felt.

Instance.

Job would not wish for a bad change: but if there be evils felt in the life to
come, he wished for a badde change: Ergo. etc.

Answer.

Job wished not for the death of the wicked, but of the godly.

Instance.

But Job makes Kings and Princes also, which gather Gold unto them. verse.
14.15. small and great, good and badde. verse. 16, 17, 18, 19. partakers of this
rest.

Answer.

It plainly appears out of the whole process and discourse of Jobs words,
that he does not teach what is the state of men after this life; but only
desires to be rid out of his present misery. And therefore through human
infirmity and impatience, he compares the sense and feeling of his present
miseries with the death and state of the Dead, whatsoever it be. As they who
are grievously tormented with present Distresses and Calamities, prefer any
thing whatsoever, before that which they suffer. So also he says in the 7.
chap. speaking as one despayring of delivery in this life: Remember that my
life is but a wind, and that mine eye shall not return to see pleasure. For
so he expounds himself, when he adds, verse. 10. He shall return no
more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more. So likewise in
the 17. chap. My breath is corrupt, my days are corrupt, and the Grave is
ready for me. They are words of one despayring of life and salvation, God
being wroth and angry.

10. Job. 34.14.15.

14 If he set his heart upon man, and gather unto himself his spirit and his
breath. 15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall return unto dust.

Answer.

Job does not here say, that the Soul does either sleep, or perish: but that
by the departure of the Soul from the Body, the Body dies and is dissolved:
yet not that the Body does utterly perish; for so it should repugne other
plain places that warrant the Resurrection.

11. Job. 14.12.

Man sleeps, and rises not; for he shall not wake again, nor be raised
from his sleep, till the Heaven be no more.

12. Act. 7.60.

And when he had thus spoken, he fell asleep.

13. 1. Cor. 15.51.

We shall not all sleep, but we shall be all changed.

14. 1. These. 4.13.

I would not have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep. In these
places, the dead are said to sleep: Ergo, The Soul sleeps.

Answer.

In these and such like places, is used a figure of speech called, Synecdoche,
translating that which is proper unto the Body, to the whole man. For that
this belongs to the Body, which is to be recalled from death to life, as it
were to awake from sleep; many places of Scripture declare: As Job. 7. Behold
now I sleep in the dust. For not the Soul, but the Body only sleeps in the
dust or Grave.

15. Mat. 24.46.

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Master, when he comes, shall find so
doing.

16. Mat. 25.34.

Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom.

17. Mark. 13.13.

13 And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. But whosoever shall
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

27 And he shall then send his Angles, and gather to geather his elect, from
the four Winds.

18. Dan. 12.1.2.

1 And at that time, my people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the Book.

2 And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, etc.

These places do plainly show, that Blessedness, and the Kingdom promised
to the godly, shall then first fall unto them at the last day: Ergo, Souls go
not presently to heaven after death of the Body.

Answer.

Those places do not show that: But they show, that at the last day, when the
Bodies shall be raised up again, the Souls that already are in Heaven, shall
by being joined to the bodies again, have their felicity and glory
consummated, and made absolute. For so we pray; Thy Kingdom come: when yet
now, God also reigns in us.

19. 1. Cor. 15.19.

If in this life only we have Hope, we are of all men most miserable. Of this
place, they reason thus.

He that is blessed and happy before the Resurrection, is not without the
Resurrection most miserable.

But we without the Resurrection, should be of all men most miserable; Ergo,
we are not before the Resurrection, blessed and happy.

Answer.

To the Mayor we answer: That he is not miserable without the Resurrection,
who can not only before it, but without it also, be blessed: But we are in
such wise blessed before it, that notwithstanding without it following and
ensuing, we can not enjoy that former blessedness: because, that God with so
inseparable a knot has joined together the beginning, and proceeding, and
finishing or perfection of the Electes blessedness; that none can have the
beginning, who must not come to the end and consummation thereof. Wherefore we
must rise again, or we must want also the Celestial blessedness before the
Resurrection. Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal Bodies.

20. Heb. 11.39.

These all through Faith are dead, and received not the Promise. Therefore they
received not their Country.

Answer.

Although when they died, they had not found their Country; yet would it not
follow of these words, that they are not at all, or have no sense after death:
for he that is not, or has no sense, seeks not his Country. Secondly, it is
not there spoken of the life after death, which is led in the Celestial
country, spoken of in 2. Cor. 5. from verse. 1. unto 10. but of this life; in
which the faithful walking their pilgrimage, sought for the Celestial
country, not finding their Country on Earth.

21. If presently after death, the godly were blessed; then injury was done
unto them, who were called again into this mortal life.

Answer.

It was not iniurions to them, seeing God is debtor to no man. God did raise
them up for the manifesting of his glory. Now what can happen better, or more
acceptable unto the Godly, then to serve for the manifesting of his glory,
either by life or by death? Therefore there was no injury done unto them.
Phil. 1. As always, so now, Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether it
be by life or by death. etc.

22. The Soul has neither sense nor action, but by bodily instruments; and
therefore being naked of those instruments, it is also destitute of sense,
motion, and operation.

Answer.

Although we grant the Antecedent that the Souls action and sense is by the
instruments of the Body, while it is in the Body before this natural or
corporal death; yet notwithstanding that it is not so with the Soul after
death, when it is freed from the Body, both learned Philosophers do confess,
and the word of God testifies. 1. Cor. 13.9. We know in part, and we
prophecy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be abolished.

Thus (I hope) are sufficiently disprooned those wicked Adversaries of this
known and necessary Truth, The Soul is Immortal. And the Scriptures
falsely by them alleged, rightly and fully interpreted according to their
true sense. By which reproof of the Adversary, and disproofe of their cause,
the truth is more approved, and stronglier confirmed: For contraries by their
contraries, are ever made more manifest. God give the Truth a speedy victory
in the hearts of his people, that Errors may be beaten down, Satan
confounded, and all our Enemies vanquished; that we may triumph with our
Captain that Lion of the Tribe of luda, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Athenagoras an Athenian and a Christian Philosopher, flourished in the time of
Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus, and Commodus, Emperors of Rome, within two hundred
years after Christ: and in his Book of the Resurrection, he reasoueth thus.
REasons touching things belonging to Mankind, are some drawn from Natural
order, some from the order of Gods Providence; such as are the reasons
concerning the Resurrection of the Dead. If then we can prove, that God is
able to know this, and to will it, we shall then even in a manner, prove the
thing itself.

God before he made Man, knew the whole World, and all the parts thereof; and
how to order, mix, and compound the Elements one with another, in the
workemanshippe of every several man. In like manner, when he dissolueth his
work, he understands whither, and unto what estate every part and parcel
thereof shall come, at the last. He therefore knows from whence they are in
like manner to be taken again, and by what means they are to be brought
again into the same form they were before, and how to compounde the same man
again. God his cunning and might is the same that was. And even as he was also
able to make that which he knew from the beginning; so that which he yet
knows, is he in like manner able to make new again. God, seeing that he is
Wisdom it self, did therefore make nothing in vain. He did not in vain
make Man partaker of Wisdom: therefore to some certain end: But not unto
this end, that things either above, or beneath us, should use Man to their
own behoof: for those things stand no need of this use, but rather were
created themselves for our use. God therefore made Man for himself, and for
the contemplation of Gods Goodness and Wisdom in his whole workmanship. God
indeed made Man to the end he might live; but yet not to be utterly extinct
like unto Beasts: for unto this living creature, that hears within it self,
the similitude of God it author, by the Understanding and Reason, has God
given Everlasting life. For verily brute Beasts were not created for
themselves, but for the use of others: which when it cease, the preservation
or restitution of them is not any more necessary. But Men were not so created,
that they should serve for the use of others; but that their life might so be
continued, that they considering the Might and Wisdom of their Author, and
keeping his Laws, might enjoy Everlasting life, together with those with whom
they lead their lives from the beginning. For God verily gave unto Man a nature
that consists of a Soul immortal; and such a Body, as might unite it self
to such a Soul contemplating Heavenly things, and imitating God, by the
keeping of his heavenly Laws. This Act therefore concerns Eternity. This
end constitute in the inmost Act, declares that Man shall be everlasting: to
wit, in his nature, which conduces unto such like Act, by the coupling
together of the Soul and of the Body. Which, if at any time it be dissolved,
is to be restored by the Resurrection, hoped for of us, not through a vain
Hope, but through Faith, a most certain sure commander; to wit, through Gods
determinate purpose, creating such like nature of man to such like everlasting
end and office. God has not appointed to any other use, but has ordained him
according to the inward act of his nature, to imitate God by the contemplation
and observation of Heavenly things. Which end assuredly, seeing it is the
inmost in his nature, and diracted to euerlastingnes, does declare, that Man
shall be everlasting: Man I say, not the Soul only; but the whole, compounded
of Soul and Body: For God, to constitute this, brought together the Soul and
Body, as parts. The procreation of man's composition, is the nature and common
life of the man compounded, gathered of the actions and passions as well of
Body as Soul: The end therefore of the compound, is commune; that is to say,
the imitating of God, and the enjoying of him by the same. Gods Justice also
must draw unto Judgment both Soul and Body, to bear the reward or
punishment, according to the action and passion, and common life. And the end
can not be common and one, and justly exhibited, unless it should belong unto
one commonthing, and that to be men, who commonly had wrought it: And to this,
is necessary the Resurrection of the dead.

God has given to man, the judgment of Understanding and reason, that he may
know those things that may be understood concerning God; to wit, his
Goodness, Wisdom, and Righteousness. Seeing then, that these are
sempiternall; it follows, that man also is borne to things sempiternall, and
shall be sempiternall: Man I say, compounded; for unto him is given the use of
Judgment, the office of Virtues, and imitation of Heavenly things. And
unless he should remain compound, suchlike use and office, should not always
continue. And it cannot be, that Man can be everlasting, if he rise not again
from death. And unless Man should be everlasting, rashly and in vain should
the Soul of the Body be joined to so many wantes and innumerable passions. In
vain should the Body be withdrawn by Reason, from following delights and
pleasures: vain and rash should be the painful use of Virtues, and the
Religious observation of Justice and Laws. Those Creatures, that have their
perseueraunce everlasting, do differ therein, according to the diversity of
their Natures: Angels have it immoueably; the Heavenly bodies moueably, but
continually: But Men, moueably and interrupt. The Soul truly has a
continual perseverance; the Body a life left for a time: but so has not a
brute Beast. For according to the Nature of the Body, we daily waiting, do
fear a dissolution: but according to the Nature of the Soul, use of Virtues,
and knowledge of the Creator, we look for the Resurrection of the Body.
Moreover, we do no less, for all this, call the life of the Body,
Sempiternall; for that, for a time, it lies dead, through the separation of
the Soul. As also, we call every man's life, until his death, one and
continual; although it seem by the course of times as it were, cut off; and
through the changing of ages, to be in like manner changed.

That the Resurrection, is of Gods Providence and Justice.
GOD, by the same Wisdom that he made and makes all things, does also daily
and hourly provide for every thing: And by that Justice that he placed
several degrees in the World, by the same, does he give euerywhere to every
thing, the things belonging to it. This providence provides for man,
compounded of Soul and Body, nourishment and succession: And in like manner
for Man compounded, he provides Judgment, justly to dispense the common
reward or punishment, for the actions or passions common to Soul and Body. But
suchlike Judgment is less fulfilled in this present life, where the Wicked
for the most part, are prosperous, and the Godly and Righteous, almost always
in adversity. Neither in the other life, can this Judgment be fulfilled,
distributing justly things that are common, unless there may follow the
Resurrection of the Bodies. The Body (verily) as it has been the fellow of
the Soul in all actions and passions, as well of Virtues as of Vices; and
companion in Holiness and Martyrdom: so ought it also to have like lot in
Pain or Reward; therefore the fame Body must arise again. For unless there
remained rewards of the life to come, Gods Providence and Justice might be had
in doubt; yea, and Man should be more miserable then brute Beasts, who for
Religion and Justice sake, depriueth himself of bodily delights, and hazardeth
himself in innumerable dangers: yea, Virtue her self, Religion, and Laws,
should be dotinges and detrimentes. Unless the Bodies rife again, Gods
Justice has no place in the Soul and body. Not in the Body: because it should
be unjust for the Soul to have reward of those labors wherein the Body
suffered a great part, and cannot it self have part in that reward. Not in the
Soul: because it should be unjust for the Soul alone to suffer punishment for
so many grievous sins, which of it self it had not committed, if the Body
had not been joined unto it: for through the means of the Body, even of
necessity, Pleasure and Passion, it abides many sharp showers or
perturbations, and sins very often. Vices are not of the Soul only; but are
in the whole Man, drawn from the wantes of the Body, and provoking of the
same. In like manner are Virtues in the Whole man; for if the Soul had never
come into the Body, it should not have needed Fortitude, Continency,
Sufferance, Counsel in matters of affairs, and the like Justice. Virtues then
are infused: from hence truly in the Soul, but from thence in the Body,
because that all men do confess, that Virtues (at the leastwise those that
are Moral) are certain inuringes of our Soul and Body. Then it is not just
for the Soul alone, to have either, the punishment of Vices, or reward of
Virtues. The Laws given from Heaven, are not given to the Soul only, but to
Man also: For there was no need to affray the Soul from Adultry, Man
slaughter, Theft, and such like things, which belong only to the Body and
bodily use. The whole man then, that is tied to the Laws, must justly either
receive reward for keeping of the Laws, or else punishment for omitting his
duty. Seeing that all things every one, have their proper ends, according
to the diversity of their Natures, it must needs be, that this Nature endued
with Reason, should also obtain her proper end. But this end is not lack of
pain; for that is also common to other Bodies without life: Neither again, is
it a sensual delight; for that is common to bruit Beasts: but it is rather
somewhat agreeable to the proper and chief nature, virtue, and action thereof;
that is to say, reasonable and intellectual; a precept wherein continually to
rest, and in which estate, Virtue her self may enjoy her rewards: Such like
end, in this present life, we can never attain; therefore in the life to come.
But seeing there is an end of human life and actions, and that this life and
actions, are common to the whole man; it must needs follow, that that end must
needs belong to the whole man. By the which consequence, we may surely know
that there shall be a Resurrection: especially because that our Heavenly workman
has made all things for himself: therefore has he given unto us, from the
beginning, Reason and Understanding, able to regard Heavenly things, that we
might contemplate him, or behold him in his works. From whence is concluded,
that the contemplation of God, is the firm and absolute end of Man.

These things have we briefly spoken of the Resurrection, not purposing hereby
eloquently to set forth al things that may hereof be spoken: but even a few,
such as are most fit for the time, which the hearers may very easily learn.

FINIS.
A Book of Xenocrates, a Philosopher of Plato his sect, concerning Death.
The speakers are, Socrates, Clinias, and Axiochus.

When I went unto Cynosarges, and was now come to Ilissum, I heard ones voice
calling me by names; And turning my self, I saw Clinias, the son of
Axiochus, running toward the Well Calliroe; and together with him, Damon the
Musition, and Carmides the son of Glancus, of whom that same excellent
cunning Musition, was my very dear and especial friend: Therefore I thought
good to go back again and meet them, that we might more leasurely and
easily go together: But Clinias weeping, said. O Socrates, the present time
requires, that we should show forth that Wisdom which you have always
spoken of to us: for my Father is vexed with a sudden and intolerable
Disease; and seems to be even at deaths door, and to take it very
impatiently: although in times past, he was wont to mock those that feared
death, as though they were afraid at the countenance of an imagined Spirit:
Come (I pray you) and blame him, as you were wont, that he may easily bear
necessity: Go therefore with us, and together with others, do a godly work.

So. You have made me very desirous, O Clinias! to do what I can, to fulfill
your request, especially seeing the work is holy, which you crave to be done;
let us therefore make have: for if the matter be so, it is time to make have.


Cli. So soon as he shall see you, O Socrates, he shall begin to recover: for
it has often happened, that he in some sort repented.


So. Then we went unto him by the Walls, through the Peritoman Fields; for he
dwelt night the Gates toward the Amazones Pillar: And we found him sound of
limme, and strong of body; but weak in mind, and greatly standing need of
comfort, and often times staying to take breath, and fetching sighs and
groans, with many tears, and clapping of his hands. Which when I saw; What
now, Axiochus (said I) Where is now that your old and boasted Constancy? Where
are the perpetual praises of Virtues? Where is your wonderful magnitude and
boldness of Mind? For even as an ill or sluggish Wrastler may in the
wrestling Scoole appear courageous till he come to try all; so have you
fainted and yielded in this conflict. Why, consider you not the order and
course of Nature, seeing you are so worthy a man, and so well learned: and if
no other thing, yet that you are an Athenian? Remember you not that vulgar and
old worn Sentence, wherein it is said, That this life is a certain
Pilgrimage; and that we ought to behave our selves rightly, and with an equal
mind, as wanderers in a strange Country, and so come to that thing which is
due and necessary; not with a weak and feeble, but with a joyful and merry
mind. But this tender softness, is more meet for Infancy, then for riper
age.


Axi. These things, O Socrates, seem rightly spoken: But I know not how
through imminent dangers, these same most comfortable words of patient abiding,
do sliely vanish away, and are neglected: yea, there arises a certain
repugnant extreme fear, which compasses my mind on every side. Oh alas, I
shall be depriude of this light, and of these good things; I shall lie in
darkness: Having lost my taste and sight, I shall rot in the earth, and be
turned to Worms and Dust.


So. Thou (o Axiochus) do join Sense with privation of Sense, without the
diligent examination of Reason, and art contrary to thy self both in sayings
and doings. Neither do you mark that you do both together complain of the
loss of your Senses, and do sorrow for rottenness and loss of good things;
as though you being about to pass over into another life, should rather flit
into the privation of every Sense: Privation, I say, and that such a one, as
went before the time that you were borne. For as in the Commonweal of Draco
and Calisthenes, no evil has touched you; for you were one that was not
compassed with evil: so after death, nothing shall overthwart you; for you
shall not be he, that may be environed with evil. Drive away therefore from
you, all such like triflings, and consider thus much, that that being dissolved
which was compounded, and the Soul going unto her own place, this Body that
remains, being earthly, and without reason, can by no means be Man: for we
are a Soul, an Immortal living thing shut up in a Mortal habitacle, which
Nature made us as a shadow wherein to abide evil. Whereunto those things that
are sweet, are Adulterous, filthy, naught, vain, fading, and mixed, with many
and sundry miseries, griefs, troubles, and vexations. But those things that
are grievous unto it, are of their own nature good, whole, sound, and void of
sweetness: Unto it do happen hot Tumors and Swellings, superfluity of
Humors, decay of Senses, and corruption of the Bowels: Wherewith the Soul
must needs be very much grieved and payned, being diffused and spread abroad
through all the pores and passages, to bind and tie all things together.
Whereby it comes to pass, that it now desires the life Celestial, and
niest to it of nature, and thirsts thereafter, and after the Quire supernall.
For the loosing or departing out of this life, is a passage from an evil
thing, unto a good.


Axtoc. Seeing (Socrates) that you do judge this life to be evil, why do you
tarry or abide in it; especially seeing you do most of all meditate on these
things, and are ateacher of others, and do excel all the rest in mind and
Godly virtues?


Soc. Axiochus, you are no sufficient witness for me, but do think and
esteem as do the people of Athens. But I would very gladly, and wish in my
heart, to have the knowledge of these common things, and not to know things
superfluous and vain. Those works which we spoke of, are the declamations of
Prodicus the Wiseman, some bought for six pence, some two groates, and some
four; for verily he teaches nothing of free cost; and has always in his
mouth that saying of Epicharmus, Manus manum lauat; dans aliquid aliquid
accipe: i. The one hand washes the other: give some thing, and take some
thing: Meaning, that one Good turn asks another. On the former days, when
in the house of Callias the son of Hippomous, he declaymed, he brought in so
many things against life, that it wanted but a little, but I even then, ended
my life: and from that time forward (o Axiochus) my Mind does die continually.


Axt. What then are those things that he there said? I will rehearse them all,
so far forth as my memory will serve me: and thus he said.

What part of life is not full of euilles? Does not the Infant yet scarcely
borne, foorth-with wail and weep; and begins it life with sorrow; neither
is there any grief wanting, but cries and weepeth either for Parents, or
want of necessaries, or for cold, or for heat, or for hurtes? He cannot yet in
words tell what he ayleth: he weepeth, and cries with voice; only voice has
he without words, as a sign of grief which he endures. Now when he has
fulfilled the seventh year of his age, he is troubled and turmoylad with very
many labors; for then come up Schoolemaisters and Teachers, Alphabetaries and
Gramarians, with such others, and do bear rule over him none otherwise then a
Tyrant. Then when he is somewhat more grown, Censores of Arithmeticke,
Distributors of Geometry, and innumerable Masters besides these, do bear
rule over him. And when he is become a stripling, then does Fear circumuent
him: the University, Prentiship, Sceptres, and the immoderate flowing and rage
of evils do dispossess him of the pleasures wherein his heart delights. All
the time and course of his youth, he is kept in, and holden under by the
Censorers of Manners, and abides the sentence of most severe and uncorrupted
Judges. And when he is freed or loosed from their sentence, then Care,
Consultations, and aduisements, come creeping upon him while he reasons and
discourses within himself, what path and course of life is best for him to
follow: so that by the comparison of the labors and troubles that are to
come, those that are past, do seem both light, and only to be feared of
Infantes: For then arise expeditions of War, and Wounds, and often
Skirmiges, Conflictes, and Battles. At the length, old wrinckled crooking Age
creeps upon him; upon the which, there altogether flows every foul,
filthy, and incurable evil of Nature; as a Banker looks for advantage,
Nature requires her Pledges, of this man, Sight; of that man, Hearing; of an
other, them both: which if any do restore, then does he dissolve, wax weak,
lame, may med, and impotent. Many live even to the utmost bounds of Old age;
but then they are in mind, twice Children, fond, and decrepite: Wherefore, God
in providing for Man's matters, does in a short time, call again unto himself,
those whom he loves. Therefore Agamedes and Triphonius, when they went unto
the Temple of the God Apollo, and had prayed for that thing which is the best
of all other, they straight way fell so fast asleep, that they never wakened
after. The same also happened unto the Priests of luno in the City Argos,
when their Mother had prayed for some good gift to be given to her Sons.

It should be prolixious and tedious to rehearse the sentences of Poets, who in
divine and heavenly Poesies, do deplore the Calamities of human life. I will
rehearse one notable and famous Poet, that speaks to this purpose, in these
words. The Gods have decreed, that miserable mortal men should live in
perpetual sorrow: Neither is there any thing upon the earth, more miserable,
then man. Therefore (they say) that Amphirarus was chosen of Jupiter and
Apollo, with a wonderful great affect; and yet notwithstanding he attained not
to the age of an Old man. And what do thou think of him, who bids him
that is newborn, to bewail the misery of his own life? But I will now
leave off, least I should seem to stray and wander wider and farther, then my
purpose was. Who is there (I pray you) that does not greatly complain of that
Study, Art, Science, Trade, and Course of life, which himself has chosen?
Handicrafts-men, Hyrelinges, and such, let us view and consider them a little,
that sit up laboring and toyling night by night, and do scarcely get things
necessary for their living. Moreover, day and night do they, their wives and
children, live full of complaints, and fill all the house with weeping and
tears. What shall I say of Mariners, how many dangers are they hourly in?
Rightly (in sooth) did Bias count Mariners in the number neither of those that
are dead, nor of those that are alive: For they being earthly men, are in a
doubtful-wise partakers of either estate. But Husbandry is sweet: let it be
so; but has it not always found occasion of Sorrow? For in truth, the
Husbandman sometime accuses, finds fault with, and bewayleth Drought,
sometime showers and Rain, sometime Heat, exustions and parching burning
Sun, sometimes extreamitie of Cold, and such unseasonable weather: sometime
Worms, Caterpillars, Grasshoppers, and such like deuowrers. What; Is not the
Commonwealth in safety and quiet? Truly it is honorable: But with how many
euilles and sorrows is it turmoyled? Truly it has a certain moving, soft
pleasant swelling, deceivable and troublous joy, even like to swelling and
boiling Cholar: but a loss sorrowful and worse then a thousand deaths. For
who can be happy, when there is no remedy, but he must needs live at the
peoples beck? And he is mocked and hissed at, as though he were a Play or a
Fable of the people, berated, flouted, fined miserable and wretched.


Soc. Where (o civil Axiochus) dyed Melchindes? Where Thomistocles? Where
Ephialtes? Where all the other Captains? These things verily I never thirsted
after. Neither does it seem to be an honorable thing, to execute the
Magistrates duty amongst the mad multitude. But those waitelayers that
about Theramenes and Calixenus did the day after, bring under the Judges or
Rulers, condemned the men indiscreetly to death, whom you Axiouchus together
with Triptolamus did repugne in three thousand speeches unto the people.


Axioc. You say true, o Socrates; And therefore from that same time, even
until this day, I have ever eschewed the Tribunalshippe. Neither does any
thing seem more difficile and hard, then the government of the Commonweal.
This is very plain and well known to them, who themselves have to do in
civil matters. But you do so speak of these things, as one that a far
off, did see them out of a Glass, or from the top of a Rock, or the prospect
of a fair Tower. But my self do right well know them, seeing I was my self
conversant in the matter. For verily the common sort (O Socratus my friend,)
is ungrateful, full of mockes and scorns, vain, soon angried, cruel,
envious, rude, heaped full of troubles and trifles: and whoseuer does
familiarly acquaint himself with them, and converse amongst them, does at the
length, become far more miserable then they be themselves.


Socr. Seeing then (O Axiochus) you do judge, that this Discipline is above
all other, most to be eschewed; What do you think of others? Are not they
also to be fled from? I have furthermore more heard Prodicus, when once he
said, that Death does not belong neither to the dead, nor to those that are
alive.


Axi. Which way (O Socrates,) or in what manner?


Socr. Because Death is not about the living: and the dead are not or have no
being: Wherefore, neither is Death about you Axiochus; because you are not yet
dead: neither if you depart this life, shall Death be about you; because you
shall not be. Therefore grief should be vain, if Axiochus do bewail that,
which is not about Axiochus, neither shall be hereafter: For you do in like
manner, as if you were afraid of Scylla and Centaurus, when as these Monsters
are neither now about you, neither shall be at any time hereafter. For that
which is horrible and to be feared, happens to those which are: But to those
which are not, nothing is to be feared.


Axi. You gather these things, out of that light and vain babbling, which is
now common all abroad amongst the vulgar sort: For from amongst them, comes
this copy of vain words, composed for young men's sakes. But I, who am
deprived of the good things of this life, do still mourn; although you have
before in your Discourse brought very strong reasons: For my sorrowing head,
does not understand the finenesse of your words, neither discern the colors
of your speech. Although it hear the pomp and shining of speech, yet it
neglects, and is farte away from the truth: neither can it abide those
rehearsed captious Sophismes; it only attends on those things which can
knock upon, and pearce the Mind and Soul.


So. Without reason (Axiochus,) do you join together the sense of evil
things, and the privation of good things: And this lies closely hidden, that
he indeed is dead who is deprived of good things, the passion of evil things
afflicts the contraries. But he that is not, can neither mark or regard the
orbitie or privation. By what means therefore where there is wanting the
notice of the things afflicting, can there be affliction? For unless in the
beginning you should put a certain senses by Justice, you should be afray de
of Death. But now you pervert and fore turmoyle your self, fearing least you
should loose your Soul. But you do condemn your Soul to amission, that it
shall be lost, and not had again; you fear least Sense should be taken from
you; and do think that Sense existing, cannot be comprehended of that
Sense, whereas there are many, and those notable Sermons of the Immortality of
the Soul. For neither had Mortal nature risen to so great excellency, that
it should contemn the violence of outrageous Beasts, sail and pass over the
Sea, build Cities, prescribe order to Commonweals, look up into Heaven,
measure the circuit of the Stars, mark the progress of the Sun and Moon,
and their rysings and settinges, defectes moreover, and swift restitutions
Meridian, and double conuersions; the seven Stars, and Winter in like
manner, and Summer; the flawes of Wind, and the force of Rain and Stormy
weather, the tempostions whurring Whorlewinde, and flashing of the Lightning;
and to conclude, how the passions of the world should so wonderfully stand in
eternity, unless there were in the Mind, some Divine spirit, by which it
should get the intelligence of so great things. Wherefore, o my dear
Axiochus, you do not flit unto Death, but unto Immortality it self. Neither
shall good things be taken away from: but you shall enjoy the sound possession
of good things. Neither shall you and more receive and enjoy Pleasure mixed
with a mortal Body: but shall quite be set free, and utterly void of every
sorrow: Thither (I say) you shall go free from this Prison; where you shall
have all things quiet, and removed from sorrowful Old age: Where the
exultation and rejoicing of the inhabiters, is an holy joy, and their life has
no conuersing with euilles; but is quiet, and nourished with Peace; viewing the
nature of things, and contemplating the hidden secrets of Philosophy; not
verily unto the grace of the multitude, or Theater; but to the object of
perspicuous truth.


Axio. Your Oration has drawn my Mind, and moved me to affect the
contrary to that it did before. I am now quite changed: for I now do not
fear Death, but do wish it. But as it is the manner of Rethoricians, I also
abounding, will express some thing. For now (o Socrates,) I am carried from
hence up on high, and do run through the Divine circuit and heavenly Throne.
And being delivered out of this Weakness, I am renewed so, that I am become
altogether new, nothing that I was before.


Soc. I will also show and declare unto you (if it please you,) what Gobrias
the Magian did teach me. For (said he) at that time when as Xerxes passed
into Greece with an Army, his Grandfather ( Gobrias by name,) was sent into
Delos, to keep the I Will; werein, there were extant two Gods; where he said:
That of certain Brazen Tables, which Opis and Hecaergos brought out of the
North parts, that he learned, that in the solution of the Body, the Soul does
flit into a hidden place under the Earth, wherein is the Kingdom of Juno, not
a straiter Haule of Jupiter; because the Earth must hold the middle of the
World; and that must be the sphericall heaven, whose one Hemisphere, the Gods
and Saints do enjoy: The other, the Inferiors, partly Breathren of the
heavenly Saints, partly the children of the Brethren: But the places without,
are the Provinces of Pluto; which are bound and environed with Walls, Rayles,
Bars, and Chains of Iron. First does the River Acheron part these places
insunder; and then the River Cocytus does separate them: which when silly
Souls have passed over, they must needs be brought before the upright Judges,
Minos and Radamanthus; to wit, into that Region which is called, Veritatis
Campus (...). The Field of Truth: Where they sit in Judgment, examining the
life of every one that comes unto them. Here no man can boulster or defend
himself with lies. Whosoever then has been led here in this life by the
good Spirit, do pass over into the place of the Godly; where the Spring
lasts ever, and abounds with Fruits of every kind, and flows with
Springs of most clear and shining Waters, and Meadows moreover very pleasant,
and bedecked with fair flourishing Flowers of sundry colors, and sweet
smelling savors: Neither is there wanting the fellowship of Philosophers, nor
Theater of Poets. There are the company of Singing-men and Quiristers: There
is Music, Singinges, and sweet Concentes, Pleasant Bankets, and Holy and
often Meetinges, inviolable joy of Drinkers, and sweet living together. There
is no excess of Heat or cold; but the nature of the Air is wholesome,
tempered with light beams of the Sun. Here are the Seats of purged Souls,
where they celebrate the Divine mysteries. What then hinders, but that there
may be given unto you, first honor and reward, seeing you derive your
original from God? Contrarily, those that have defiled their lives with
wickedness, are of the Hollish furies, suddenly snatched through Hell into
Chaos and Herebus, the deepest Pit of all: where lies the Province of the
Wicked, and the vain labors of the Daughters of Danaeus; who in vain do
labor to fill the Tun with water, out of whose sides filled full of holes,
the water runs so fast, as they put it in; where is the thirst of Tantulus,
the bowels of Titius, the perpetual rolling Stone of Sisyphus: Whereas raging
wild Beasts, biting Worms, and stinging Serpentrs do inseparably fould about
the Bodies: Where inextinguible Firebrandes that can never be put out, do
burn up their flesh: Where wicked men are punished with all kind of torments,
and are for euer-more vexed with perpetual pain. These things, I heard of
Gobrias. But you, O Axiochus, shall judge of these things: for I being
constrained by reason, do plainly and firmly know this only, that every
Soul remains Immortal; and that that which goes pure from these places,
do live without sorrowfulness. Wherefore, O Axiochus, whether you go upward
or downward, it can none otherwise be, but you must needs be blessed, if so
be you do live holily and godlily.


Axi. I am ashamed, o my dear friend Socrates, and it abasheth me to speak
any further. The fear of Death is so far from me now, that I now do most
earnestly desire to die. Your former speech, as though it were a Celestial and
Heavenly Oracle, has so persuaded me. Now therefore, I do despise this life,
seeing that I am about to go into a better, and more desired place: Wherefore
these things that are thus spoken, I will quietly mark, ponder, and meditate
by my self. And you, o Socrates, I pray you come again unto me at afternoon.


Soc. I will do as you say: But I will now return again unto Cynosarges, to
walk there fore my recreation, from whence I was brought hither unto you.


Here ends Xenocrates Book concerning Death.

Mecaenas good, I ^raue of thee, my Patron for to be;
Against carping Zoilus cankred corpse, and censures bad of me.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by W. White, for R. Bolton and W. White. 1611.


