THE TELL-TROTH'S REQVITALL, OR, Truth's Recompense: As it was preached the
12th day of November, 1626, at Eckington: WHEREIN Are contained these three
Propositions, (vindicating Paul from the aspersion of Enmity, and laying it on
the Galati^ns,) Viz.

1 No grace of God in man can secure him from the enmity of the unregenerate. 2
Sometimes a Ministers own hearers are set in variance against him. 3 The
publication of the Truth is the cause of this variance.
By Samuel Kenrick Student in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word in the same
place.

Veritas odium parit, sed non quaerit angulos. LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher
for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at the great South door of Paul's.
1627.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir William Courten, Samuel Kenrick wishes all
grace, and peace, and happiness in both worlds.
Right Worshipful:
IT were as great an injury to Custom, to write, and not to dedicate, as it is
to your love, to receive a courtesy, and not study a requital. Now, it is the
happy lot of a Scholar, to play the Surgeon, and partly at one clap (with a
paper-plaister) cure both griefs. I confess, I am indebted to them both; and,
in both, to you. If then, I seem to presume, either blame Custom, or your
Love. Common sense sent me to Custom; Custom, to your Love; and both
challenged from me the debt of this presumption. Receive then these few rude
lines, as your due, in part of payment. Honor them with your acceptance, as
sometimes you have graced mine Auditory with your presence. I have perceived
your love unto the truth; I have found you a friend unto it: whither then
should I send the truth but to Talmud: Cholin, 62.1.
such a Patron? Every thing (by some native inclination) hastens to that,
whereby it gains. The Dog knows his grass; the Heart, his Dittany; the
Pigeon, her Laurel; and the Swallow her Celidon: neither is the Truth ignorant
of her well-wishers, or insensible of her Physicians. Therefore, I trust,
however it goes forth from me in weakness, and disgrace; it will return (like
her self) in strength, and honor. But, if you knew all, you would say, it
were too young to make a Martyr, and indeed the Press befits not its infancy.
It was but conceived in the morning; and brought forth ere night; it began to
(...). Thucid. hb. 1.
twatle on the morrow; and (being a little saucy with the sons of Belial) met
with a check, and almost dared unto martyrdom, before it could get home to my
study. So, it was neither my prefumption, nor foole-hardinesse, that sent it to
the Printing House, (if any shall so think, he will offer injury to my
simplicity) nor was it (simply) that usual argument of Apology (the
Importunity of friends) but the audacious malipertness of the Adversaries of
Truth, that drew it, as it were, perforce, out of mine hands. Let it therefore
find the burrow of your patronage, and you shall encourage me hereafter unto
more deliberate exercises. What now remains, in the mean time, but mine
humble prayers to God for you? Nezian.
((...):) for I have no more. Therefore, the Lord God Almighty (who is the
ancient of days, and the God of Truth, keep you in the Truth, and bless both
you, and yours, with peace, and length of days; that you may stand for the
peace, (and maintain the strength) of Truth here; and afterward be crowned
(like the Truth) with immortal Joys. So I rest

From my house in Eckington this 12 of December. 1626. Your Worships most lowly
devoted in all Christian service. Samuel Kenricke.

To my reverend and venerable Brethren, the Ministers of the Gospel of Truth,
peace and prosperity in this world, and fullness of glory hereafter.
Reverend Brethren:
I Bring forth my papers among you, Quasi and latere simul and legi vellem,
educo. Cunaeus.
as one that scarce knows, whether it be best to hide them, or reveal them.
But, seeing now, that no other Nay would stop the mouth of necessity, Durum
telum, necessitas.
but the Printing of them, I am bold to desire a part of Patronage from you
(too) for my Impe. All is little enough to shroud it from the weather, as the
wind now sits. Therefore be good to it, I pray you. It Was a quick birth, God
knows; and, it may die, like an abortive, in its nativity, for ought I
perceive, if it miss the alms of your approbation. Nor, is my request without
reason, if you consider the nature of my subject; whose nobility entreats not
only the courtesy, but commands the debt of your acceptance.

For first it concerns you much: Truth; and it is your profession to stand for
it. Its own worth, not my comment, may move you to it. My dull oratory has
too low areach to handle the height of it: yet my poor strain (what ever it
be herein) though hasty, yet it is liberal, and freeborn; which calls me,
Parent; and you, Patrons.

Secondly, Truth: you have the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: you are
tough, and approved Soldiers in the School of Christ; (I speak not to the
silent Cattle in the Ministry.) Sit ye down then, in the Charets of
Ammi-nadib, and plead for my yongling, that can scarce speak for it self. Let
the care of its credit, or pity of its weakness, persuade you to patronize it.

Nay further, Levies illegitimates, to astipulate to my request. For, in
Natures School, strike the dog, and (with an inherent proclivity) he runs to
his master: wound the Soldier, and be hastens to the army: the Antiperistasis
of the cold sends the heat back again into the fire: yea, Vnumquodque magis
inclinatur adid, cuius est.
every thing (by a nature all inclination) has respect unto that, whereunto it
chiefly belongs. Now, the Church is my center, and receptacle; you, the
Guardians: whither then, should I fly for shelter, but to you? if any refuse
me this courtesy, it is either for envy, or else for enmity.

But alas, we are not clean, in Levies Tribe, from Critickes, whose best
learning consists in censuring others; whose best skill is to show their own
folly. And indeed, it is no wonder, to see some Bastard Curs, when they dare not
bite, dare bark: some cowardly Braggadochioes, when they dare not fight, dare
crack of their manhood: and it is no injury, to say, There are some Ideaes of
wisdom, who, when they dare not write, dare carpe; and happily prove
themselves as liber all of their ignorance, as of their words.

But I leave such unto the further doom of my silent censure: nor let them
think, that my purpose was ever bent to grace them with the dedication of my
lines. Therefore to you, my Brethren, (whose grave discretion and Christian
love have taught you to cover an error,) to you I turn my self again: And
if, in this Pamphlet, my phrase shall seem too clownish, (for such was the
adversaries comment upon the delivery) pardon it, and say, I live among my
fellows, and have not, as yet, learned any better eloquence, then (with the
home bred Soldier) to call a Spade, a Spade. Besides, some of you know, that
Physic is a part of my profession, and practice: Ex spuma dracorum veneneta
fit Bezoardicum.
and therein of strong poison, I make an wholesome medicine: why may not then
some Balm of Gilead (by a divine confection) be extracted out of an harsh
phrase; which (simply taken) may breed an offense. But your judgments I know
are apprehensive; I need not inform. Your affections, I trust, friendlike; I
need no further persuade. Frustrate not then my expectation of your acceptance
hereof: so you may happily milk from me some sweeter streams of my more
maturate studies: and in the mean while, (yea ever) you shall find me obliged
by this truth,

From my house in Eckington this 12 of December. 1626. The readiest (though the
meanest in our tribe) to do you service, Samuel Kenrick.

TOMY WELL DEVOted Neighbors in the town of Eckington; all grace and love of
the truth be multiplied in you.
Christian friends,
I Bring you here only an Herb of your former tasting, by presenting (now)
unto your eyes, what heretofore I preached to your ears: and it is of your
own garden (too;) for you are Lords of my Ministerial services: yea you may
say unto me as sometimes Paul did unto Philemon; (...). Epist. Pauli ad
Philem, verse. 19.
Thou owe thy very self unto us. Well then; take my notes unto you: labor
to make them useful unto your souls; Buy this Truth with your diligence; Sell
it not with your sleighty regard of it: If you have hated it, learn now to
love it; if you love it, love it still; maintain it; stand for it; make much
of it; so shall you know that the Lord will do you good (not so much, because
you have Judge. 17.13.
a Levite to your Priest, as) because you have the Truth dwelling in you. But
why stand I here to move your affections, when (happily) your understandings
are not altogether so rightly informed in the Text as they ought? Now indeed
it is fit that the (...) Talmud.
beginnings of things should be diligently looked unto. And it is a good rule
for a Scholar often Pliny Sec. Epist. 6. lib. 3.
to look back upon the Title of his own works. You may (indeed) make a
doubt, whether I have rightly interpreted this Text, or not: whether the
Apostle demands, [Am I therefore become your enemy, etc?] to free himself from
the aspersion of Enmity, or to upbraid the Galatians with it; I say, to upbraid
them with it: which position, I bind with these arguments.

First, 1. Galatorum inobedientia.
the Apostle takes them up sharply for their Gal. 3.1.
disobedience unto the truth; (which is the usual companion of Emnity.) Chap.
3. verse. 1. as also chap 5. v. 7. which makes a probability that he upbraids
them here of Enmity against him.

Secondly, 2. Epanorthosis Apostolica.
I argue from the Apostles sudden correction of himself in this present text:
Before he blazoned forth their Encomiasticke praises: now he sings a Palinode,
Am I therefore become your enemy, etc.? Before, they would have plucked out
their own eyes for him, etc. Now, they seem to hate him. Therefore I
conjecture he upbraids them in these words, Am I therefore become your enemy,
etc.?

Thirdly, 3. Orthodoxoru^ Consensus.
I gurge the consent of orthodoxall Writers upon this place; as Haet est
conditio veritatis, ut semper inimicitie persequaxtur. Hier. in hunc versime.
Hierome, Tam exprobrandicausa, quam admonendi, etc. Calvin.
Calvin, Ju verse. 17.
Beza, and Cum voserga me praesentem tm alacres ostenderitis, tantoque amore me
complexi fueritis, non debebatis menunc pro inimice habere. Pisc. in hunc locum.
Piscator: and also Bezaes Gloss upon the 17 verse, They zelously affect you,
etc. that they might transport all your love from me upon themselves. Therefore
it seems unto me that the Apostle (now finding them to halt in their love to
him-wards) upbraids them with an Am I therefore become your enemy, etc?

But, if I have erred herein, pardon my haste: I little thought to print it,
when I pend it: and (I know) you will witness with me, that I have not much
mended the coat of the delivery. Bless it then with your Christian
approbation, and you shall encourage me hereafter (the rather) to plead for the
Truth. Now, with my prayers to Almighty God for the increase of grace in your
hearts, I leave you for this time, and will rest

Your most assured friend and Pastor, Samuel Kenricke.

THE TELL-TROTHS REQVITALL.
GALAT. 4.16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?
THe best cause finds not always the best patronage: neither are Libere, and
sine adulatime veritatem praedicantes, and gesta pravae vite arguentes gratiam
non babent apud homines. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 4.10.
good Ministers always blessed with the affections of their hearers. Some brood
of Ismael (of a currish nature) like churlish Nabal, never wanted the quips of
enmity, against the Holy Truth. For was it ever known, that there was a time
wherein Stumbling-blockes were not laid in the walks of Truth? who ever told
the Truth, and was not (with Paul) accounted an Enemy for it?

If John will needs twit Herod for keeping his brother Philips wife, off goes
his head for it: his Sermon's now no longer accepted: he tells the Truth, and
he smarts for it. If Christ once begin to blow up the skirts of the Scribes
and Pharisees, and broach their hypocritical outward lines to the view of the
world; then straight a confederacy against him; he must be put to death, and
that for telling the Truth. Amos must not be too busy in the Kings Court; if
he be, he is bid, Avaunt; and quickly made ware, that it is the Kings Chapel:
he must away, and eat his bread in Judah. Nor may we forget the success of
Elijah, who no sooner began to blab against the Statutes of Omri, but
straight way he is counted Ahabs enemy, Have thou found me o; mine enemy? No
marvel then, if good Paul be counted an enemy, for telling the Truth: for
rubbing away the old ceremonies of the Leviticall Law; for branding them out
with the title of beggarly rudiments: In short, for teaching justification to
the Galatians by faith alone in Christ Jesus.

For so stirring and operative is the nature of the Truth, and its language so
working, that it soon netles a corrupt heart; and where it lights, it peppers
to the quick. And indeed, we may not mistake the times; we must think them
then, as they are now; wherein the friends of Truth, are but like stars, whereof

Some seem to be, Comets of amity, and shadows of friendship had Paul; such
have we. Now, we are their friends; now again, their enemies. Now they are
with us; now again departing from us. And why? because they were not of us.
Thus their friendship comes, and goes, like the good days of an ill ague; and
(to speak Truth) it is but enmity at best.

Others are stars indeed, Hyminaeus and Philetus) they make shipwreck of them:
and shall we blame them? Their nature is erraticall and fleeting.

But some are fixed, Enmity. Paul (no doubt) had some friends of each sort:
neither do we blame all the Galatians, for some of them. Charity has taught
us a limitation of Censure.

So then, (these premises wisely considered) the strangeness of this truth is
a little qualified, that Paul should be counted an enemy to these Galatians;
or, that he should so pathetically demand of them, Am I therefore become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth?

Time prevents a larger preamble: of the drift or meaning in a word, which I
conceive to be this:

Summam hujus explicationis colligo ex Hieronimo, Calvin's, Beza, and Piscatore,
super hanc locum. Et vid. plurain Epist. ad Lector.
I (Paul a Minister of Jesus Christ) perceiving you [the Galatians] to halt in
your love, Expositio.
to be estranged to me, as though I were become your enemy, (or rather indeed,
to be at enmity with me) am bold to enquire of you [my hearers,] whether this
enmity arises from any other cause, then for telling you the Truth [revealed
unto me, by the Spirit of God.]

In which plea, we may observe two parties; 1 Paul, on the one side. 2 The
Galatians on the other. 1 He tells the Truth. 2 They hate him for it.



So we see, their natures are differenced by two distinct qualities, Truth and
Enmity. Enmity is now become (and indeed Haec est conditio veritatis, ut com
semper inimicitiae persequantur. Hier. in hunc locum. Divisio. 1
ever was) the nearest consequent of Truth: And here the children are (as it
were) set against their own parent: Am I therefore become your enemy, because
I tell you the Truth?

Wherein we may observe more plainly two parts in general: 1 An
interrogation, or question: Am I therefore become your enemy? 2 The
anticipation, or prevention of the answer, because I tell you the Truth.


More particularly we may hence collect these four branches.

1. The injury conceived; enmity: Am I therefore become your enemy? 2 The
person, in whom, Paul. 3 The persons against whom, (or rather, your enemy. 4
The cause of this enmity; It was the Truth: Truth.
Look over the Text again, and behold every part, (every word) caries the
aggravation of grief in the face of it.

1 Look on the passion; enmity; it was not so light as anger. 2 Consider the
person hated: Paul, (no Judas, but) their own Preacher. 3 See the persons
hating: Galatians, His own hearers. 4 Search the cause; Truth; (the
publication of the holy Truth of righteousness.)
Had it been any other indignity, then Enmity; any other Preacher, then Paul;
any other Hearers, then the Galatians; any other Cause, then the Truth; I would
not so much marvel: but that there should be such a wrong offered to such a
Preacher, of such Hearers, for such a Cause; Horresco referens, I tremble to
tell it.

But it is neither our fear, nor amazedness, that either helps Paul out of the
briars, or frees us of the like danger: some seasonable instructions out of the
Text may rather do the feate: therefore of the particulars in their order: and
first of the first and second, 1 and 2 part.
The enmity, and the person, (Paul) against whom it was conceived.

And here by the way take notice, that it appears by the scope of this
Scripture, that this enmity was seemingly in (but really against) Paul: It was
really in (but only seemingly against) the Galatians. So we proceed, Am I
therefore become your enemy?

Some question may here arise, QuesT. Solut.
what this Enmity is? Whereunto I answer briefly, That it is Est vctus ira ex
pluribus causis collecta, diuturno tempore perseverans. Aug. de diffin.
a grounded passion (if I may so speak) arising from natural affection
distempered, and breaking forth into a disdainful contempt, or opposition of
that which we hate. And this differs

First, from envy: for a man cannot envy himself, yet he may be at enmity (in
some sort) with himself.

Secondly from anger: for that is but a disposition; this, an Festuca in oculo
ira est: trabs in oculo, oaium est Aug. in Math.
habit. Anger is but enmity begun: but enmity is anger finished.

Thirdly from abomination: for in abomination we proporly hate the evil, but
not the person.

But enmity against others is when we hate, 1 The fault of the party offending,
as it is a fault. Vt culpa.
2 The person too, for his fault. Vt poena.
3 We desire the evil of punishment to befall him; and this is called the
Alrenethim Episcop. Cathnens de-medicina anima.
hatred of enmity. And this (I take it) lights here upon Paul, whereby he
himself is counted an enemy to his Galatians. Divine Paul! yet none of his
privileges could prevent their malice.


1 Neither his calling unto the Ministry: yet that was powerful, and
miraculous: he was called immediately of God. 2 Nor his learning; yet he spoke
wisdom among those that are perfect. 3 Nor his Vita fidesque inculpata fuit.
Ovid. mer. Propos. 1.
unblameable conversation; yet that was in heaven: yea he desired to be
dissolved and to be with Christ.
This considered, we may safely conclude hence, that Neither profundity in
learning, nor power in preaching, nor unblameablenesse in conversation, can
secure a man from the enmity of the unregenerate. Paul was hated; who then can
be freed? he (alas he) was counted an enemy, Quis serme ad explicanda Pauli
merita sufficient? quae lingua laudibus eius invenietur aequalis? cum omnia,
quae sunt in omnibus bona, anima una possideat, etc. Chrysostom. de laudibus Pauli.
whose praises no tongue can express: in whose soul Divine grace chose her
habitation. He, who was the pillar of the Churches; He, who traveled by
Hieron. in Ep. ad Exuberap. Choysost.
sea and land, to implant the Truth among the Gentiles: That earthly Angel,
that heavenly man, who learned among the Maxim. in sermon. Petri and Pauli.
Angels, what he should preach among men, is now hated as an enemy.

Alas good Paul; what, art thou counted an enemy? Why, thou wast not inferior
to the very chiefest Apostles: thou had the care of the Churches: thou
labouredst more then they all: thou spakest with tongues more then they all:
thou foughtest with beasts at Ephesus: thou spakest wisdom among those that
were perfect: thou did tread Satan under thy feet: thou wast rapt up into the
third heaven: thou heardest (...).
words unutterable: all which graces and privileges were most amiable, yet
(for all those) thou art hated and counted an enemy.

But why wander I so far abroad to fetch Paul's commendations? let but the eye
of reason look home to this present Epistle, yea this present Chapter, and see
the very Text hemd in with such reasons and arguments of love that it seems
very reasonlesse, Motives that might have induced the Galatians to love Paul.
that these Galatians should either hate Paul, or account him an enemy unto
them.

First, see his care and his fear of them: verse. 11. I am afraid of you, lest
I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Me thinks love should have been the
recompense of so tender an heart.

Secondly, Brethren, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at
all. See him here, with a patient forgetfulness, content to pass over former
discourtesies without recapitulation.

Thirdly, Ye know, how through infirmity of flesh, I preached unto you. Alas
Paul thy diligence did not deserve their enmity: so the Duplicatur dolor, cum
ab eo, a quo non merueris, venit: Tanto magis iniuria est effectior, quanto
proximus est, qui facit. Seneca.
injury is the greater; because undeserved

Nay, this argument may be illustrated with a twofold Exegesis.

First, he was now in prison at Rome; and yet he preached unto them by Epistle.

Secondly, he was now aged: a Minister of Christ of three and thirty years
standing, and within three years of his last end. Now, the Prove. 16.31.
hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

Fourthly, ye received me (as he himself testifies of them) as an Angel from
God, even as Christ Jesus.

But now see a cooler, they count him an enemy unto them. Yea further, says
he, ye would have pulled forth your own eyes, and have given them to me. But
now the case is altered: their zeal is qualified, and he accounted an Enemy.

Fifthly, Galatians in cleaving unto others: verse. 17. They zealously affect
you, but not well: they would exclude you, Vt omnem amorem a me in ipso;
transferatis. Beza super haec verba.
that you might affect them. Why then should Paul (notwithstanding all his
privileges) be counted an enemy? Even because he tells the Truth.

But this enmity was not so individually restrained, that it lighted upon Paul
only: for even so it fared with Christ too; who for learning was excellent,
and for life exquisite; in all, perfect: and yet hated for telling the Truth.

Nor could the privilege of integrity secure Job from the enmity (what if I
say of his own wife?) of his friends. In a word, see Luke 21.16, 17. Ye (be ye
graced with what excellencies soever) shall be betrayed by parents and friends,
etc. and ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. So you see, there is
no excellency of grace whatsoever, that is able to shelter us from the arrows
of hatred: they (...). Hom.
fly at random, and spare not (if not soonest hit) the dearest in Gods sight.

And that we may discern a little more clearly the truth of this truth, let us
briefly take notice of these three grounds; wherein (as I think) we are all
agreed.

First, that all the excellencies of grace in man, as knowledge,

Secondly, that whatsoever we now gain in those excellencies, scant measure)
of what we lost.

Thirdly, that between the excellencies of these estates, difference, or
variance.

These things thus provided, Probation.
we may reason out this truth from the antipathy, or difference, between Paul's
estate by grace, and these unregenerate Galatians. I say, it is no wonder to see
the gifts and graces before mentioned to be hated of unregenerate men, Argum.
1. Mizald. 1. lib. arcan.
because of the repugnancy that is between their natures: they cannot stand
together. In all things we may perceive some native hatred, and disagreement.

In vegetables, Pythagoras.


In sensitives, there is the like difference. The Pliny lib. 10. c. 74.
Aristotle lib. 9. cap. 1. de natu. anim.
Be is at variance with the Waspe; the Spider with the Serpent; the Wolf with
the Lamb; the Horse with the Bear; the little Birds with the Owl.

Yea in reasonable creatures this difference is seen. Romans 8.7.
wisdom of the flesh be accounted enmity with God, no marvel if the wisdom
of God be accounted enmity of the unregenerate.

Nor will it seem dissonant from the truth, Argument 2.
or our judgment of the unregenerate judgment of the unregenerate; how that is
blinded, their understanding obfuscated, and their mind (in a word) so
universally led with the spirit of error, that they cannot rightly distinguish
Paul from Plato, Divinity from Morality; no marvel then, if they dis-esteeme
(yea even hate) both depth of learning, power of preaching, and
unblameablenesse of conversation. If a man want his eyesight, all colors are
alike unto him, because he can distinguish none; and in his feeling there is
no difference between Lead and Gold: so to the understanding of an
unregenerate man, grace seems no better then nature: he cannot discern the
things that are of Gods Spirit, because they must be spiritually discerned.
Yea, let him be (...), id est, homo non alia, quam naturali animi luce
praeditus. Alsted. System. lib. 1. page 49. Argum. 3.
never so perfectly read in the Ethickes of Aristotle, or purest moralities of
the Heathen, he knows not, he discernes not Paul's graces, without Gods Spirit:
and then we need not wonder to see some unregenerate Galatians at enmity with
Paul, not withstanding all his excellencies.

And the rather, if we consider the perverseness of man's will (by nature) unto
any thing, that is simply good. To such a one, grace is no care; and the
passion of enmity, no fear. For his will is wholly set to do evil: And we
know, that approbation and dislike do not always proceed from a judgment
rightly informed: but sometimes from the will, corrupted and misguided. Yea,
sometimes the will is lifted unto such a pitch of peremptory thwarting, that
we will gainsay what assuredly we know: (...) cruciantes.
hating the grace that is divine; and spurning at the truth because it is the
truth. So we see, that unregeneracy is no just mete-rod of the truth: it
over-weenes vice, it under-values virtue; and it is impossible that it should
give the wisdom of God its due.

Thus much for the information of our judgments; the time now calls for some
application, prepare therefore your affections.

And first of all, come hither, my brethren in the Ministry; Applicat. 1.
come, I say, and see your portion, and your share in the inheritance of Levi.
I am (I confess) the meanest and most unfit either to counsel the ancient, or
comfort the oppressed; yet the little candle may give some light among the
greater Lamps; and the treble strings (with their smallest notes) may make
some music in the ears of the hearers; I do but sing for company; if my
note be harsh, pardon it: and then consider, you who-ever (or wherever) you
are; you, I say, to whom God has committed the care of his Church: you, that
speak wisdom among those that are perfect: you, in whom that Holy Ruah
Hakkodesh. Rabbi David. Kimhi in Psalm.
Spirit of Truth shines: you, who fight with beasts in the world, (enemies to
the way of godliness:) you, that live Phil. 2.15, 16.
blameless and harmless, the sons of God, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth
the word of life: you, who neglect no time, but still are watching for the
souls of your people: you, in whom there flows a (...) Viri celeberrimi.
Sea of divine eloquence in respect of others: Consider, I say, that none of
all your privileges can secure you from enmity. Be as careful, as patient, as
diligent, as loving, as loved as ever Paul was, yet you Hac virtutis iter.
shall be accounted enemies, and that for telling the Truth.

Yet (though you have to do with men-devills, and be smitten with the blows
of hatred) stand fast, and strive ye for the faith of the Gospel; be nothing
Phil. 1.27, 28
terrified by your adversaries for all this: for to them it is an evident token
of perdition: but to you of salvation, and that of God. Nay, be not dismayed,
though to the disesteeme of your gifts, and enmity against all your graces,
were an addition of ten thousand indignities: though you should see those
Mock-stars of grace, those Ideaes of Learning, those vicious livers (who are
crept in among us, Jude 4.
ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into wantonness,) whose wisdom
stands rather in a pretense then essence of grace, whose Blacke-coates serve
only to beflout the vocation of Levi, (if not shame it quite) though you see
those, accepted in the world, and live at ease, while good Paul wants the
countenance even of his own Galatians. Alas, consider their end, and that is
destruction: consider their glory, and that is shame; because they mind earthly
things. But, brethren, let us Tim. 2.1.6. (...), to stir up fire.
stir up those gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in us, while the world
accounts us enemies for telling the truth.

Secondly, Applicat. 2.
what Paul, that great Scholar now counted an enemy! what, he that taught so
many sweet Sermons among them? that even traveled in birth of them? for whom
they would have pulled out their own eyes! is he hated? surely this tells us
that unregenerate men do thus grossly sin against their own knowledge.
Alas those Galatians could not be ignorant that Paul labored earnestly for
their good; that his calling was miraculous; his gifts excellent; yet for all
this they hate him, and count him an Enemy.

A fearful case, my brethren, when a people shall be at enmity with Gods
chosen vessels (whom happily they have seemed sometimes to affect,) and to
hate them without a cause. Look to it, thou, whoever thou art: thou have a
little Judge within thee (thine own conscience) which shall one day be
awakened; which shall make thee bite thine own lips, and cry out in the
language of Judas, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. Therefore
lift not up your horn too high, ye that have this Holy Truth in such deep
disdain, and cloth good Paul and his brethren with the robes of enemous
disgrace. For it is a very These. 1.6.
righteous thing in God to render tribulation upon those that trouble us. But
what? can hatred or enmity wrong Paul's privileges? no; in no wise. Grace is
beyond hatred. For gold may buy out hatred: but nor gold, nor hatred can buy
Grace or Learning. What need we then care? we have prevailed with God, and God
laughes them to scorn.

But yet for their sakes that of infirmity do account Paul an enemy, let us
use a word of exhortation. And here, Applic. 3.
my brethren, be warned to correct that spirit of error, of judgment
misguided. Let us no more be at enmity with Paul; nor dislike or under-value
either grace or learning, or the life that is hid with God in Christ (For it is a
detraction from the Spirit of God.) But let us highly prise what God sets at so
high a rate.

Alas, with what arguments might we persuade the affections to love Paul and
his privileges? why the very Heathen (who lived in Paganism, yet) highly
reverenced and esteemed Learning and civil demeanor. Now then, shall we hate
(in this kind) what they so loved? shall Nature teach them so much? and shall
not the sound of grace teach us as much? Shame upon us, if we suffer them to
outstrip us.

But what need we look so far as their example? Let us fasten our eyes upon
Paul, and with our ears listen unto his words; hear him speaking an heavenly
language, whose proper eloquence is sufficiently tractive, and able to allure:
it is the Truth, the Truth of righteousness, whose lovely worth may dissuade
us from Enmity.

Therefore if the truth may find any footing in our affections, Applic. 4.
let us labor for the cure of so irksome a sore. Labor we, I say, for a cure:
Nam sanabilibus aegrotamus malis. Sen. de Ira.
for we labor (as yet) of a disease that may be cured. The passions of
iniquity, (yea the habit of enmity) may be conquered and removed by Gods
assistance, and thine own diligence.

First then, pray for the Spirit of Love; Means to cure enmity.
so the power of enmity shall be dislodged. Pour out thy cries unto God for
some heavenly Spittle and Clay, that thy judgment may be cleared, and thy will
ordered, that thou may discern grace from nature, and so become a friend to
Paul. Urge the Lord; lose no opportunity: cease no time: leave him not till he
has left this Blessing behind him. Pierce the very heavens with thy
supplications; be reconciled unto God above: So thou and Paul shall be no
longer at variance.

Secondly, enmity with Paul, (his chosen vessel) or his servants? Can thou
remember the excellent dignities in Christ, as grace, wisdom, etc. and yet
contemn them in his Ministers? Oh, me thinks, this might win thee unto
amity, Hosea 11: 4.
and love, to consider how God has drawn us with the Bechauele Adam. Heb.
cords of a man, with the (...). Septu.
death of the Son of his defires. The undaunted Diamond scorns to yield unto
the sledge and anvill; yet cast it into the blood of a Goat, and straight way
it is dissolved: so thy heart that is hardened with enmity (though it will not
yield by other persuasions, yet) will be moulten all over into love, if thou
cast it into the Omnis enim morbus hoc remedio extinguitar. Aug. 4. Hom. in Mat.
blood of Christ Jesus, that immortal Scapegoat.

Thirdly, be at enmity with thy self a little; do thy self this pleasure,
wallet that hangs on thine own back: so shall thou divert thine enmity of
others upon thy self: and this is not only warrantable, but a point of
Christianity.

It is a fit cure of Galen. lib. 5. de Meth. Med. cap. 3. Avicen. Fen. 4. lib.
1. cap. 1.
Haemorages in Physic, to turn aside the fluxes of blood by Phlebotomy in
some other vein; and in mine opinion, I hold it a good spiritual cure of
Enmity against others, to let the blood of it forth by thine own veins; for
many times Ex spuma draconum veneneta fit Bezoardicum, and sic summum
alexiterium ex summo veneno conficiunt Chymici.
wholesome Physic is made of the strongest poison; and indeed of this sharp
Vitreoll (thus diverted) may be made a medicinable Avodyne.

And this shall be so much the better performed, if thou parallel thy self to
others, and compare thine own wants (I Sic parvis componere magna solebam.
speak by experience) with others graces. Compare thine own coldness with
the zeal of others, thine own backwardness (in the faith) with others
forwardness; thine own vanity with others sanctity; thy own anger with
others patience; thine own enmity with others amity; thine own hypocrisy
with others sincerity; thine own negligence with others diligence: in a word,
thine own rebellion with the contrition of others. Thy self being thus
thoroughly sifted, thou can be no longer an enemy unto Paul, but to thy self;
no longer an enemy to the graces of Gods Spirit in others; but to the vices in
thy self.

And when thou have so done, Principiis obsta.
occasions of enmity; and be sure that thou take not occasion at the way of
godliness: if any external suggestion does arise, Suffoca matre^, and non
erit filia. Aug. de verb. Dom.
croppe it down in the infancy, for enmity is of a spreading nature, and the
longer it grows, Vires accrescit eunde.
the stronger it grows. Leave once granted unto anger, soon draws on the
habit of enmity, as the vanity of the eye (entertained) pulls on adultery.
Therefore, when thou have (by Gods grace) a little mortified this enmity
against others, take heed of a new supply of passion. Put the Et extinctum
cinerem, si sulphur tangas, vivet. Ovid.
candle (that is newly extinguished) to the match again and it is soon
lighted again: so is Enmity by the fire of anger or dislike: Watch and pray
therefore lest ye enter into this temptation.

Thus have I prepared some good means to set the Galatians and Paul at amity:
and now, whiles I begin to enter upon the next part of my Text, viz. 3 Part.
the persons that were at enmity with Paul, the Galatians, I am almost fallen
into angry (or zealous) rage against them, that they, even his own Duplicat
dolorem sustinentis, indignitas inferentis. Seneca.
hearers should give him occasion to cry out, Am I therefore become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth?

But how now Paul, what strange alteration is this? why, who would have ever
thought that these Galatians would have stenched from their first love? before,
they would have placked out their own eyes to have done thee good; now, they
count thee an Enemy. Alas, had they been Sodomites, or Gomorrhaeans, had they
been Turks or Caniballs, had they been dissolute Libertines in their
hot-spur humors; or such as had been hitherto strangers to the Commonwealth
of Israel, I would not so much marvel; but since they were the Galatians,
thine own hears, such as among whom thou had labored, such as seemed to
have yielded obedience unto thy Ministry: I know not what to do but sorrow,
and stand amazed: for alas! that same misery which falls besides the
expectation is most ponderous, and intolerable: and the enmity of a familiar,
is an Nulla pestis efficacior est ad nocendum, quam familiaris inimicus. Boet.
lib. 3. de Consol. Propos. 2.
unsufferable pestilence: little did Paul think that his next welcome should
be Enmity, or that the former love (pretended) should end in hatred: yet so it
was then, and so is now, that

Sometimes a Ministers own hearers are set in variance against him. Sometimes,
did I say? yea, at all times; for time still affords some Jnimicitiae semper
concomitantur, etc.
enemies: but now especially may Paul cry out in the language of God himself,
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have (...) transgredi. Esaias
1.2.
rebelled against me. A kind reward God knows, for all his care: and a
recompense more fit for a Tyrant then an Apostle: what! to be hated! and
accounted an enemy? and that of his own hearers!

Oh, that ever impiety should perke up the head to this height, that a Minister
should spend his time in study, night and day; break many a quiet sleep, to
break yt pure word aright unto his people; pour out many a bleeding complaint
unto his God, for their obstinacy and rebellion, labor with might and main,
tearing his sides early and late, for their conversion; and yet (for all his
pains) be counted an Enemy, and that of his own hearers. Intolerabile fit
malum, cuius autorem turpe sit confiteri. Sen. Probation.
A grief, surely, intolerable to a Preacher, since it is a shame to an
hearer. But so it fared with Christ himself, (that great Doctor of the Church)
though he spoke as never yet man spoke; yet he was hated of his own hearers,
his own countrymen, yea of Judas too, (his own Disciple:) and for a
determinate proof, see Matt. 10.36. A man's enemies shall be those of his own
house; Jobs own wife against him: Absolon seeks his own fathers overthrow:
Ismael mockes his own brother: what wonder then, if a Ministers own hearers
oppose themselves against him?

For was not God himself so used at his own childrens hands? Arg. 1.
Esaias 1.2. Did not he nourish them as his own? Hosea 11.4.
did not he draw them with the bands of love? did not his Ier. 31.20.
bowels yerne over them? were not his Hos. 11.6.
repentings kindled together for their sakes? Did he not Amos 3.2.
know them, above all the nations of the earth? Yet see, now have they rebelled
against him. What marvel then, though Paul be hated as an enemy, and Ministers
counted the (...). 1 Cor. 4.9.
dregs, and off scowring of men? what though they be made the Brothers of
Owls, and companions of Ostriches in the desert? A satin suit becomes not the
servant, when the master must go in canvas: we must not think to live (in
this life) in any other state then Christ himself, our Lord and Master.

And it is fit that good Ministers should have their patience and constancy to be
proved by such indignities. Argument 2.
Patience is best seen, when an affliction fights most closely with the
affection: David could say, if it had been an open enemy, I could have borne
it; but it was thou, my familiar friend, etc. yet God will have his patience so
tried, by setting his own friends against him.

So much the rather also, Arg. 3.
because God will not have his Children, and chiefly his Ministers, to be too
well conceited of their own gifts and graces. Vain glory and spiritual pride
creepes in with an aspiring facility, and is not easily Vana gloria est ultima
Pellis, quae exuitur. Bern.
shaken out. If we should hear our Auditors cry out of our Sermons, in the
language of Herod's Parasites, The voice of God, and not of man; we might
happily be tickled in the ears, and so fall into a spiritual whimsey;
wherefore, lest happily David should cry out in the vanity of his heart, Tush,
I shall never be moved; the Lord sets his own familiar friends against him, and
then he cried out, It is good for me that I have been afflicted: So lest Paul
(through the large knowledge of words unutterable) should have been exalted
above measure, he received a prick in the flesh; and see, now his own hearers
are set in variance against him; But he knows it to be as great a privilege
Agere and pati, fortia. Phil. 2.29. Arg. 4.
to suffer, as believe.

Lastly, a Ministers own hearers are set in variance against him, that Vt
lapsu graviore ruant. Mat. 23.32. Jngratum si dicas, omnia di^i^.
they might brand themselves out for persecutors of the Truth, and so fill up
the measure of their sins. The persecution of the Truth is the Epitome or
Abridgement of all other sins: for it is ingratitude in an high degree. Give me
a persecutor of the Truth, and give me a complete sinner. We read of but two
that ever were recovered, as far as I remember, Manasses and Paul. Therefore I
had rather see a man (I think I may speak with a safe conscience) commit any
other sin, then persecute the Truth: for this sin ever comes nearest unto
the sin against the Holy Ghost; if it be not the same: and indeed (when it is
not (always) wholly the same, yet) it is ever a Alsted, in Lexico.
branch of it: and by this do wicked men mark out themselves for rebels, yea
for the destruction to come.

So for these ends (call them arguments if you will) does God suffer his
Ministers, in the mean space, to be opposed.

But in this mean space Paul, Applicat. 1.
and many of us Pulpit-men, may take up the complaining lamentation of the
Prophet David; Psalm. 120.5, 6.
Woe is me, that I sojourne in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar: my
soul has long dwelt with those that hate peace. And we may justly take up his
Motto (too) I am for peace; yet whiles we speak they are for war: and they
(even our own hearers) account us enemies, for telling the truth. But see and
hear, O heavens; and hearken, O earth: stand amazed, O heavens; and be dumb,
O earth; yea, be abashed at this ye sons of men, that the glory of the
Almighty should be turned into obloquy; and the Israel of God should lay an
aspersion of enmity upon her own Apostles. But what? does the enmity of
familiars suggest such a wonder, or exasperate the grief? why then, why wander
I in so general or circular an application, as to go to Israel, or Galatia
for an instance? Come, my brethren, from your Nocturnus iuvat impallescere
chartis.
nightly studies, and see our Land divided against it self: see it hating and
despising government: see it spurning against her own Per iram concordia
rumpitur; per iram lux veritatis amittitur. Greg. lib. 3. moral.
light; (what if I say against our own eyes?) The Heb. 2.3.
great salvation is now proclaimed, but we love the works of death. The Sun
of the Gospel, the word of truth, is now risen (...). Clem. Alex.
upon us all, but we love darkness more then light.

Some Travelers have laid this imputation of obscurity upon our Land, our
England, that the heaven above us is ever (...).
lowering; and the Sun a stranger to our eyes, and the reason thereof, Because
we are encompassed with the Sea, from whence, there is a daily Exhalation of
clouds, interposing themselves (in our Horizon) between the light of the Sun
and our sight. Now God grant that their Geography be without a mystery. I
sear lest our light of the Gospel be obfuscated with the assiduous clouds of
enmity, arising from the sea of anger. We must needs confess, that (as the
Sun, so) the Gospel is (...).
pure and clear, and devoid of all cloudy matter; yet, because our affections
answer not its purity, and our own profession; it seems obscure unto us, and
we account them enemies that bring it unto us.

But why do I combat in the spacious field? and tell you a general story of
the Homebred dissentions of our State and kingdom, between our own light and
our own sight? why do I not rather speak the phrase of inine Apostle, Am I
therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? No, in no wise; yet
I am become an enemy (in your acceptations) unto you, and that because I tell
you the truth. Thus, is not the case belonging to you, and me, and all Gods
faithful Ministers? Are we not hated of you, as though we were your enemies?
and nicked of you with the twits of enmity? is not our zeal accounted
frenzy, and the sincerity of preaching rather an austerity of passion, then
the purity of the Truth? Say, O ye people, is it not even thus? Can you deny it
for very shame?

Blush then, and be ashamed at this, Applicat. 2.
all ye that live under a painful Ministry, yet account it a matter of enmity
unto you: yea, quake and tremble, ye that malipertly oppose your selves against
those that watch for your souls: for surely this is next the sin that is
unpardonable.

I am afraid, lest many in our Nation bear a share in the danger of this
doom; as we bear a part in the in jury of their enmity. We may indeed justly
complain of the thwarting opposition of many, as well as boast of the
teachable forwardness, the zealous and loving affections of others to
us-wards. But all indignities whatsoever let us freely pass over and forgive;
as we trust all our own imperfections are really pardoned of the Almighty. Let
our prayer for them be Father, forgive them; and I would to God we could
conclude with the voice of Christ, They know not what they do. But, alas, our
Nation knows the Truth; (I know no Haec conscia numinis aetas.
plea for ignorance in these days) they have both seen and heard; and yet
have impudently and malipertly spurned against their own Lights, and that in
the face of the Law, and Gospel. Therefore it is to be feared, that their
sin remains. But what? shall they so pass? with so slender a rebuke? What
if we bid? Twist up a comtemptuous Absalom: Cry? Out with the scoffing Ismael:
Hang the rebellious traitor: scourge those Iannes and Iambres: out with the
aking-teeth of the Galatians: spare not Paul's enemies: but yet, I hope, we
shall not err with too much gentleness, if we give way to affection, and as
patiently put off the injury of enmity, as Eli did the offense of his sons,
in this sparing correction; do so no more, my sons. And let us take heed we
do so no more, we hearers: for it is as great a matter, as the hating of a man's
father or mother. (Our Ministers are fathers to beget us, and mothers to bear
us.) Now the eye that Prove. 30.17. -- Scelus est adisse parentem; hic amor est
odio maius scelus. Ovid. Met. Applic. 3.
mocketh his father, or despises his mother, the Ravens of the valley shall
pick it out; and the young Eagles shall eat it. Therefore, receive ye a word
of exhortation and warning.

Let there be no more variance between Paul and his Galatians; between us and
Gods Ambassadors: but have them in singular honor (not so much for any worth
that is in them, but) for their works sake; as those that must give account
for your souls, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief. Oh, let
not their care be requited with enmity, nor their love with hatred: regulate
your affections either to their office or diligence, and you shall find that
such discourtesie is neither the equal desert of the one, nor a fit recompense
of the other. If we enquire after their diligence, we may cast back our eyes
no further then Paul; if after the dignity of their office, we may look through
the volume of the whole Book of God, and we shall find their office no place
of underlings, but the 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors of the great God, yea (...), 1 Cor. 3.9.
fellow-workers with him. Such, and such glorious titles has he vouchsafed to
grace them withal: all which excellencies carry in them a command of
acceptance, and not an occasion of variance. Yet many times it so falls out,
that their best welcome is but a check of enmity.

But be not dismayed, nor quite cast down, Applic. 4.
O ye sweetsingers of Sion; though happily your own hearers oppose themselves
against you; though they become your enemies, among whom ye have broken the
bread of life; and distilled the sweet influences of the water of life: though
they fill you with (...) amaritudinibus. Lament. 3.15.
bitterness, among whom you have wasted your spirits (like the candle) to give
them light. Yea, though the goodly shows of some have promised a birth of love
and growth of faith, yet by and by have Exitus auspicio gravior. Ovid.
turned into Apostasy: nay further, they themselves become your enemies too:
yet sing no Paelinede of discontent; murmr not at your portion; but consider,

That (as in the days of John, generation of Vipers. The Et sic, a suo, quem
ventre concipit, faetu necatur. Parad. Symb.
Viper (we read) cates her way forth by the belly of the damme: no marvel
then, if the Prophet of God (through the malice and enmity of his hearers) cry
out, O my belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart: and no marvel, if we
suffer the like ingratitude of our hearers.

Especially, Jesus Christ the righteous has traced out this path before us;
hated even of his own disciple. Oh then let us (...). Basil. page 139.
walk this Kings highway with patience: for we have not only the comfort of
his company, (yet that may assuage the misery) but his assistance also. Nay
further, he not only (...).
suffers the like with us, but also measures our suffering, and (in a measure)
suffers it too. Exceeding full of comfort are the words of our Savior Christ:
he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me.

Nor is the worthiness of the cause, Solatur conscientia and finis. Melph.
conscience know, that the love of the truth constrains us? and that this
dignity excels all dignities, to suffer for the Truth, for telling the
Truth? 4 Part.
which is the next and last part of the Text, viz. The Cause of the Enmity, for
Telling the Truth; which likewise craves my pains, and your patience.

Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? or because I
play the Tell-troth with you? (...).
yea; this is the cause of your enmity, or else you have no cause at all. Alas,
is this the cause? why, this, of all others, seems to be a cause without a
cause. What, to hate a man for telling the Truth! Could they have upbraided him
of some capital crime, either of whoredom, or drunkenness, or oppression, or
covetousness, or the like, the matter had been colorable: Or, had any part
about him received any (...).
apparent stain or blemish; had his tongue been cursing and swearing; his
lips, lying and profane; his hands, thievish; his heart, malicious; or his
eyes lascivious; it had been something to the purpose: but, to hate him for
telling the Truth, argues no simple ignorance in them, but a sinfull-rebellious
impudence. And this is but one of 2 Chronicles. 135, etc.
Ieroboams tricks: he hated Abijah for his good counsel; and these Galatians
count Paul an enemy unto them, for telling the Truth. So, we see here the
Proverb verified, the lovely Veritas odium parit, sed tamen non est odiosa.
Calvip. in Galat. Propos. 3.
Truth brings forth hatred; and (...). Philo. de vita Mos. lib. 3.
The publication of the pure word of truth sets faithful Ministers and corrupt
hearers at variance. Hence proceed those broiles: hence, this enmity: hence,
this dissension. But blush, and be ashamed at this, ye Galatians, that the
revelation of Truth should breed such deep dislike in you. Alas, with what
strain of words or matter might Paul study to please you? If you look for
plainness of speech; why, see him stooping to the capacity of the meanest,
becoming all things to all men. If you look for eloquence from him; why, see
it so mixed with his Divinity, that it is hard to judge wherein he most excells.
But none of these disturbes you: it is the matter that occasions your hatred; the
telling of the Truth.

Many in our days, though they love the truth after a sort, yet (through (...)
Talm. in Masor.
opinions) do dislike it, if it appear plain or eloquent: but these foolish
Galatians (and they were Bonos, quis, nisi stultissimus oderit. Boet. lib. 1.
de Cons.
fools indeed) hate Paul for (very) telling the Truth. But what, if Paul had
come among them, with his mouth full of lies, and told them a smooth tale of
their secure estate, though they did live after the flesh? yet surely, they
would scarce have believed him: and will they hate him for telling the Truth? O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth?
Can neither Lies nor Truths please you? Surely those (though pleasant, yet)
seem doubtful, if not miserable; and these (though certain, yet) seem
irksome, if not damnable. Those tickle the ear, but suspend the conscience;
these suspend the understanding, but wound the conscience: therefore neither
these, nor those can gain their acceptance. Yet if Paul would have run to
the same excess ofriot with them, and have prophesied of strong drink, he
might happily have been a Prophet Micah 2.11.
for their turn; and have gotten a spirt of love from some of them: but let
him tell the Truth, and he is accounted an enemy for it. Which truth,
Probation.
our Saviors words put out of all question or doubt; Mat. 10.34.
Think ye that I am come to send peace on earth? I come not to bring peace,
but a sword; to set a man at variance against his father; the daughter against
her mother, and the daughter-in law against her mother in law. And this was
verified in Christ himself, Ioh. 8.40. Ye seek to kill a man that has told
you the truth. And, verse 45.
because I tell you the truth ye believe me not; but rather hate me. But it is no
more wonder to see the Dogs bark at the Moon, then to see a good Minister
hated for telling the Truth: and the truth of this truth shall seem the rather
to be a truth, if we regard these demonstrations.

First, Arg. 1.
there is a palpable disagreement between truth and falsehood; grace and
corruption: the one is light, the other darkness: the publication then of the
one must needs make the Antithesis of the other. God and Belial cannot stand
together: and is it any news to see the disagreeing qualities of fire and
water, each hissing at other? nor, for mine own part do I ever marvel to see
good men, and bad; wise men, and fools; knaves, and honest men, to fall at
odds, when I respect the contrariety of their natures.

Especially, Argum. 2.
if I consider the nature of the Truth: how searching and working it is: what a
powerful operation it has, to divide (like a Heb. 4.12.
two-edged sword) between the bone and the marrow. The letter Judge 12.6.
Shibboleth. Sibboleth.
(...) (Schin) could never make a more perspicuous difference between the
Gileadite and the Ephraimite, then the Truth does between good Ministers and
corrupt hearers. Truth is both an eye to see; and a glass to convay the object
unto the sight. But as the Optickes have many crotchets and deceiving fractions
to beguile the corporal eye: so has Hypocrisy many forms of godliness to
deceive and bleare the mental: yet Truth does execute its office so squarely,
that it will not suffer us to make Anaxagoras dreamed that there was (...), to
make quidlibet ex qualibet.
Any thing of any thing: but it soon distinguishes the good from the bad; the
right from the wrong. Our colorable sins can now find no burrow of shelter,
or evasion: but Truth does anatomize all the (...), Spinam dorsi scindere, ita
ut intima pateant. Argum. 3.
secrets of the heart, and make them naked and barefaced: no marvel then, if
it breed dissension, enmity, and variance.

Thirdly, Truth takes away freedom, and custom in sin: August. Greg.
it proves the one, to be slavery; the other, an old error: it disturbs a man
of his sweet naps in iniquity: it removes him from the bed of vanity: it
suffers him not to sin so quietly as otherwise he would: it stings him by the
conscience, amidst his pleasures, that he cannot walk on his journey to
Hell-wards contentedly enough; no marvel them, if it be the occasion of
strife and enmity. Wake a man out of a sound sleep, and straight way he fumes:
spur a gaul'd-backe Jade, and presently she winces: so let the Truth speak the
Idiome of her own Dialect, unto the conscience of a corrupt hearer, that is
fast asleep in his sin; and be sure, her language shall be counted
opprobrious, and her requital shall be enmity.

The truth whereof, bids us not wonder to see the Truth opposed by corruption:
Applicat. 1.
look not that the publication of it should bring peace, or rock us asleep
(with a Lullaby) in the Cradle of security: for the Sermo non est sapiens, qui
non pungit. Hier. in Ecclesiast.
Truth is of a pricking nature: it ever carries a sword in its hand; and makes
a division between light and darkness, grace and corruption. Its own nature
(by the strength of its own activity) strikes home unto the conscience;
unbowells the ward-rope of transgression; like a Praedicantium verba scintillae
recte appellatae sunt; quia eos, quos in cord tetigerint, incendunt. Greg. in
Ezech. Hom. 3.
flame, makes the spirit to burn within a man; shows him the right way;
informs him of the wrong; curbs him of his sweet sin; opens an Handwriting
against him, whose character are steeped in blood and heaviness; neither does
it read the sinner a lecture in a private Kennell, as if it durst not show its
face, save only in a Veritas non quaerit angulos.
corner, but speaks to the nose of the proudest Vassaile, that carries about
him a body of sin. This will make the Drunkard quake in his seat; the
Whoremonger tremble on the bed of vanity; the swearer, the liar, the Sabbath
breaker, to mourn for their profaneness. No sin is exempt from the reach of
Truth. This controules the brazen-faced sins of the land: this rips up the
sin that is unseene: private omissions, sleighty perfomances of holy duties,
outward conformities, lip-services, neutralities, worldly correspondencies. It Is
like unto the lightning, nimble and active; runs through all created bodies:
examines the weakest; Infringit solido.
pierces the strongest; pursues all to their very lurking places: Consequitur,
quodcunque petit.
finds whatsoever and whomsoever it seeks for: as the Hypocrite, the
Apostate, and the covetous worldling.

This (like the lightning) wounds, and never touches; breaks a man's bones,
(yea his conscience) and never scareth his skin: like a noisome smell, only
with the sent, soon casts down a queasie stomach. This is that our fine
mouths cannot Offendit omne, quod nolumus. Hier. super bunc versum.
endure to taste: this it is, that our sore gummes cannot endure to be rubbed
withal: and because wicked men (out of an overreaching apprehensivenesse) do
conceive this to be an enemy unto them; they would feign have the mouth of it
stopped, and the preachers of it to be doomed unto a perpetual silence. So the
Truth is now become like an hurtful Serpent, generally invading a whole
country, every wicked man's club of malice is out against it, as against an
enemy.

But oh that ever the Truth, which is the only means of love, should be now
the cause of such enmity! that ever this should set good Paul and his Galatians
at variance! oh, but the Truth is Veritas dulcis est, and amara: quando dulcis
est, parcit; quando amara, curat. Aug. ad Christian. Applic. 2.
sweet and sour; as various in operation as the Sun, which dissolves some
things, as Wax: but exsiccates or dryes up others, as Clay: So the Truth dryes
up the humor of enmity in some: in others, it dilates and spreades it abroad.
Such is the quality of the Truth; such the portion.

And why should we be dismayed; we, who in the Ministry suffer for the Truth?
O let the dignity of the cause make us put up the indignity of the cross with
an honorable scorn: so shall the Truth grow strong with a Vireseit vulnere
virtus.
wound. Consider we, that it is the cause, and not the quarrel, that makes a
Martyr: it is not suffering, but so suffering, or suffering for the Truth, that
helps us to heaven. Simul ista mundi rector Deus posuit, odium atque regnum.
Odia, qui nimium timet, regnare nescit. Seneca.
Our kingdom must be gotten with such violence as this. Let this then comfort
us, that we suffer in a good cause, for the truth, and the crown of our
conquest is kept with God.

Therefore for this holy truth let me resolve to dye, to lose my life, my
liberty, (were I worth thousands) lands, and livings, all. Oh, this holy truth,
let me embrace it ever; and let the world count me an enemy unto them, and be
at variance with me, whiles he that Sedens in coelis ridet.
sits in the heavens laughes them to scorn, and bids (...) Talmud.
a sorrow to them, as many as (maliciously) have evil will at Sion.

Thirdly, let us entreat wicked men to receive a friendly admonition, that they
be better advised hereafter, then to make the publication of the pure word of
truth the occasion of contention; to be a stumbling block and a rock of
offense and variance, to count Preachers enemies for telling the truth. But
alas! our times and people are grown emulous to be superlative in this enmity;
for we exceed the Papists a degree: they counted this truth to be a matter of
Eckius. Pighius. Hosier. Gretser.
debate; so do we: they accounted it to be but Inken Divinity: but we repute
it Inken enmity; and so beflout the sincerity of it with the scumme of
Puritanisme in the lowest degree of our disdainful teene. This is grown now
the usual Doctor Airy on 3 of Phil. verse 9.
companion of a Christian Profession, yet hypocrisy has learned to spin a
finer thread of Enmity against the truth, then a gross hatred, and this is a
secret dislike of the way of truth, (yet an outward comparting with it) and
this is a damnable Gravissimum inimicitiae genus, esse cord adversarios, and
linguae simulare devotos. Cass. sup. Psalm 54.
neutralitie (as it were) between enmity and amity. Such Ambo dexters have we
in the Church; such Antickes in the way of truth, that are not wholly for God,
nor wholly for the devil. Some affinity they have with the truth, in the name
of Christianity, like the (...) Jdol^. (...) Deus.
Hebrew words for God, and Idols, yet they are but (like Ephraim) as cakes on
the hearth not turned, shuffling and cutting with the truth, (as the Sun in
Hezechiahs time,) yet never more certain, then in their enmity of the truth.

But draw hither, Isay 57.4.
all ye enemies of the truth, ye sons of the sorceresse, the seed of the
adulterer and whore: against whom do ye sport your selves? against whom do
ye make a wide mouth? and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of
transgression, and a seed of falsehood? do ye not spurn at the Lord, and
deride his truth?

But now for a good in the side, and a motive in the heart, that might stir
up the affection to the love of the truth. But what? must we beg favorites for
the truth? Cannot its own worth speak for it? Oh that its excellency could be
seen with our corporal eyes, then (with a silent oratorie Mirabilem amorem
excitaeret sui.
would it persuade our affections to embrace it. Alas, the known ale needs no
signe-post, and the Vendibile vinum non eget bedera.
vendible wine no Ivy bush; and shall the truth need more enticing arguments,
then its own worth?

First then consider its dignity; it is borne of God, (...)
doctrine, our (...)
law.

Secondly the majesty of it; Deus est veritas sine fallaecia. Hugo de anima.
God is truth: if then we be at enmity with the truth, we are at enmity with
God: love the truth, and love God; hate the truth, and hate God himself. And
now I pray you, does it boot a Child to fight with a Giant? or an earth-worme
to contend with the Almighty? Me thinks when I see a man at enmity with the
truth, I see the Olaus Magnus, Episc. Vps. l. de ritibus Gent. lib. 3.
Gothi (with their Ioviall mallets) thumping their brazen fabric, to fright
away the thunder, for when it thunders, they imagine some strange god is
coming in battellagainst them: So wicked men, when they hear the truth once,
they begin to muster their forces (as against an enemy) to outface it, if
they may. But alas! it is the God of Tantam potentiam veritas semper habuit, ut
nullis machinis, aut cuiusquam hominis ingenio, aut art subverti potuerit: and
licet in causa, nullum patronum, etc. Cicero.
truth who speaks from heaven, whose power is uncontrollable.

Thirdly, survey thy own weakness, and truths strength; for thy own state,
consider that in the midst of thy fury thou have but a curtaild horn, like a
cursed Cow; thy heart happily may be full of hatred, but thy hatred not full of
power, so thou art less noisome to the truth, but no less hurtful to thy
self.

And as for the power of truth, it was once determined in the Esdr. 3.
trial of wir, what was the strongest: one answered A King; Wine; for it
overcomes the strongest brain: A third said, Women; for they bewitch the
deepest wit: but in short it was concluded, that Truth was stronger then all:
all the rest decay, but this continues: it is still durable, it is permanent:
though it be Talis est veritatis status, ut etiam multis impugnantibus
suscitetur, and crescat. Chrysostom.
trodden down, yet it still increases. Why then will thou be an enemy to the
truth? why will thou hate it? nay, why will thou not love it?

Fourthly, truth, let the blessings with it, and the curses without it; command
thy affections to embrace it: with it there is life, without it death: with it
there is certain peace, without it assured discord: with it there are outward
blessings and inward, without it there are temporal plagues and eternal. But
why stand I here to trifle with Pauperis est numerare pecus.
Arithmetique? either these with it, or those without it scorn to be bounded
with a stinted calculation. In a word then, have the truth and have God, and
heaven, and all Veritas sola liberat, sola salvat, sola lavat. Bern.
blessings; but be without the truth, without the love of the truth, and have
the devil, and hell, and all curses,

Now therefore, let Solomon's exhortation take footing in thy affection, Prove.
23.23.
Buy the truth, and sell it not: buy it with thy love; sell it not with thy
hatred: buy it at any rate; thou can not give the worth of it: sell it for no
price; thou can never again match so precious a Pearl.

And if by this time the love of the truth be wrought and habituated in thee,
thou shall know it by these signs and symptoms:

First, if thou love the truth indeed, truth: the love of the truth must be
an universal love of the whole, and of the parts: it is not a branch of truth
that must only be in thy acceptance: but even a reproof (in season) must be
as welcome as a promise is (at all times) grateful.

Secondly, if thou love the truth, identity of the truth, but do highly
prize it in robes, or in rags; in rich, or in poor; neither rejecting it in
the one for poverty, nor overweening the measure of it in the other for plenty.

Lastly, if the love of the truth be in thee, blood that runs through every
vein, or like the Soul which is in every part. Thou must go up in this love
of Truth, from strength to strength, as it were from Mibbeth midrasha lebeth
midrasha. Targ.
School to School, (...). Phil. 3.13.
stretching forth all thy powers toward perfection; forgetting all that is
behind, receiving Paul, (now again) as an Angel of God, and no more hating
him for telling the truth.

Oh happy State thus to be made happy with the love of the truth: Blessed
Symptoms, on whose brows soever they do light: if we can spy them out on
our own faces, they will testify unto our consciences, that we are Gods, and
God is ours. If we have them, let us Conjunge funem suni, and lineam lineae.
Rch. Mos.
increase them: if we have them not, let us labor for them; and neither hardly
think, or (...). Nazian.
lightly esteem of good Paul, (or Gods Ministers) for telling the truth. So
shall we live in the unity of the Spirit; and dye environed with the bonds of
peace. Which God grant of his tender mercy, through Jesus Christ.

(...)


