A funeral sermon that was prepared to have b^ne preached, by Robert king
doctor in diuinit^ for a cert^in honorable Lady then almost^ dead^, but
afterward recovered, to who^ in writing this Sermon was g^uen, that she be^ng^
al^ue, might^ read^ what should have b^n^ preached at her death: howbeit now^
God has done his will upon her and has called her (I doubt not) to himself.
But now it is here set f^rth^ as it was delivered to her then be^nge al^ue.
1552.

The preface or Epistle to this Sermon.
AS I looked among papers of mine old studied notes and sermones (most gentle
Lady) by chance I found a draught of a sermon that was prepared, to have been
preched at your buryall. This was when your Ladishippe was so deadly sick at
Chelsie. Then was I warned of one of your chief officers to prepare a sermon
for your burial, which was thought to come shortly, which thing made a
great many of us your servants full heavy. But in such a case no thought will
help. And I knowing that such a thing would be looked for at my hand, with an
heuie heart I prepared this present sermon (although it be now a little more
dilated) to be in a redines, for ye instruccion of all them, that should have
been present at your buriyng, to learn them how they should preare themselves
to die. And now (thanks be unto god,) which does order all things to the
best, so that, that sermon which was prepared for to have edified and ben
profitable to other then, may be profitable to teach your good Ladishippe now,
in readyng of the same, both to live and to die. It shall not be only
profitable to you, but also to as many as shall either read it or hear it. I
pray you good madame remember this one thing well, although death did but
dalye with you then, to put you in remembrance that ye be mortal, suerly he
will come again a another time, and execute his office upon you even in earnest.
And when this shall be, ye cannot tell, therefore be always in a redynes, for as
our Savior Christ says: Ye know neither the day nor yet the hour. etc.
watch therefore and be all times in a redines. Hear I must desire you to note
and bear in mind, that the exhortacio^ that I purposed to have spoken to them
that should have been hearers alive at your buryng: Now hear I speak the same
(by my pen) to you, ye thanks be unto god being alive, and may by readyng of
the same know what should have been spoken unto other. And though it may be
sumwhat merueiled at, why that I name you so often in this my preface, as
though al ye whole exhortacion were made only unto you. The cause why I name
you so often is ths. In your name or your person, I admony she as mani as shall
either hear or read this poor exhortacion. Remember good Lady, remember, yea
even in your most prosperity, what ye shall be in aduersite Remember in your
pleasant life, what ye shall be after your dolorous death. It is not for
naught, that the wise man says, Memorare nouissima tua, and in eternum non
peccabis, Remember (says he) thy last end, (ernestly and often, and I warraunt
the) thou shall never sin, wyllyngly. And so consequently, thou shall never be
damned. A worthy bill of remembrance, often to be looked upon: Yet moreover I
trust (good Lady) that these doctrines, which are necessary for all manner of
persons, shall be also your instruction, for there is no person so perfect, no
nor yet so well learned, but he or she, may be better, both in learning and
living. There is no person so witty or wise, but by hearing of godly
doctrine, he or she may be made wiser: according to the saying of Solomon in
the first chapter of his proverbs. Audiens sapiens, sapientior eris: The
wise hearing, shall be wiser. Moreover, that that I write to your good Ladishippe
now, for your good instruction, both to live and to die by, I doubt not but
that ye will imparte and communicate the same, with your most dearly beloved
husband, my esspecyall good Lord and master* which I am sure will be as glad
to hear it, as your Ladishippe will be to read it, for he that so often
vouchedsaulf to hear me preche, will now I doubt not hear that that I have
written* for I have even now with as good an heart written unto you, as I was
wont to preach before you. And am now as ready as ever I was to do you
service if time and place would suffer. But by ye grace of god, yt which wilnot
be now brought to pass, a another time God wylling shall well come to pass.

I would wyshe now that this poor exhortacion ware even as a glass before
your eyes, and as a bill of remembrance before your minds, both to think how
that ye do live, and also how that ye should live, and consider ernestly, what
ye do, and what ye be commanded of God to do, Let the holy scripture in all
these things, be your rule. Also consider, what ye be now by the goodness of
god, and what ye shall be hereafter by the course of nature. What ye have
received at gods hands, and how that ye use such things so received, ye
must remember also, that he that does receive much at his lords hands,
must give a compte of much. And he that makes a good account of many
things well bestowed according to his masters mind, shall have great
thanks, and be set over much more after then he was before Matthew.xxv. I
trust that both my good lord and you also, willbe content with my writing now
unto you, both boldly, plainly and truly, as well as ye have been content in
times past to hear me preche before you both boldly, truly and plainly. And
not only contented to hear me so preach, but also, to defend me so
prechyng. Yet moreover I trust, that your wisdom, knowing my rudeness,
rusticalnes and plains, will rather consider the things that be here written,
with the meaning of the writer, then to look for such things as ye know, by
your old experience not to be in him* that is* Colors of rethoricke, Eloquence
of speech, Crafty conueiaunce of matter, Fine terms, pure English, and
ortographically written, and such like, where as the proverb says, where
nothing is, the king loses his right. So your good Ladyshippe must be feign
to be contented with such as hear is, seeing yt he that sent your Ladyship
this, would with all his heart, have sent you a better made thing, if there had
been any better in his store house, Therefore I beseech you my good Lady, take it
in good worth now, and when god gives better, ye shall have better, Last of al
I would be glad, that you of your accustomed goodness, would vouchesaulfe to
take the pain to look over this poor sermon, ernestly and often. Yet because
it is sumwhat long: I have divided it in to v. parts, that ye may read over
one part at once, and so at length all. I would desire you at the least wise
to look over, the first and the sconde parts, and that as I have said, both
ernestly and often. For although it be, very good and expedient to know diverse
playsters and medicynes for diverse sores and sickenesses, yet we must use
those most, that we know will help over sores and diseases best.

Now when I had made an end of this poor exhortacion, it came into my mind,
that a new year was at hand, a time wherein, both men and women, be wont to
gratify there fryndes with such gifts, as are both pleasant and
profitable in this life. But I intend to gratify you my especial good Lady,
and maistres, with such a Iuwel or gift, out of the treasure house of god,
that if ye keep it well and use it well, it shall be unto you, both pleasant,
profitable and permanent, not only for this present life, but also for the
life that is to come, and shall dure for ever. Other imagyne in this merry time
of Christmas, to make there frindes merry and glad in body. But I go about to
make my fryndes (among whom my Lord and you be the chief and all) merry and
glad in couscience, that is, when ye so live as though ye ware ever ready to
die, and glad to be in heaven, with your Lord Christ, who ever preserve my
good Lord and master, your good Ladyshippe and al yours both in honor hear,
and in glory there. Amen.

By your servant Roberte king after h^s vncha^ngeable pla^ facion.

A preface into the Sermon.
I Am comen hither this day (Christen audyence) to preche at the burial of
this honoralbe Lady, my good Lady and Maistres. That that shall be preached hear
at this time, shall be to her nothing profitable: for learning time, with her is
past, but this sermon may be unto you al, that shall be the hearers of the same,
if ye imprinte it well in your mind, and bear it well away profitable. It may be
(I sai) profitable to you al, of whatsoever state, condition or degree, ye be
of.

I have chosen he parable, that our Savior Christ speaks of in the xvj.
chapter of saint Luke, to treat of this day: out of the which parable, every
man may learn, that marketh it well, both how he does and also how he should
live. And how that if he live hear well, he shall ever after live well in
joy and pleasure. The contrary, if that he live not hear well, he shall no
live hereafter, that is, he shall be damned and suffer perpetual pain in
hell. That we all may hear the doctrine of this parable preched so, that it
may be to the advancement of gods glory and to the profit and utility of
his people, I shall desire you for to pray. etc.

A Sermon.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine white,
and fared delyciously every day etc. Our Lord Jesus Christ (honorable
audyence) in the beginning of this.xvj. chapter of the holy Euangeliste saint
Luke, propouned and setfurthe a parable of a certain wicked and crafty
Steward, whom he lawded, because he ordered the matter so with his masters
fermers and tenauntes, that he should never want whiles they had. This man's
wisdom, was lauded of our savior Christ, not because it was wicked, but
because he made prouisyon, that is to say fryndes, here in this present world,
for the time that was to come. And so in this parable of this wicked Stuard he
techeth us all to make us friends whiles that we be here in this present
world, that we lack not in the world that is to come. These be our saluiour
Christ's words, and the hole pitthe openyng of this before named parable. And
I say (says he) make you friends of the unrighteous and wicked Mammon, that
when ye shall have need, they may receive you into everlasting habitacions.
There shall a great change come at that day, where the pacient and the
thankful poor beggars, shall be very rich. And the unmerciful and
unthankful rich shall be very beggars and poor. This is the riches that the
pacient and thankful poor beggars shall receive: everlasting, (that is to
say) felicytie and glory with god in heaven. And this is the poverty and
beggary that the unmerciful and unthankful rich men shall receive with the
deuell in hell, that is to say everlasting pain and misery. This doctrine is
both lively and truly setfurth in this parable of Dives and Lazarus, that is
to say in the parable of ye richeman and of ye poor beggar Lazarus. Althing
hear in this parable, is setfurth so lively and plainly, that a man marking it
thoroughly and depely, with all the circumstaunces of the same, shall rather
think, that he sees althynges done before his eyes, as it ware played in a
play, and every person seen, then to have read it or to have hard it
preached. Now whether this parable of this richeman and of this beggar, ware a
thing that was done in deed, or rather a thing invented by our savior Christ
to teache with all such things as be hear taught: it makes no matter for us
to know. Let us consider, us (I say) which either be, or ought to be very
Christians, let us mark well, and depely consider, what things be taught
in this parable for our instructions and lerninges, and let us believe the
doctrines of the same to be most true. And that the selfsame things here
taught in the parable, shall chance unto us, if we do as they did. Let us
therefore have contynually before our eyes, ye eyes I say of our consciences:
these.ij. persons in this parable or example: setfurth (and by our savior
Christ to learn us by. This parable is very necessary and also profitable and
worthy to be had in memory of all men, whether they be rich or poor, for
there is no person of what soever degree or state, he or she be, but may
learn by this parable. The rich may learn and beware by it. The poor man
may learn and take great comfort of it. I would wyshe this story or parable
to be painted or graue^ in every man's house; but rather imprinted in every
man's conscience and memory.

Now let us come unto the parable, and therein mark, both notable words and
sentences. There was a certain Rich man, which was clothed in purple and
fine white, and fared deliciously every day. The holy scripture teaches.ij.
manner or sorts of rich men. The one sort are such as are rich in God. The
other sort that are rich to themselves. They are rich in God, that know
that all riches are given and come of god, and must be spent according to the
will and pleasure of God. They know what David in his xxiij. Psalm does
confess and say, not only with mouth but also with heart: in these words.
Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius: The earth is the Lords and all the
plentuousnes that is in it Ergo such goods as we have and possess, be not
ours, but the lords. We have but the use of them, and shall make a strait
count for them how that we use them either to our own, or to the lords use, to
our own profit and pleasure, or to the lords profit or pleasure. If that we
ernestly, would weye these words and ernestly believe the^ to be true (as they
be most ernestly to be waied, and also most ernestly to be believed,) I suppose
we should not be so unthankful in receiving, so unawares either in keeping or
spending, contrary to the will and pleasur of the owner of them as we now are.
Then should we receive of the hands of our Lord a great sum or portion of
his goods, look to make of the same Lord, a great and a perfete compte for
those goods received. I pray you, do no great rich men of the woorlde,
look for a compte of them to whom they commit there substance or goods. Is it
not right and reason that the tenauntes, know their land lords, and ones in
the year to pay their rentes, and knowleage their duties. Seeing that al me^
that have aught, do look to have their deuties paid and done unto the^
according to couenau^tes, why should not al men both high and low noble and
unnoble, look to do their duties to their lord god? Let them consider they
have received that that they have they be none owners, they be but servants
and disposers of their Lords goods. God give grace to all such servants,
to receive such things, as they receive truly, and to spend and bestow
their goods truly, that in time to come, they may make such a compte, as
shall be thankfully received, and they to be rewarded abundantly. Of such a
servant David writethe in the.Cxij. Psalm thus saying: Opes and diuitiae in
domo eius and iusticia eius manet ineternum. Abundance and great riches are in
his house, and his righteousness and vprighte dealing remains for ever. He
says not, Robberyes, evil gotten goods and usury are in his house: for then
David would have said that his unrighteous and subtle dealyng had remained
in his house for ever. Here let us weye and depely consider, the great gift
of god whereby these.ij. things may be joined together in one house, that is to
say, rghtuousnes and Riches. When the good man of the house is both Rich and
rightuous, how much is that man bound to God. For seldom be these.ij.
gistes lodged in one house. And yet it is not impossible to God although it be
impossible to man. We read in holy scripture of many (by the goodness of god)
that ware both rich and rightuous. As Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Samuel,
Job; David, etc. These men ware more then men, for they were good men, that both
feared god and loved god, and that by his grace and goodness: which was not
received of them in vain, they used al their goods to gods will and
pleasure. And so do all good men that are rich in god. Richesse and poverty
of themselves, be things indifferente neither good nor badde, but the use of
them makes all. God is not pleased by and by, because that a man is poor, for
there be many poor that be also wicked, and none more wicked then they. Nether
is god displeased, because a man is rich, for there have been, and I doubt not
but there be, many rich me^ both rich and good also, that pleasen god right
well. For riches be means and instruments, whereby God may be pleased, if
they that possess them, be both rich and rightuous. Then do they use there
richesse to gods pleasure and poor men's profettes. And they being such
rich men, there spryngethe out of them as it ware.ij. founteynes, one is: they
will do good, And another yt they are able to do that good that they will. Here
ye see, that the rich man may do one thing, that the poor cannot do, That
is, he has wherewith to do that yt he will do, and so has not the poor man,
yet for all that the poor man is never the more unrighteous because he has not
to do with all, but it is sufficyente for him to whom god gives no more, to
have a good will and a merciful heart toward all them that have need. And
let him deal his almose with his tongue, in comfortynge, counseilynge and
exhorting other to patience and to al other goodness. But although the rich man
be bound to do al these, yet he must help the neadie to, with his substance
according to his abilytie and their necessity, or else he is not that man,
that is before spoken of, that is both rich and rightuous. I pray god make all
them that have riches of god given unto them, or rather lent unto them, to be
of this sort, that is both rich and rightuous, and to consider deaply the
will of god, and to remember charitably, the need of their poor neighbors. It
follows also in the before rehearsed text and Iusticia eius manet ineternum.
His righteousness does remain for ever. Abundance and richesse remainethe
not for ever, but the right vsyng of them and the upright dealing with them
remains for ever. Some men perchance will say, sir ye say well, that I must
help and releue my neighbors needs and necessities. But I pray you tell me?
benot my gooddes mine own gooddes, and may not I bestow them according to
mine own mind? This objection is answered to partly before, but heareafter it
shall be answered fully, that neither the gooddes that thou haste in thy
possessyon, are thy gooddes, but gods gooddes, and are not given the to be
bestowed at thy pleasure, but at gods pleasure. Hear and mark it well in
this matter, what the holy man David in ye.ciiij. psalm says. Impleta est
terra facultatibus, tuis. The earth O lord (says he) is replenished with thy
goods and substance. Then if we believe the saying of this holy man David, as
we must needs and are bound to do, because it is autenticke scripture. We
shall perceive that all the goods and substance that is on the earth, is the
Lords and not ours, and that we be but balliefes and Stuardes of the same, to
bestow them after his will and not after our own will, and that on pain of
damnacion. Wylt thou know what is thine own proper good, among all the gooddes
of the earth, consider well what thou broughtest in with the in to this world,
that is to say, nothing, the^ that nothing maiste thou bestow according to
thine own will, for all other things are to be bestowed according to the
Lords will, that is the owner of them. Perchance a man will say, although I
brought nothing into this world with me, yet there be many things, that I my
self with my wit and wisdom, with my diligence and poll^cye have gotten,
may I not bestow those goods at mine own will and pleasure? I pray the tell
me, who gave the that wit and wisdom, that with thy diligence and policy,
thou haste gotten these (as thou accomptest the^) thine own goods? Did not
god give the all that thou haste, wit, reason, understanding, knowledge, and
whatsoever thou haste else, to serve him with all. Art not thou his bound
servant with all that thou haste, and art bound to serve him to ye uttermost
of thy power? May a servant that is sure bound to his master, make himself
free, and to do what him list, when he will? Stands he not bound to his
master to do him service, to the vttermoste of his power, with all his wit,
with all his reason, with all his understanding and knowledge, and with all
that is possible for him to do, and thus must he continue until the time his
covenant be out? Are not all manner of persons with all there qualities, both
inward and outward, both great and small, high and low, men and women,
from the highest sort to the lowest, bound to serve God with all there goods
and substance, and with all that they have or be beside. Who has made any man
free from this service? Not god: for he says in the.xij. chapter of Exodus
Ego sum dominus deus tuus I am (says he) the Lord thy God. This saiynge is
spoken to every man and woman of whatsoever state they be, here is none
excepted. If god be the Lord of us all: be not we then all his servants,
with all our qualities. Who has made us free? Not god, for he will never make
us free from his service, so long as we be in this body, Can we make ourselves
free? That cannot a servant do during his covenant. Our covenant is made, it
cannot be broken during this life. Therefore we with all that we have be
gods bound servants, and are bound to serve him faithfully and truly, and
that to our end even on panye of Damnacion. Now therefore, ye that wylbe
rich and rightuous, see that ye get your gooddes according to the will of God
godly, keep them godly and spend the^ godly, be merciful to the poor and
nedye, be not high minded and haultie over other that be poor, Trust not in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, be rich in good works: for all
these lessons does the holy Apostle Paul teache us, in his first Epistle to
Timothe.vj. Such a another good lesson does David teache us in the lxxxj.
Psalm saiynge: Si diuitiae affluunt, nolite cor apponere. If riches (says
he) flow or be abundante, set not your heart on them, Make not your good,
your God. Serve you your God, and let your good serve you.

Now hear ye have heard the properties of those rich men yt are both Rich
and Rightuous, and they that are such are also Rich in God. I beseech God of
his infinite goodness, to give us all grace to learn to be rich in this wise,
that is in God, and to practyse the same in our living, which shall be if that
we be rich and rightuous, but all are not rich and rightuous, it is good
inoughe if we be rightuous whether we be rich or poor. Whatsoever be away,
righteousness may not be away.

Here ends the first part of this sermon.
The second part.
FVrthermore according to my promise, I will speak of another sort of men,
that are rich in themselves and not in god. Of this sort of rich men was this
rich man of whom Christ made this parable. Of such sort of rich men the
holy scripture is plentyfull, and the whole world is not empty. Of that sort
of men Saint paul admonissheth Timotheus his dysciple.j. Timothy.vj. Charge
them (says he) which are rich in this world, that they benot high minded,
nor to trust in uncertain riches: and in the same chapter he spekethe also, of
such rich men. They (says he) that will be rich, (that is to say to
themselves and not to God) fall into temptacion and snares of the Deuell, and
to many folyshe and noisome lusts, which draw men into perdicion and
destruction etc. Here ye see partly in what case they are that are rich in
themselves and not in god. Paul calls them the rich of this world, because
they look for none other riches of the other world. They may well be called
the rich of this world, for they shall be poor beggars in the other world,
forthey make no preparacion here, that they may be rich there. A lively
example of such a rich man is setfurth by our savior Christ himself in the
xii. of Saint Luke and that by a parable. The ground (says Christ) of a
certain rich man brought forth plentiful fruits, and he thought within himself
saying, what shall I do? because I have no rome where to bestow my fruits? And
he said, thus will I do I will destroy my barnes and build greater and therein
will I gather all my gooddes that are grown unto me and I will say unto my
soul: Soul thou haste much goods laid up in store for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink, be merry. But God said unto him: Thou fool, this
night they shall fetch away thy soul again from the then whose shall those
things be, which thou haste provided?

Here is many wounderous things in this parable to be considered, if men of
this world ware so wise to consider them in time, no doubt of this matter,
they shall consider it and that depely and ernestly, but all to late, all to
late I say. It ware very expedient for all men, and namely for such as be
laden with worldly, goods, riches, Dignities and promocions, and that now in
time, while time is, for that time will away shortly ere a man be ware. It
ware good to beware in time I say, for after that time, it is to late to be
beware, It is to late to be wise, for all thy warenesse and wisdom will not
help then. Let them be ware now ere it be over late. Remember the old
proverb: happy is he that can be ware by another man's hurt, he is wise,
that can learn wisdom by another manes folishnes. He is happy that can
learn to be ware in time. All men, that have godly wit and understanding,
may be ware how they use their gooddes and their lives, by these.ij. men
setfurth in these.ij. parables, to all men to learn by, how to have hear in
this world there goods, and how to spend them. Of the one mention is made
in Luke.xij. Chapter, And of the other in the.xvj. Chapter of the same
Euangeliste. I will begin now with the first.

I have rehearsed unto you, already the text, which begins thus. The ground
of a certain Rich manne brought furthe plentiful fruits. etc. Here is to be
marked, the great and infinite goodness of god that gave such abundance of al
erthly things, to this unthankful man, that does not once consider the
abundant goodness of God toward him, nor yet is he merciful toward his
neighbors, but forgate his bound dewtie, both toward god and his
neighbors, and remembered only himself. Mark the words of ye history or
parable, mark what this man said, and mark also what he did, Mark I say,
for all men ought to beware, either of such sayings or doings, for the
proverb is true: so do: so have. Say and do as this man did, and it shall be
said and done to you, as it was said and done unto him. Mark this man well,
with his sayings and doings, for even so, it shall be said and done unto you
as was said and done unto him. First what said he? what did he? He said,
what shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits. And he
said: thus will I do: I will destroy my barnes, and buyld greater, and therein
will I gather all my goods that are grown to me. etc. Here ye hear part of
this man's sayings, and see his doings, not without his thinkinges. He
said, what shall I do? Was this evil said? It had not been evil said, if the
meaning of his saying had been good. Every man ought to examyne his own
conscience: saying to himself, what shall I do? This man's saying may be
borne with in part, but consider the whole, with the meaning, all is naught. He
says: what shall I do. His meaning was naught, his own words declare no
less. He means not, when he says, what shall I do, according to Gods
will, and to the comfort of my neighbor. His meaning was altogether to get, to
keep, and to spend, all for his own pleasure, all for his own profit. He
regarded neither his duty toward God, nor yet toward his neighbor. He
made no reconyng, whence his abundance of his goods came, who gave that
plenty, whose goods they were, and how they ought to be bestowed. His mind
was set another way, how he should keep these his goods, where he should
bestow the^, his mind was occupied in pullyng down those things, yt were to
little for his purpose, and to build greater, and to lack no rome, where to lay
al such goods, as were growe^ unto him as God had sent, given, or lent him.
Was this an evil thing, either to speak or to do? to buyld greater houses,
and to make greater romes, where god sends such great plenty? Nay truly.
Herein was his fault, that all that he either thought, said or did, was
thought, said and done, to none other end, but al for himself. He neither
regarded his duty toward God, nor yet toward his neighbor. We hear
nothing of his thoughts, sayings and doings, that his goods came-fro^ god
and ought to have been received with thankesgeuyng, and also to have been
bestowed, according to God the geuers will. We hear tell of none of all these
things, neither by his thoughts, words nor deeds, but he thought said and
did, al things, according to his own will, to his own pleasure, and for his
own profit. He compted al his goods and substance his own, grown unto
himself only, and only (as he took it) to use the^ to his own pleasure and
profit. This I will do, this I will say, says he to himself. He remembered
not, what the will of god was what he should say, and what he should do; but
he said: thus will I do, and thus will I say. Be there not many now a days,
that both do and say: even as this man did and said. If a man would
consider the doings and the sayings, of many me^ now a days, should we not
think ye, find them as mad and as marvelous, as this man's doings and
sayings were? Should we not perceive by such sayings and doings their
imaginacio^s and thoughts to be as vain, as mad and as ungodly, as this man's
were. Should not a man markyng these things, perceive that men now a days, be
as unthankful to God, as this man was? Should not a man find such now a
days, as has received such abundance of goods, of substance, of honors
and promocions at Gods hand, and regard their duties in these things,
toward God and their neighbor, as little as this manne did. But what needs
me to go forth and dilate this matter at length. Look upon men's manners, and
ye shall se, that they now a days, pass this man, both in their doings and
sayings, and also by their imaginacions, which be seen unto us by their
sayings and doings, to be nothing behynd him. Think ye not that those
men, being either equal with this man, or passing him, in their
imaginacions, sayings and doings, shall not all these hear also by the
mouth of God, said unto the^, as this man did, said unto him? Yes, truly
shall they. Now what the mouth of God spoke to this man then, and no less to
our men of like conditions now ye shall hear hereafter. Butere I pass, I
must rehearse unto you, one saying of this man's more, and then I will come to
Gods saying, for, when we have all said, we must be content to give God
license also, to say his mind, for surely so will he do, will we: nil we. And
we will not hear him here, we must and shall hear him there, with a worse will
and less profit. I will return again, to that one saying of this man that is
behind, and then will I tell you what God says. This man said thus, says
the text: And I will say unto my soul (says he) soul, thou haste much
goods laid up in store for many years. Take thine ease, eat, drink, be
merry. First and formoste ye must mark, who it is, that speaks on this
fashion, it is the rich man, that hear before is described he that had such
abundance of gooddes, that he wist not where to lay the^, he that had no Godly
regard to bestow them, but all his mind was, in gettyng, in gatheryng, in
hourdyng, and laiyng up in store, for long time to come. Such men thus full,
having all thing after their own mind, then they begin to say to the^ selfs,
in their own co^ceiptes: soul thou have much goods laid up in store for
many years. Mark here the imaginacion of such rich men, they wene, through
the multitude of their substance, to live many years and days. This man was
of that opinion, because he had such abundance of goods, he promised
himself many years, to make merry in, and to lead a ge^tlemanly life, both a
pleasant and a long. But he made his reconyng (as the Proverb is) without his
host: and so he is fain to recon again. His many years were sone run over. He
was not suffered to live, the space of an whole day. He promised himself, many
other things mo: which came to as good effect and pass, as this thing did.
He said also: take thine ease, eat drink and be merry. Where is that long
ease that was promised, with that delicacie in eating and that pleasantness
in drynkyng. Where is become, the careless life, wherein there should be
nothing, but mirthe and joy, and making merry: setting the Cock upon houpe,
and all should be well. All together is turned: arsie, versie. There came one
suddenly, unlooked for, and also unwelcome, that marred all the play. Who was
that? Truly GOD. Why, is it come to his course, to speak now? Yea surely.
When men have showed their vanity, then will God show his verity. Men do
take their pleasure, when they be here having all thing after their awn
lusts, but when the time comes, that God does appoyncte, he will take then
his lust and pleasure, and will bring them: cora^ nobis in a wild wanion,
and he will tell them a new tale then, far unlike to their tale, wherein
they promised themselfes long life and well to fare. But when God begins to
speak, then they begin to hold their peace. Why will God begin once to
speak? Yea, that he will truly. A practice of Gods speaking, we learn
here, in this present place of Scripture. When this rich manne had talked full
his belly, after his awn fancy, thinkyng al thing should come to pass, even as
he had imagined it. Even when he had went he had been most sure, he was
sonest deceived. I told you, he made his reconyng without his hooste. His
hooste (which is God, to whom all reconynges must be made truly) called him
to a new reconyng, he made him make a new count. It follows in the text.
But God said unto him: thou fool, this night they shall fetch away thy soul
again from thee, then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?
It is the fashion of GOD, to call such men to a rear count. Is God so
sharp in his words, that he will call as many as he finds in this case,
fools? Yea truly, this is his fashion, and thus will he do. I fear me then,
that a great many of our wise men, at whose wisdom the world wondereth now,
will be called fools then. I fear me, that a great number of noble men,
whose nobility the world worshippeth, will be proved fools then. I fear
me, that a great number of our Judges and Justices, whose authority is not
small in the world, will be proved fools then. I fear me, that a great
many of our learned clergy, whose learning is in no small reputacion: will be
found fools then. What shall I need to run over, all the states and sorts of
men: seeing that all men, of whatsoever state or condition they be, if they
do, as this foolish rich man did, no doubt the mouth of God, here in this
place of Scripture, calls all the many of them fools. All such men that
thus lives, and so dies, be created fools by Gods own mouth, which
calls them fools, because they use the^ selfs, here in this life, so like
fools. They live fools, they shall die fools (except they repent) and shall
arise again fools: and shall go to their judgment fools, and after that,
they shall go to the devil, like fools as they be. Men count now a days, none
fools but such as we are fools cotes, cocks co^bes, ears and belles. But I
fear me, that this manne that our savior Christ speaks of in this Parable,
with all those that are like unto him in condicio^s, be more fools then they,
for all their cocks combs, ears, bables and bel^es. What if a man should
ask but a question in a similitude: whether he were worthy to be called a
fool that had in his own possession of his own patrimony, a.M. pound land,
and if that manne having this thousand pound land, would change his thousand
pound of patrimony, for an hundred shillynges of copy hold land, only to
have it ad uoluntatem domini? Were not this man worthy to be called of all me^
a fool, and worthy to wear a Cocks comb and a bell. etc. were he never so
wise compted. Such fools almost are all the whole world. Does not all the
world (for the most part) change heavenly things for yearthly things,
perpetual things, for transitory things, the life everlasting, for this
present life. Is not this fool as wise as they? What will ye make of a fool,
or how will ye discern or know a fool, but by that he does like a fool, and
as no wise man would do, he will not give his babble for a Kings raund some,
he knows not what is good and what is evil. He will leave the best and chose
the worst. He knows not (as the Proverb says) chese from chalk, and
therefore he is judged a fool, and is a fool in deed, and if he never ware
wiser, he shall die a fool in very deed. Now I pray you, do not they, that
receive goods, richesse, honors, offices, and promocious of this world, and
either abuse them, or be unthankful to god for the^ and so for these uncertain
and unstable goods, riches, honors, offices and promocions of this false
flattryng world, do for lack of godly wisdom and taking head here in time,
lose everlasting, sure and permanent, goods, richesse, honors, offices and
promocio^s. Be not these think ye, those that the mouth of God, does openly,
plainly, and sharply here in this place call fools? yes truly, and shall be
served like fools, as the conclusion, and knittyng up of this aforesaid
parable of our savior Christ does plainly and undoubtedly pronounce and declare
to all manner of persons, none excepted: saying. So it is with him, that
gathers riches to himself, and is not rich toward god. Hear the mouth of
truth, yea, the truth it self pronounces, what shall come of all such as
abuse, and be unthankful to God for such things, and uncharitable to their
neighbors, with their goods, richesse, honors, offices, and promocions of
this world, and regard not such things, as be prepared for good and godly
men, in the world that is to come. I would fain if it were possible, set
furthe some thing, before these worldly wise men's iyes, that they might
clearly se their own state, that they be here in, in this present world. I
cannot imagine how better to show them their state, (if it be not rather
worthy to be called a fall) then to compare their whole life, to men that
dream, pleasant and profitable dremes, and do think themselfes, for the time
so well, as they can imagine them selfs, that they cannot be better, and so
long as that sweet sleep does continue, so long are they (as they imagine)
most happy. But when they awake out of that dream, and perceive all the
matter, to be turned to a dreamyng matter, all that their felicity, is turned
to misery, all their joy, is turned to sorrow, and so to conclude, al thing is
turned topsie turuie. Truly, truly, if the worldly minded manne, whose heart,
mind and al, is set upon worldly things, his state, the end considered is
even like the state of a dreamer, or a dreamyng man, that is in the mids of
his pleasant and profitable dreams. He thinks all is well, and he has al
things after his own hearts lust, and supposes all things so to continue.
But alack alack, he is far deceived, even as a dremyng man is. For when God
shall take such men, from this vain and dreamyng life, then shall they, truly
se and perceive, with their own great hurt, because they will not consider
it in time, that al was as vain, as vain dreams, that they took for both
stable and profitable, which does but make fools fain for a time. Therefore I
would advise, all such worldly men to be wise in time, and to consider what
Ecclesiastes teaches them in the.xij. Chapter of his book, saying: Vanitas
uanitatum (dixit Ecclesiastes) and oi^auanitas. Ecclesiastes says, he can see
nothing here in this world, but all was vanity, vanity, vanity, fondness,
fondness, foolishenesse, foolishenesse. Now what is all your great richesse,
high honors offices and promocions? Are not all vanities. When your dreamyng
time is out, ye shall then truly perceive the^ to be very vanities. Yea, and
worse then vanities, if either ye abuse them, or be unthankful to God for
the^, and help not your neighbors with the^, they shall be unto you dampnable
vanities. Now I beseech god for his great mercies sake, to give unto all me^
grace, to use well their riches, high honors, offices and promocions, and to be
thankful to god for them, and charitable to their neighbors with them. And so
to use these things (which of the^ selfs if they be abused) be but
vanities, to use the^ (I say) as instruments, whereby they may please god, and
profit their neighbors, and make the^ here friends by the right using of these
worldly vanities, which may receive them into everlasting habitacions. Now
here I have showed you of such rich me^, as are rich to themselfes, and not
to God, Better it were for them to be warned here in time, then to tarry to
long, until they for lack of warnyng come to hell, where warnyng will not
serve. As it chanced unto this rich man, of who^ ye now shall hear, in this
Parable following, which is now for lack of taking head in time: dampened in
hell, and fain would have remedy, but because he seeks it to late, none will be
found.

and Here ends the second part of this Sermon.
Now to the Parable. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in
Purple and fine white, and fared delicioufly every day, and there was a beggar
named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desiryng to be refreshed
with ye cro^mes which fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto
him. The Dogs came also, and licked his sores. Here, in the beginning of this
parable, Christ did set furthe to the Jews, to whom he preached then, and no
less to us, to who^ this his doctrine is preached now two me^, of the which,
one was a rich man, and the other a poor beggar, by the which two, he
sets furthe by antithesin, the felicity of this world in the one, and the
misery of this world in the other. That is, in this rich man is set furthe,
the life that is compted only happy in this world. In the poor man, is set
forth the life, that is compted most unhappy, and miserable in this world.
First, let us consider earnestly, the state of these two men, being both here
in this world: and also their states in the world to come. These things are
to be considered earnestly of us, even now while time is, lest perchance we
defer it, til it be to late, as this rich man did, as ye may well consider
in this Parable. Here we may learn also to consider not things that be only
present, but rather thendes of al things. The life of the rich manne was
compted best, and the poor man's life worste, but the end shows far
otherwise. Let us not follow the fashion and manner of men of this world,
which care little for the end, so that they now may have the pleasant life,
that this rich man had, nothing at all considering the end, what chanced unto
him after this life was past. This aforesaied man, is named here rich, and was
rich in deed, and was compted happy and fortunate, for he lacked nothing,
which belonged to lead a pleasant life withal. He was clothed in Purple,
and fine white, and fared deliciously every day. In these two things, that
is, in costly and precious raiment, and delicate fare, is comprehended al
things, that are to this present life, either pleasant or delectable. Under
these two kinds, that is, purple and white, is comprehended, all manner of
costly and sumpteous apparel, whether it be linen, or woollen. And by these
words he fared deliciously every day, is understand, that he had abundance
of al costly and delicate meats and drinks We read not here, that this rich
man was condemned in hell, for his costly raiment, and his delicate fare, but
that he having such abundance of them both, could not find in his heart,
that poor Lazarus should have any part with him. All they that are costly
arrayed, and fare delicatly, are not conde^pned, so that they keep them within
their limits and bounds, and forgette not them that lack, even their
castraime^t, and their scrappes also of their table. Here are condemned only
they, that are to theimselfes to liberal, yea, to prodigal, both in raime^t
and fare, regardyng not, what they spend upon theimselfes, painperyng up their
own bodies, and in the mean season, are altogether vnliberall, and stark
nigardes to the poor and nedy and can find in their hearts, to se the^ die at
their gates, both for hunger and also for cold. Thus did this rich manne, to
the poor beggar Lazarus: therefore he is in hell for his labor. And what learn
we by this rich man's doing, but to bewart, lest we doing like, shall have
like, even as he has. For, therefore is this rich man set here to teach us to
be ware by his example. Here I say, every manne must keep himself, within his
limits and bounds, and so there shall be no man dampened, either for raiment, or
for costly fare, so that men be beneficial to the poor. But bounds be
broken, limits be over trode^, there is almost no person that keeps himself
within his limits or bounds: there is almost no man, that can be content with
his own state, neither in raime^t, nor yet in fare. The yeoman will approach
to the ge^tlemannes state, the gentleman to the knights state, the knight to
the lords state, and so forth on: and not only in raiment, but also in fare.
And that see the servants, and they pass their degree also: and so every man
is out of order. O that men would be content, to fare and go, every man after
his degree, and beware of climyng. And also if every man would beware of
excess in all things, the pouerties needs might be releued in all things.
For there is more spent in superfluous raiment, and superfluous fare (I hold
my peace from superfluous gamyng, and superfluous gifts geuyng) in England,
then would serve to the necessities, of the very nedy of al England. Now yet
a little to the text. There is a certain rich man. etc. We read not that this
rich manne, gatte his goods evil, but he both kept the^ evil, and spent
them not well. I read not, that he was a bribe taker, nor an extorcioner, nor a
re^t raiser, nor a fine taker, nor a leasemonger, nor an usurer, nor a pillar,
or poller of the poor, nor a false purchaser. In su^ma, I read not that he
gatte his goods evil, but that he spent them all upon his own person, and
after his own pleasure, and not upon the poor, after the pleasure of God. The
text says, this man was rich, but it was to himself, and to the world, and
altogether after the worldly estimacio^, and alone before the world and worldly
men, but he was a very miser and poor beggar, before God and all godly men.
Here ye have heard of this rich man, in what felicity and pleasure, he led
his life, how that he was compted happy and fortunate, among all other here,
and as he lived honorably, so he died to the world honorably, and was buried
honorably. All his life was honorable, even unto the very grave, but to what
honor he came afterward being dedde ye shall hear hereafter. First, ye shall
hear of the poor beggar Lazarus life how miserably he lived, in a worldly
respect: as it follows in the text. And there was a certain beggar, named
Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desiryng to be refreshed with
the cromes, which fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto him,
the dogs came also and licked his sores. Now harken here of this poor
beggars life. There was a certain beggar named Lazarus, a man as far drouned
in misery, as the rich man was in felicity: this manne was not only poor
and a beggar, but also a miserable beggar, as far out of monnes reputacion, as
the rich man was in estimacio^. This man was as poor in lackyng, as the other
was rich in having. This man lacked, even very necessaries, where as the
other abunded in superfluousnes. This miser (as the world takes misers) had
neither house nor home, neither coat nor goune, he lacked neither sores nor
hunger, who would not say, that he was most unhappy of all other, that ever
lived in the world? Who would say that does consider, both these men's
life's, that is to say, this rich man's life, and the poor beggars life, but
that the rich manne was even a very pattern, full of felicity, and the
beggar a pattern of very misery. The One was rich, the other a beggar and poor,
the one had abundance of all things and the other the lack of all things.
The one had to many houses, and the other never a one. The One had to much meat
and drink, and the other never a whit. The one was sound and merry and the
other sick and sorry. The one was all to well clothed: and the other all
together naked. Here a man may se a lively example of worldly felicity and of
worldly misery. What man seeing and considering, both these me^nes life's, but
would say, the one were altogether happy, and the other altogether unhappy The
state of this rich man is highly esteemed, with all that be but men, and a
lonely worldly men, and yet it is nothing less, then so esteemed of God, and
godly men. As our savior Christ says in Luke.xvi. chap. That that is highly
esteemed emo^gmen: is abominable in the sight of god. He says not only it is
little or lightly set by, in the sight of God, but it is abominable in the
sight of god. Mark here, that all honors, all dignities, all promocions, all
offices, and al riches, which, although they be never so highly esteemed in the
world of worldly men: if they be not rightly used, unto the honor of God, and
charitably ordered, to the commodity and wealth of Gods people, the state
of them that possess them: although it be in the sight of men, highly
esteemed and honorable, in the sight of GOD and Godly men, is both horrible
and abominable. What shall we then say? Shall things of this present
world, continue still in their estimacion, in another world also, as men
esteem them here, whether they be good or bad? This matter is clearly set
furthe, to all men's iyes that will see, in this present Parable, of this
rich manne, and poor Lazarus. Consider the end of those two persons, and
then ye shall see, and that evidently, that the matter is far otherwise.
Sodeinly, death coming, turns ye matter vpside down. Death coming to the
rich man, makes an end of all his felicity and pleasure, wherein he was
thought to be so happy. Death on the other side, coming to this poor man, is
the end of all sorrows and miseries. O that the world, which is so blinded in
worldly vanities: would consider this thing both hartly and earnesty. Then men
should not be so forgetful, and so little remember the state, that is to come in
another world. It is not for naught, that that good man, Jesus the son of
Siracke in his book, which is called Ecclesiasticus, in the.vij. Chapit. does
warn every man of this thing, saying: Son, remember thy last end, and thou
shall never do amiss. The lack of this remembran^ce in time, is the cause,
that so many men go to the devil. If that we would, earnestly and often
remember, what is to come in another world, after this present life, we should
never so forget, (as we now do) neither our duty to God, nor yet to our
neighbor. We should not set so much by worldly vanities as we do: we should
not so lightly regard heavenly and eternal things, and so highly esteem
worldly things as we do. Remember therefore thy last end, and what thy state
shall be after this present life. Remember (I say, yea, both earnestly and
often, and that remembrance shall cause thee to exchue vice, and to follow and
embrace virtue. Beware by thexample of this rich man, which delighted and had
somuche pleasure, that he thought not once of death, and of his state after
death. And therefore is he now, (although to late) taught with his own
dampnacion, to teach other in time, by his example, the way to salvation. He
was so full of richesse, that he had no regard to poverty. He had so much
wealth, that he regarded nothing at all poor men's misery. Poor Lazarus
desired no deinties, but only to releue his hunger, with the cromes or
scrappes, that were left at this rich manne's table, but no man gave unto
him. By like there was an uncharitable house, that neither one nor other, could
find in his heart, to give this beggar some almose. I doubt not, but every
manne within the doors had to much, eue^ dogs and all. But there was nothing
without the doors, for the poor nedy and hungry, but hunger and small ease.
Yea, the very dogs were more merciful, then either their master, or
maistres, or household for they delte their almose upon him. The dogs (says
the text) came and licked his sores. Such master, such servants, is
commonly seen. This man was altogether liberal, yea, prodigal upon himself
and his, after his own lust and pleasure: but concerning the poor nedy, and
Gods lust and pleasure, he was eue^ a very stark nigard. Well, this man
lived here all in his felicity, and so did poor Lazarus, even in his misery.
But now comes death (as I have said) and turns all topsie turuie. It
follows in the text. And it fortuned, that the beggar died, and was carried by
the angels into Abraham's bosom. It chanced (says the text) that the beggar
died. That beggar (I say) that no man regarded whiles he lived, but god showed
how much he regarded him, in that that his angels brought him in to
Abraham's bosom. The rich man would not once vouchsafe, to take him into his
house, to releue him, but god does vouchsafe to take him, to such a place,
where is everlasting felicity and glory. Let us consider, what manner of
departing had Lazarus from this world Death to this good and godly beggar yea,
to all godly men, is a great benefit. For it delivers all such, from
innumerable evils, eue^ as it were men that had been long in a sharp prison,
from great affliccion, to great refreshyng. Therefore it is no pein nor
misery, for a good and godly man to die. For to him death is the very way and
passage, to everlasting joy and high felicity. This poor man is ded (says
the text). He is ded I grant, but not so dedde, or with such a death, as the
wicked men use to die, but after another fashion, of the which the holy man
Job, the.Lxvi Chap. speaks on saying: The death of his saints (says he) is
very precious in the lords sight This poor Lazarus soul was carried, not of
one Angel, but of many says the text. Whether did they carry it? Into
Abraham's bosom, that is, in to everlasting joy and rest in the lord. Which
place, some men call Paradise, after Christ's saying to the thief hangyng on
his right hand, which desired him, to have him in his remembrance, when he
should come into his kingdom, Luke.xxiij. where Christ says unto him: this
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Some call this place the hand of the
Lord, as it is written in the.iij. Chap. of the book of Sapie^ce. The souls
of the righteous are in the hand of the Lord. Mark here, that although
mention is made, that the souls of good, godly, and righteous persons, be
safe enough, either in Abraham's bosom, in Paradise, in the hand of the Lord,
or in heaven. And I doubt not but that they have, such glory and felicity:
as.S. Paul to the Cori. speaks of in the.i. Epistle the.ij. Chap. saying,
that man's iye has not seen, and theare has not heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him. But to tell you what glory they have what they do, and where they be: I
can no more tell, then the scripture tells. I let God alone with all such
secrets, as Christ, his Apostles, and the prophets, has not reveled and
made manifest to us in holy scripture. Now I doubt not but Abrahames bosom, is
the place wherein all the elected and chosen of God, which do truly follow
Abraham's faith, do rest in. But now where that place is, I know not, and
therefore I will not go about to determyne a thing that I know not. Let us
not be much careful, where that place is, but rather let us be careful,
how we shall come thither. There was never time, but that God had appoyncted a
place for his elected to rest in. Before Christ's coming, that place was
called, the bosom of Abraham: but now it is called heaven, the house of the
eternal father, as.S. Paul witnesses in his.ij Epistle, the.v. Chap to the
Cori. For we know (says he) that if our yearthy mansion of this dwelling were
destroyed, we have a buyldyng of God, an habitacion, not made with hands but
eternal in heaven. Also Christ in Iho^.xiiij. speaking of the same thing,
says: In my fathers house there be many dwelling places. And the same Christ
safeth also in Ihou.xii. Where I am (says he) there shall my minister be also.
Paul also in his Epistle to the Philippians the.i. Cha. Desires to be losed,
and to be with Christ. Now here ye have hard the end of this poor beggar,
being righteous before God, what came to him after his death and departing from
his body. Although he were of no reputacion before the world, yet he was
highly regarded before God. In this good poor man, being in the sight of God
righteous: all good, godly, and righteous poor beggars, and men of small
reputacio^, make great comfort, unto whom the joy and felicity of the life
to come, shall recompense the sorrow and misery, that is in this life all comen
and past. Here ye heard of Lazarus death, and what chanced unto him after his
death. Now shall ye hear of the rich man's death. Why? do such men die, as
well as poor men do? So well? No God knows, they die all doubtless, but how
well they die, and how well comes to the^ after their death, mark well this
parable, and ye shall know. It follows in the parable. The rich man also died
and was buried. Is he ded in deed? How chanced he died? It was not (I trust)
for lack of clothes? For he had to many. It was not for lack of meat and
drink, for he had to much. Why? will not gay and costly clothes and delicate
meats, keep men from death? No, rather I fear me they help men to death. Then
I se that neither costly array, nor delicate fare, nor abundaunce of goods,
nor excellency of dignities, nor greatness in office, nor yet nobleness of
birthe: will keep any man from death. For as sone dies the rich man with his
riches, and his costly raiment, and with his delicate fare, as the poor manne
with his poverty, course raime^t, and homely fare. As Soon die they in
dignities and great Offices, as other that have none of them both. As Soon
dies the noble, as the base borne. As Soon dies the Prelate, as the Pulter, as
sone dies the priest as the clerk. etc. For as Paul says to the Hebrews,
ix. Chapter. It is appoyncted unto al men, that they shall once die. And the
old saying is true: There is nothing more certain then death, but there is
nothing more uncertain, then thoure of death. Now to the text again. The rich
also died. etc. Why? Is he dedde that promised himself so long time to live? He
is dedde. But is he dedde in deed? Yea truly. What shall we then say? what?
Mary if he were, as many of our rich men be now a days, I know what men be
wont to say, I would not that they should so say. What (I pray thee) be
they wont to say, when such rich coueteous men die? What? Even thus plumpe
out. The devil in hell be with them. Let them guess again, if they had said
so when this rich man died, and had laid any wager on it, it may fortune
they should have won. But what shall we say? God have mercy on his soul that
were but lost labor. For God will have no mercy upon them that be in hell. For
scripture says: in hell is no redemption. What shall I say, God have mercy
on poor Lazarus soul? That also is lost labor, for God has mercy on him all
ready. It is now past God have mercy of all christen souls matter, when men de
departed all ready. Pray here, and that in time, for to pray when men be ded,
it is to late. It follows in the text. And was buried. What matter was this,
that he was buried. It is a matter, for we read nothing of Lazarus buriyng, and
yet I doubt not but that he was buried. Here is mention made of this rich
man's buriyng: by that is signified, that his burial was like, as al his like
was compted, that is most honorable and I doubt not, but so was his burial
also. Moreover, I doubt not but this rich man, had Diriges, Masses, Trintals,
and priests enough to say Masses for him. He neither lacked singyng nor
ringing, chimyng nor tollyng, if such things were used in those days. I
doubt not but there were at his burial, all the four orders of Friars, with all
the religious men and women, that could be gotten for money. There were also
many mourners with whoodes and black gounes, with many a dri^ye more, and so
he was brought into the earth most honourrably. But poor Lazarus lacked us
more but all this pomp^ and glory* (...) he lacked not everlasting glory* (...)
had not this rich manne with all his trinkettes, wrought and dooen so
honorably, everlasting felicity? Nor, ware that, for that is gotten with
(...) such tro^pery* But where is he then? Where? Mary even where he should
be, and where he sought in all his whole life for to be: Where is that? Ever in
hell: for so says the text. What man, is all that ringyng and singyng, all that
Massyng and dirigyng, with crouchyng and kneelyng, with that bitter weapyng and
wailyng, with the Church hangyng and great offering, al together lost? Yea
truly; all was lost to him. For whosoever found aught; he found naught.
Perchance ye will say there were no such things at that time, as is now used.
I answer, although there were no such things, at that time used, yet I doubt
not but there was then, as pratie devices devised by the Clergy, and received
of the laity, as we have seen in times past, and yet may se, so that we will
se it. See ye not what pratie tricks be in our this most knowing time
conueighed into the blessed Communion for to get money withal? Now let us
return again to this rich man, thus honorably buried, and so seems unto
unknowing people of the world, to be in no worse state in another world, then
he was in this world. But it will be found far otherwise, when the truth is
known.

Here ends the third part of this Sermon.
IT follows in the text: And being in hell in torments, he lift up his iyes,
and saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said:
father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe
of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flambe.
But Abraham said: son remember that thou in thy life time, receiuedest thy
pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus received pain, but now he is comforted, and
thou art punished. Ye have heard here before, how honorably this rich man (to
the world) led his life, died and was also honorably buried. Now his honor is
turned to horror, his prosperous state, to an unlucky state. He lived here in
all delicacie and pleasures, but he leads his life now in all miseries and
pains. Let us consider out of the text here, in what miserable case this
rich man is comen into now, after all his felicity, and pleasure taken in
this world. First, he is cast into hell, which is a place for the that are
perpetually dampened, in which place, there is no hope of any delivery or
salvation. Furthermore, in that hell he is tormenred with fiery flambes. We
read no less written by Esate the Prophet, in his.lxvi. chap. Their worms
(says he) shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and all flesh
shall abhor the^. Christ says also in Matthewe.xiij. Chapi. They shall cast
them into a furnes of fire, there shall be wailyng, and gnashing of tethe. Yet
more, this rich man sees set before his iyes, poor Lazarus, whom in times
paste, he did nothing regard, in great and perpetual felicity. This is no
little pain to the^ that be dampened, to se them that were nothing, in comparison
to them, now so to be in perpetual pleasure, and them selfs in perpetual
pain, and al through their own folly. Furthermore, this rich manne is driven
to that need, through his exceeding pain, to beg of him, to whom in his life,
he would not once vouchsafe to give the cro^mes of his table. He says; send
Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flambe. This is the very judgment of God:
whereby the pride and stoutnesse of such men, are wont to be punished withal.
For they which were in plenty, and felicity: contempned poor s^ly souls in
their misery and beggarie, not having pity upon thein to help them, but they
despised them and judged the^ not worthy to their company. These me^ thus
doing, does find no less at Gods hand, and that by the right judgment of
God, be brought to such extreme necessity and high misery, that they would
thank God with all their hearts, that those men, whom they conte^pned and set
so little by, would now vouchsafe once to give them one familiar countenance,
or speak unto the one familiar word. It is (I say) the very ordinance of
God, that they shall be measured with the same measure, that they measured other
withal for so says Christ in Matthewes Gospel.vil. Chapi. with what measure
ye mete, with the same shall other men measure to you? There is a meruerlous
equality in god, for this rich man (not withstandyng his bitter prayer)
obtained not so much at Gods hand, as a drop of water, because he had
defiled before a crome of bread. We have here a lively example, what they shall
find hereafter, that now in this life does not prepare for theimselfes
friends of the wicked Mammon, that when they shall be taken from their goods
which they co^pt their friends, and be very beggars in deed, and have great
need, they shall find as this man found, everlasting lackyng, and evermore
beggyng. There is no beggar in worse case, and a more miser, then he that ever
beggeth, and never obteineth. Such shall be all that does as this man did.
Therefore here in time what remedy Christ has found, for as many as does believe
him, and follow his counsel. Luke.xvi. I say unto you, (says he) make you
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may
receive you into everlasting habitacions. Will ye follow Christ's counsel?
while ye be here rich, and be able to make fre^des by your riches, make them I
counsel you. Give here, and it shall be given unto you there, help the poor
here, and they shall help you there. Receive them here, and they shall receive
you there. Look what ye do unto the^ here. shall be done unto you again there,
be it good or evil: for Christ compteth altogether, that is done to one of
his, being never so poor, to be done unto himself. And where it is promised
that they (to whom ye are beneficial here) shall receive you into everlasting
habitacions: By that we gather, that Christ of his goodness, has given the
both goods and authority, to do you good again, that have done them good
here. Here ye se, how to be received of God, and how to be abiected. Be good
therefore unto the poor, and do to them, as ye would that they here after,
shall do unto you. And so ye doing good unto them, shall do your self great
good, and lay up threasure for your selfs, that never shall fail you. And so
dooyng here, ye shall not lack there. And to the text again. And being in hell
in torments, he lift up his iyes, and saw Abraham a far of, etc. Here are
in this parable that Christ propouneth, many strange things, to them that
knows not the nature of a Parable. In a Parable, there be many things
feigned to be, that were never done: and yet may there be much and Godly
doctrine taught by them. This one thing among many, is to be marked in every
Parable: the scopt, the meaning and thend, wherefore the parable is spoken, and
all things in parables, must be directed to yt purpose. Now in this Parable ye
must mark well, although here in the Parable, it seems that they that be in
heaven, or in a place of salvation, should both se and talk with the^, yt be
in the place of da^pitation, yet there is no such things in deed, but we
must mark to what end christ spoke this parable. He spoke it to the Iues and
in them to all us, teaching both the^ and us, how to live in this world, yt we
may live in the world that is to come also. Here is in this Parable taught, how
that we may not judge, after the judgment of the world, but after the
Judgment of God: which is known only in holy scriptures, neither of things
present in this world, neither of things in the world to come. Now once
again to the text: and being in hell in torments, he lift up his iyes, and saw
Abraham etc. Here must ye note (as I have partly told you before) that although
that Christ sets forth in this parable, as though souls departed out of
this world, some to the place of glory, and some to the place of misery:
should speak or talk one with another, yet there is no such thing, nor
Christ means no such thing. But Christ's meaning is, to teach us that be
his, and here a live, to be ware of such imaginacious or sayings, as this
man being in hell, does say here. For eue^ as Christ feigneth this man, to
speak in hell: even so does deuilish men imagine and speak in earth supposyng
such things to be true, as this man in hell does speak, or is rather by
Christ feigned to speak. And ye must note also, that like as in this man's
speaking is signified all evil mestnes imaginacions and sayings: so here is
also to be marked in Abraham's sayings, Gods will and pleasure known in
scriptures, for Abraham does speak here in the person of god, and there is
here nothing spoken of him, but that is true, and does confute all this wicked
man's assertions and sayings. Now let us example the text, which says: he
being in hell in torments, lift up his iyes, and saw Abraham a far of, and
Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said, father Abraham have mercy on
me, and send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water, and
cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flambe. Now here is showed the
imaginacions of them, that be in hell in pain. They do consider the state
that they be in, in hell, that is in pain and misery. They do also consider
the state of them that be in glory and felicity, and that does augment their
pain and misery. They being thus altogether wrapped in sorrow on every side,
show their affeccion, and desiryng relief of the same, cry to Abraham (that
represents God) for mercy, but altogether is in vain, because they do it all
out of due time. But Abraham said: son, remember that thou in thy life time,
receive do thy pleasure, and co^trary-wise, Lazarus received pain, but now is
he comforted, and thou art punished. Here speaks almighty God in Abraham's
person, not only to this man but rather to all men, that does as this manne
did. He asks mercy, but out of time. He would have help of Lazarus, whom
when he might have helped, he would not help. Therefore he hears Abraham
speaking the sentence of god to him, saying: son, remember that thou in thy
life. etc. God does call men to a rear co^pt, because they do follow their
own sensuality, taking in all things their own pleasure, they regard nothing
at all what is gods pleasure. They care not what God would have them do, but
they regard and only care for their own pleasures, and such things as they
will, and have pleasure to do. Consider also, that he calls Abraham father,
and also Abraham calls him son. But likewise as this man here being a live
and in prosperity, regarded not Abraham, that is to say god, any thing at al,
and he took him not once for his father (except it were with the mouth only.)
He looked for no help at his hand, he trusted not in him, nor was for things
received, thankful unto him (...) so does Abraham, that is to say god, calls
him son after the same fashion, as he called him father, nothing meanyg to
show his fatherly pity, and compassion upon him, neither does he make him
once partaker of any part of his euheritaunce; but says: Son, remember
that thou in thy life time, receiuedst thy pleasure, and contrariwise Lazarus
received pain. As though he might say, like as thou in the world, being in
high prosperity, forgottest me, regardedst me not, had no trust in me to
do thee good in time to come, but folowedst thine own pleasure; and not mine,
thine own will, and not mine, and was also in all things unthankful. Remember
now how thou have done the^, and therefore now thou must be concent to receive
there after Thou regardedst not, neither my will nor pleasure then, but thine
own: therefore now thou have, according to thine own deservings. But
contrary wise Lazarus being in adversity, forgot me not, all times he regarded
my ways. He put his whole trust in me, to do him good, in time to come. He
followed not his own pleasure, but mine, he did not his own will, but mine. He
was pacient in his adversity, and gave thanks in all his misery. Therefore,
now is he comforted, and thou art now punished. This doctrine is not set furthe
here, neither for this rich manne, nor yet for this poor manne, for they can
neither take good nor harm by it. But it is set forth (as all other
scripture is) for us to do us good, to teach us, to monish us, whether we be
rich or poor, to have before our ties, here in this world, whether we be in
prosperity, or adversity, al times the state of the world that is to come.
If that we would earnesty and often do this, we (I say) of what state soever
we be, truly, truly, it would make us, that be rich to consider, from
whence our goods come, to what purpose. God either did lend them us, or put
them into our hands, it would make us to remember what good, we being here
rich, may do unto our selfs in another world, (hourdyng up our
Threasure there) in ministeryng the same goods, gladly, liberally, and with a
loving heart, to our poor brethren and sisterne, according to their
necessity, and our ability. It would also make us thankful to GOD, which
has given us the same gooddes, and has made us to be in a more blessed state,
which is in the state of geuyng, according to the saying of our Lord Christ,
in the Acts of the Apostles the twenty Chapter, which says: It is more
blessed to give, then to receive. This doctrine also would make them that be
poor and in misery, to be pacient, and thankful to GOD their father,
knowing that there is nothing that can come or chance to them, no, not one
here of their head shall perisshe, without either their fathers will or
permission. Now therefore both rich and poor take heed to this doctrine,
consider what is setforth in the same, either to eschew of follow. If ye take heed in time and follow this poor man's doing, that is, the will and pleasure of
god, walking truly in your vocation, truly serving your calling, doing in
all points to your power your duty and office, both toward God and your
neighbors, ye shall have as this poor man (your pattern and examplar, doing
his office and serving his vocacion) had, that is even heaven for his labor.
If ye regard not this doctrine setforth here in this parable of this rich man,
but be negligent and careless in doing your office, and serving your vocacion,
giving your selves to your own lusts and pleasures, as the rich man did,
that that is written here in the parable to come to him, doubtless shall come to
you, that is to be perpetually damned in hell. It follows furthermore i^ the
text: Beyond all this, between us and you, there is a great space set, so that
they which would go from he^nce to you cannot, neither may come from thence to
us. Here is a another doctrine of the heavenly father taught here by our
saluiour Christ, in the person of Abraham. By this doctrine of Christ here set
forth, is signified unto all men, that in a another world, there is no change
of things, but al things be there firm, stable, suer and perpetual. Therefore
they yt be ones made happy in that world (as all those shall be that does depart
in faith) shall for ever and perpetually, remain happy and never be changed,
as John says in ye Apocalipse the.xiiii. Blessed are all they yt die in the
lord, yt is in ye faith of Jesus Christ. Eue^ so they, that are once unhappy,
shall ever and perpetually be unhappy, and there is no place left of repe^tyng
amendyng and obteinyng of salvation. Mark what is written in Ecclesiastes
the.ij. chapter. If the tree fall, either to the sowth or to ye north, in
whatsoever place it falls, there it lies. This doctrine is not meant of
falling of trees, but of the death of men. By ye South is understand faith,
by the North infidelite. Like as the tree lies still where it falls: So
does the man signified there by, abide still for ever in one state and never
changes. If he die in faith he is saved, if in infidelity, he is damned. So
that he that is ones damned shall never be saved, Even so no more shall he that
is ones saved, ever after be dampened. Where is then become purgatory, that has
put so many both great and small in a wanne hope, to be saved by other men's
merits after their death? I trust it be run home again to his first inuenter
and founder the pope. I would wish yt al purgatory mainteiners were with him
also until I would wish the^ here again. Seeing that every man at his death is
either saved or dampened, wherefore is all that money bestowed for the dead. If
they be in heaven, there can no money increace there joy there. If they be i^ hell,
there can no money minish their pains there. Therefore the money that is
bestowed for the dead with that opinion, either to increase the joy of ye one,
or to relese the pain of the other, is euel spent. For ye dead be never the
better, and the living bestowers be much the worse. Why sir may not a man give
his goods to be bestowed among the poor when he is dead? I say not nay. For
there is litell enowgh given unto the poor by men's lives. Therefore I think it
mete to give at ye lestwyse at there deaths. But I will counsel noma^ to tarry
and differ is almosse until he die: for then I doubt whether it be his
almosse or not. Or whether other me^ will give for him that he could not find
in his own heart to give for himself. We be bound to give that yt we be able
to spare to them that has present neade and necessite, and not to tarry
until we die, for then we give, because we can no longer keep it, and I am a
fraied that god shall thank us thereafter, that is to say, nothing at all. For
he never gave us his goods nor yet lent them us to keep them till we die, but
in all our life time to bestow them upon the neady: and not to keep them that
other men may bestow them for us, or rather strive for them after our death.
Here we may learn of this doctrine, that although this rich man begged a pace,
(being in hell in torments), to have been relesed of some of his pain: yeat
he found no relief at gods hands at al, for he asked it to late. No More shall
we find at gods hands, if we come to late as he did, which died i^
infidelity. And as many as dies in infidelity, shall never obtain mercy,
pray they never somoche for the^ selves, as this man is made mention to do. And
moreover and if all the whole world together would pray for one of them: yet
should he never obtain any relief of his pain. Now by ye sentence of god,
there is nothing behind then but this, that both this rich man and his like
companions must content them selves with there state and pain that they be in,
and never to look for better. Now here we may see and learn by this doctrine of
this place, that there be no more but ij. places prepared for the^ that be
departed out of this world, One for the^ that are blessed, yt is a place of
refreshyng Another for them that are dampened, that is a place of torme^ting. We
find not one word in scriptures of yt forged purgatory, wherein sowles be not
purged, but fools purses be emptied.

Here ends the fowerth part of this Sermon.
BUt when this before named rich man saw yt he could not prevail any thing at
al for himself, tha^ he began to make his peticio^ for other saying: I pray
the therefore father send him to my fathers house, for I have five brethren,
for to warn the^, lest they also come to this place of torments. Here is
also to be marked, in this part of the parable, a another damnable opinion
spoken by this man being in hell, to teach them that are yet here in the
earth, to be ware of it and such like. This man's opinion was, as Christ
teaches here in the parable, that men would give more credence to Spirits
that come from a another world, tha^ to the holy scriptures being taught the^
here in this world. This opinion is confuted here by ye heue^lie Fathers
doctrine taught by Christ in the person of Abraham, as ye shall hear
hereafter This opinion is confuted here of Christ, not for this rich man's
sake, nor for to teach him and to convert him, but it is set here to teach
us, to convert us, which be yet here, where we may be taught, where we may be
converted. Why? be there any now a live think ye, that be of that opinion
that this rich dampened man was of? Ye truly, I fere me to many. There be yt
be not ashamed to utter there dampnable opinion, with these and such like
words: We know (say they) what we have here, but we know not what we shall
have there. Who does know, whether there be any other life after this life? Who
will change (that wise is) the certentie of things that we be suer of here in
this world, for the uncertainty of things that be to come, in a another (to us
vnkowen) world. There is none (say they) that will do thus except a few of
momishe mopers which can do none other thing else, but mope upon there books,
to make us afraied of shadows and buggeberes. Therefore (say these wicked me^)
we will abide in this our opinion, until we have some messenger sent from
heaven or hell, to show us what news be there, and take our pleasure here in the
mean season, let the^ teache what they will. Of this opinion the parable
teaches us that this rich man was, and he does here represent all those that
be now of that opinion, and that answer that was made unto him than, is to
warn them that be of such opinion now. That the parable does teach, this man
to be careful for his brethren, that were yet of the opinion that he was of: is
not set here to teache that the sowles in hell does care for them that are in
earth, but it is set here to teach us to be careful for our own selves and
for our fryndes also here, while care will help. For like as this man's care
(that the parable speaks of) prevailed not, no more shall no man's care
prevail, nether for himself, nor yet for other, that is not taken in time.
What was this man's care in hell? that his brethren all together vntawght of
the will of god, that is, that they that live here in this world godly,
following the will and the pleasure of god, should have with god everlasting
glory, as he saw Lazarus had. And the contrary wise, as many as took there
own pleasure, regarding not the will of god, should be in pain everlasting,
as he himself was. This was his care, but to late. He said, Vt testificetur
illis, for to warn them (quod he) lest they also come in to this place of
torment. This man's opinion thus far was good, yt he would have his brethren
warned, to be ware here i^ this present life forth But in this his opinion was
naught, that he would have one to come owe of a another world to teach them,
for that is a false opinion confuted here by our saluiour Christ, let us be
warned here in time, while life is in us. But let us look neither for Angel,
soul, nor deuel to teach us, but only Scripture, as ye be here taught by
Abraham speaking in gods person to this rich man, and not only to him, but
rather unto us, that we heringe this his doctrine, believing and working after
ye same, may be saufe: where doing ye contrary we should be damned. For to
warn the^, says the text: To warn them of that (as though he might say)
that I now find by experience, that is, that virtue shall be of god rewarded and
vice punished. Of this let the^ be warned, lest perchance, they differ (the
amendment of there lives,) til they be dead, as I did, and then it will be to
late for the^ to be warned, as it is now to late for me. Vt testificetur illis,
for to warn them, etc. By these words here he bewraieth his own wicked
opinion, that he had here when he lived. May not a man gather out of these his
words, this to be his opinion? I (as though he might say) when I was yet a
live. I judged all things to be put vain, whatsoever was spoken of the fire
of hell, and of the punishments of malefactors in a another world. I supposed
such things, to have been but preachers dreams to terrify the simple people
and selie sowles, to keep them in awe. Therefore I pray the good father Abraham
to send Lazarus to warn my five brethren and to testify unto the^, suerly
not only those things to be most true, which holy scripture does teach of
the everlasting damnacion, which nether they nor I did believe ones to be true,
or any such thing to be in deed. Which things now, I am not only compelled
to believe, but with mine own hurt I feel the^ to be to true, and to be such
pains as nomans tongue can express. Therefore now they that will not believe
such things as the scriptures teaches to be, with there own mischeue and
everlasting destruction shall learn by overmuch experience (as this rich man
did) such things to be. Here ye have hard this wicked man's peticion for his
brethren, with his wicked opinion, that one out of a another world should be
sent to teach them, but his peticion was not hard because his opinion was
wicked, and also he prayed out of time. To this wicked opinion, whether it be
of this wicked man in hell (as the parable teaches) or of such like wicked men
in earth, our saluiour Christ with the doctrine of his father spoken by
Abraham, do make answer in this wise sayng: They have moses and the prophets,
let them hear them. What is understand by Moses and the prophets? By Moses
is understand Moses doctrine, and by the prophets is understand the
prophets doctrine, and both those doctrines taught that Christ should come,
promised of god to do all things that belong to our whole salvation,
iustificacion, and redemption. And that we by him only should have remission
of our sins and life everlasting. Al these things we may and owght to learn
by Moses and the prophets, that is the holy scriptures. Is there nothing
else to be learned but holy scriptures? No truly, Nothing that shall make
any thing for owr salvation, iustificacion, redemption, remission of sins
and obteining of everlasting life. Therefore we be taught here with these words:
They have Moses and the prophets: let them hear them that is, let them give
ear to them, let the^ regard them, harken to the^. He says not they have
with the^, reason, wit and wordly prudence: let them heart and hearken to
them, let them follow them. He says not here, they have Scribes and phariseis,
Fathers Customs, long vsages, Many hundrede years, Man's tradicions, decrees
and inuencions, Men's good intentes and meaninges, Multitudes of people,
Abounda^ce of Doctors and Councelles and such like, hear them: but he says,
that they have Moses and the prophets (that is holy scriptures) let them
hear them. For all these before named things with such like, put on one heap
without scriptures be of none authorite, but holy Scripture without all these,
is of full and perfect authorite. Therefore if we will be saved, let us hear
Moses and the prophets, that is holy Scriptures. Our saluiour Christ said
unto the Iues, in John's gospel the.v. chapter Search scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Also
in Mathews gospel the.xxij. chapitre our saluiour said unto ye Saduceis: Ye do
err, not knowing the scriptures. Here ye se all knowledge comes by the knowing
of ye scriptures, and all ignorance also comes for lack of knowing the
scriptures. For they that know not the Scriptures that they are the word of
God, care for no godly thing, they take their pleasure in all thing. Now the
lord that would have al thing done after a right order, that is by his own
rule, which is the holy scripture, sends these me^ and also us unto the same
scriptures: saying. They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them,
obey them, keep and observe the^. How shall we understand this saying of this
place. They have Moses and the prophets: meaning this rich ma^s five
brethren which know nothing less then ye scriptures. By this is signified
nothing else, but that there is none other lernyng to be saved by, then by ye
scriptures. Therefore let every man learn, yt intends to be saved by this
doctrine of Christ to know the scriptures, to teach the scriptures, to
credit the scriptures, and to lead a life according to the same. And if this
rich man had done this, he had not been now in hell, but because he would
neither hear it, nor have it, neither read it, nor yet regard it, neither
credit it, nor yet lead his life after it, to conclude, he sought nothing, but
refused al things yt made for his saltration, therefore must he needs be
dampened, and so shall all that so does. Now after that this dampened rich man
had hard ye sentence of god (spoken by Abraham) infallibly true and to be
received of al men: They have Moses and ye prophets: Yet he was not contented
with the answer, but he replied against this manifest and open true doctrine
and said: Nay father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they
will repent. He says unto him, if they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they believe, though one rose from death again. Here ye may mark
by this damned rich man's replication, the wicked opinion of them, that follow
there own sensual judgments, and not gods judgment expressedly set
furthe by scriptures. For they say Nay, when God says yea, God says, they
have Moses, and the prophets to teach them, and them only must they hear,
obey and follow, for in them only is contained enoughe and abu^oauntly, al
manner of doctrine that can, or may help us unto salvation. Nay say they, as
this dampened man said. Nay father Abraham (quod he,) not so, but if any man
come unto the^ of the dead they will repent. Meaning (as his damnable opinion
was) yt if such one as Lazarus was that should come out of an other world,
raised up again from death to life, should have more credit given unto him,
and men should sooner repent at his preaching, then of either readyng, or
preaching of the scripture. But unto that vain and wicked opinion, Abraham (in
gods person) answers saying: If they hear not Moses, and the prophets,
neither will they believe though one rose from death again. As though Christ
might say. If there be any man, that will not hear the doctrine of Moses and
the prophets to repent and amend his life at them, surely that manne will
sone cauil and find a fault, if any man would say that he ware raised up
from among the dedde, to bring any other new rules and precepts out of another
world to learn men to repent and amend by. Therefore let al men come only to
the holy scripture. For there is more credicte to be given to that only
scripture, then to al men's doctrines, to all men's rules, inventions,
tradicions customs, miracles and all other imaginacions of men. This is a
plain and infallible rule, that the holy scriptur is the only rule to judge
and live rightly by. Which does comprehend all that belongs to godliness
and our Salvation. And is only of himself autenticke and of authority,
and so is nothing else in the whole world among men but it only. For to have
blessed sowles sent unto us from heaven to admonish and preach unto us, this
ware but vain, and false. We be sent here of the lord to the Scriptures. They
have (says God,) Moses and the prophets. Let no man therefore (that is of
God, and entendeth to be saved,) ones look for any apperyng of either
Prophet, or Apostle, They whilst they lived, (by thinstinct and inocion of
the spirit of God, preached unto the^ that ware present, and wrote for them
that ware absent, all things that are sufficient to instruct both them and
us. Let us look upon their preachinges, and writings, and content our selves
with the same. Let us not ask with this wicked and damned rich man, that
either saints, or souls out of an other world, should come, or be sent
messengers unto us. For there is no credit to be given unto spirits raised
from the dead. That does the history of Samuel raised (or rather supposed to
be raised) again, which is written in the.i. Re. or. Sam. the.xxviij. cha.
testifye. Furthermore we have a plain commandment of the lord, that we shall
not seek no truth at them that be dead, in the book of Deute. the.xviii.
cha. Let none be found in the (says the lord) that seeks the truth of them
that be dead. If we may not seek ye truth at their doctrine, much less we
may seek our salvation at their doctrine. Here ye may perceive how grievously
they sin, that does give credit and believe to the aunsweres of coniured
Spirits. It is possible by Gods permission, to come to pass that spirits
shall appear and give answer to certain interrogatio^s. But to tell the truth
what they be in diede, these are even very mockinges and deceiptes of the
deuel. Although Satan sometime will tell truth, like as he did what should come
to Saul, as it apereth in the before rehearsed history.i. Sam.xviii. Yet
notwithstanding, he does whatsoever he does to beguile and deceive even so
many as credit, and believe him. Seeing then that Satan is a lier, and also the
very father and beginner of lieng, there is no faith to be given unto him.
Furthermore there is no revelation of Angels to be looked for, which should
teach us the Gospel, for either those Angels should preach the same Gospel,
that the Prophets and the Apostles has preached, and so it ware in vain, or
else they should preach contrary. Then mark what Paul says to the Galathiens
in the first Chapi. If we (says he) or an Angel from heaven, should preach
unto you an other gospel, besides, or contrary to that ye have received,
curssed be he. Here it is manifest, that there be no dedde men's souls to be
heard. Angels be not to be looked for. Man's wisdom in this case, is
not to be regarded, but only Moses and the prophets. For this doctrine of
Moses and the prophets, did Christ teaache, even aftre his resurrection. For
as Luke says. Chapit.xxiiij. He did interpretate, or expound Moses and the
Prophets. Wherefore here it is plain, that the authority of them is so by
Christ confirmed, that we may hear, nor credit any other, either doctors,
or preachers, for our salvation. Therefore the way of salvation is true, which
Moses and the Prophets, and after them, the Apostles have taught, and besides
that way, there is none other to be sought, neither if it ware sought, there
is none other to be found. This is the way that they taught, that we
knowledge our sins, and believe, that for Christ's sake, to have remission of
our sins. And in this faith let us walk in gods vocation. All this shall
come to pass if we believe christ's saying to be true which is: They have
Moses and the prophets, let the^ hear the^. Now on the other side, they that
contemn scriptures, or minishe the authority of scripturs, make light of
them, or dispraise them: of such men if they do not shortelye repent, and
return, there is no manner of hope, that by any other way, theye may be
brought to the way of their salvation according to the true saying of our
lord, If they (says he) hear not Moses and the Prophets, (that is holy
scriptures, neither will, theye believe though one rose from death again.
Therefore of Angels, of dead men's souls, of al Spirits, whether theye come
from hell, or heaven, must be avoided, abhorred, and eschued only the law and
the prophets, received and heard. Yet if a man will consider the disposicions
of the flesh, and of the spirit, and consider the Judgments of both, it
shall teach him to beware of the one and to follow the other. The spirits
judgment is, that the scriptures which are the word of God, that is Moses
and the prohetes are sufficient for our salvation. The flesh on the other side
seeks for salvation not only at the Scriptures, but at many other strange
things also. It sekethe the truth, at the dead, it gives credit to
spirits, to miracles and to all manner of things taught beside scriptures. But
they that be taught of the holy Ghost, believes, or gives credit to miracles,
and signs, for the words sake, and not to the word for the Signs and
miracles sakes. But theie that believe after the flesshes perswations does
contrary. And therefore it commethe to pass often times even by the very
judgment of God, that they that desire rather signs and miracles, the^ true
doctrines of scriptures, to be deceived with false miracles, and lyeng signs,
for noman ought to believe the truethe for signs and miracles sake, before he
believes the word of truth. For ye scriptures says not, they have signs and
miracles let the believe them. But it says: They have Moses, and the
Prophets, let them believe and credit them.

By these things we may mark, that apperynges of spirits which does
show, and also require many things) can not be of GOD, but doubtless they
be wicked Spirits, which by the fearefulle and terrible judgment of God,
(for men's unfaithfulness) does deceive, and bring many to error. Here we
may well perceive, that the will of God is, that we should not be taught,
neither of one thing, nor of other (concerning our salvation) but only of holy
Scripture, or else God would never have spoken thus by Abraham: They have
Moses and the prophets, let them hear them.

Now I beseech the God of al verity and truth, to give us all Grace, only as
we be commanded to hear to harken to, to credit and obey the only word
of God, that is Moses and he prophets, which are the only truethe, and to
fashione our whole lives after the same word to the glory of God, and to our
own Souls salvation. Amen.

A Short sum of such things as our savior Christ does teach and
admonish us of, in this present Gospel.
First is that we use well the present gooddes of this world. Here we be
taught also to be merciful to the pore in distributyng and ministering to them
those gods goods lent us for the same purpose. Here we be taught morouer that
if we be not thankful to God for things received at his hand, and be
merciful to our pore neighbors with the same goods, that then we shall be
unmercifully handled with perpetual torments in hell. Also we be commanded to
learn of the holy scripture, what pleasure we may look for at Gods hand,
if we here, and obey him according to his own will set forth in scripture and
none other where. And contrary wise we may learn what pain we shall be sure
to have if we do otherwise. Yet more we may learn that it is vain, folish,
and ungodly to look to be taught rather of them of an other World, then of
the holy Scripture, which is left to teach us inthis world. Last of al, we be
taught that al good, godly, and necessary things for our salvation, are taught
and plainly set furthe in holy scripture. And if there be any that does
otherwise believe, or of the same does doubt, he, or she, (as yet) doethe lack
the spirit of God, which does teache al truth, and such one abidyng in that
case shall never give credit to Christ himself, nor to Prophet, nor Apostle,
nor yeat to all the Aungelles in heaven, if they ware al sent to convert him,
much less shall he, or she believe the dead, if they were sent to teach him.
Here we may gather of what auchoritie the holy scripture is. And that there is
therein expresselye set forth, all that is for our souls health, and wealth
necessary, and of done other thing to be known, but of it only, in so much
that if we do not hear that scripture only, credit it only, obey it, and
fashion our whole life after it only, we shall never find any other thing,
being in heaven, earth, or hell, that we may be saved by

Now the God of heaueu, which is the maker and aucthor of the holy scripture,
give us al grace gladly to receiueit purely to understand it, faithfully to
bear it away, and effectually to live aftre the same, to the glory of god and
to all our Souls health. To the which God, with our savior Christ, his
dear son, and with the holy Ghost, be al honor, laud praise, and glory,
for ever and ever, world with out end. Amen.

Imprinted at London by R^chard^ Grafton, Printer to the K^nges Majesty.

Anno post Christum natum. 1552.

Mense Maio.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

depiction of the the seven liberal arts VERSVTVS CELAT SCIENTIAM PRO.12. LOG
GRAM ASTRO RETHOR ARITHM GEOMET MVSIC



printer's device of Richard Grafton SVSCIPITE INSITVM VERBVM IACO.I.



