THE WORLDS ASSIZES.

Or A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross the tenth day of July 1614. being the
Sunday before the end of Trinity Term.

By NATHANAEL KITCHENER, Student in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word at
Grauenhurst in Bedfordshire.

Look up, and lift up your heads for your Redemption draws neers.

Luke 21.28. Aug. ad Iulianum, Epist. iij. Tria sunt in hoc mundo deteriora
omni malo, Anima peecatoris in peccatis perseuerans, quae nigrior est coruo;
and mali Angeli, qui eam rapiunt; and infernus in quem inducitur: non exim sunt
deteriora his tribus.

Imprinted at London, by Lionell Snowdon, for John Harison, at the golden
Anchor in Paternoster-rowe. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABL LORD CHARLES Earl of Kent, Lord of Hasting, Weisforde
and Ruthin, and his Majesty's Lieftenant of the Shire of Bedford.
RIght Honorable there be two things, which make any great house truly Noble,
Love to God, Loyalty to Prince, with the former, this great noble house of
KENT is now invested: in the latter it ever continued nener tainted; in both a
succession hopeful still expected. Religion (which is better then that lot of
inheritance, given by Jacob to his son Joseph) has in your Lordship bin so
long a Resident, that any good man, even by popular report, might present an
Orpha^t in hope of succor: much more my self who know so well, am so much
bounden, and can so truly speak that of you which the Spirit did of the
Church of Theatyra; I know thy Love, and Service, and Faith, and thy Patience,
and thy Works, and that they are more at the last then at the first. I have
here exposed mine Infant, (a formelesse Embrion) to the mercy of the Press,
and the Parent to the mercilesnesse of censure; the poor abortiue resembling
Alcibyades child, of whom the querulous mother made complaint, That Nature
begun it, but did not completely finish it: shrowding both under your worthy
Patronage, as an Ajax buckler for defense. All is done in benefit of the Church
wherein I live, in token of duty to your person, who^ I honor: to satisfy my
friends whom I love, and to content any good man, whom I like. Thus desiring
the happiness of Heaven and Earth, to attend your soul and body. I beseech
him who made all, to add much honor to your days, and many days to your
honorable life: In hope whereof, I take my humble leave, and rest,

Your Lordships Chaplain in all observance. N: Kichener.

To the Reader.
REader, (if courteous, I must thank, if captious, I can endure) there be two
sorts of beasts whereof I warn my Youngling; moone-eyde Ignorance, and
bleere-eyde Envy; the one with Melitides cannot judge at all, the other with
Zoilous will judge too much: the fathers council is, That his child avoid
both. But if the constellations be maleuolous, why yet the Poet says,
Scribimus indoctidoctique etc. So some of those cattle may prove with young
themselves, and then others may do as much for theirs. If happily at any time
mine Ospring be conuented before Felix, ears itching after news; it answers
for it self, that of Solomon, Non est qnidquam noui sub sole. Far as the
Comedian said, Nihil est iam dictum, quod non sit dictum prius. If it be taxed
by soothing Zidkiah, that with Joseph it wears a parti-colored coat, or that
Iay-like it borrows feathers from other birds; In promptu causa est. It
pleads antiquity as the first Apoligie. It have bin the ancient custom even of
the learned so to do, Tum vt certiora scribant, tum vt iucundius legantur. Next
it answers for it self with Patricius, Me parum admodum fidei rebus meis
adhibuisse, si solu^ authoritati meae in terarer. Thirdly it puts in that plea
of Lipsius for his politic Ceutons, in it own behalf, Nil nostrum and
omnia: Only the kingly policy of Astyages is the fear of my young One, who
upon his dream, married his only daughter to a poor shepherd, That the means
of the father might derogate from the child's mind. In fine Cor: Agrippa said,
Inter Diuos nullos non carpit Momus; and how then shall Mortals think to
escape? Grauenhurst. October, 1615.

Thine if thou love the Lord Jesus. N: K.

Upon this Sermon touching the Judgment of the World. Preached at Paul's
Cross, by N: K. Encomiasticall Verses, of A: W. in love to the Author his
especial friend, and his Book a Judicious Work.
IN naught save in Christ's Cross Paul glory had,
In naught more then Paul's Cross maey we be glad,
Whereby men do this Triple honor raise,
God glory, this Land Good, and Theirselues praise.
Amongst the rest, let me, Judicious friend,
Commend thy Book, thy Book shall thee commend,
By thee, the Judgment of the World's explained,
Wherein a World of Judgment is containd,
Thy Judgment of the Worlds Judgment we see,
Fear not the Judgment of the World of thee.
The Worlds Judgment thy Book so well displai's
The Judgment of thy Book the World must praise.
Thy Book may mend the world by sins detection,
But the World cannot mend thy Booke's perfection.
Both Book and World shall surely once decay,
But both shall last unto the latter Day.
Ni frustra Augurium vani docuere parents.

A. Wilbore, Ma. Art Syd. Coll. Cant.

The Worlds Assizes.
RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, worthy, and Christian men, and brethren,
it is a received opinion in Philosophy, that the motion of the inserior Orb,
is governed by the motion of the superior. I may well compare this Chair to a
dimmy heaven, wherein the Ecclesiastical Orb of our blessed Horizon do often
move. I may like^ it to the Firmament, wherein the fixed startes being set, do
twinckle and glitter, to the admiration of most. The Orb wherein my self am
carried, is one of the lowest: yet now according to the will of God, the Primus
motor, and my worthy friends that moved, I am here in motion. In this my
motion, I desire with the Israelites to the king of Hesbon. Deuteronomy. 2.27. to
pass along the highway of my Text, turning neither to the right hand, nor to
the left: only as Michaiah said to Ahabs messengers. 2. Chron. 18.13. As the
Lord lives, what my God says, that will I speak. So say I, what my Text has
put into my hand, and the Lord shall put into my heart; the one will I touch,
the other will I teach. It may be expected by some, that mine inferior Orb
shall be carried according to the propper motion of the Primum Mobile; or that
it shall imitate the wonted motion of the Superior Orb; or since some say, its
A natura huius loci, The custom of this place, to summon the manners of this
city: that therefore mine shall wade into those abuses, wherein it self is a
stranger: I answer, No it shall not. For min own part, I say with the Prophet.
Puer sum, nescio loqui. ler. 1.6. I am a stranger here, no traveler in the
world: I know that Tortuosae viae, Crooked, craneld ways; and Malimores, Bad
and worse conditions, are nearly allied: yet how the kindred comes in, I
desire not to search the Records, least happily without desire I might loose my
self. While I was musing under the burden of my thoughts, what text to take
that behooued many: this my text met me, offering it self to me and you, and
it concerns all? It was at my choice to choose, and speak what all know: but
in my choice I choose, to speak what the most know not. I might speak to you
reverend Judges, to take heed of perverting judgment: least you euert your
selves, when your selves shall come to judgment: but I would feign suppose,
that they who know equity, will do right. I might speak to this Honorable
worthy Lord Mayor, that he would be a father to the fatherless, and defend the
cause of the widow; that he would eleuate virtue, and debelitate vice: but I
hear so much of you, that this hortatory speech I hear will be needless,
notwitstanding I hear that sin so abounds here, that unless the whippe scourg
it, the scourge is like to whip al. I might speak to the noble and learned
Clergy, my brethren; that they like John Baptist would be burning lights, and
not like Demas burnt-out lights: but this they know as well as I, and I must
strive as well as they. I might speak to the speakers at the Law, that they
with care would maintain their Clients; as their Clients at cost retain them:
but they are wise and know much, and in their wisdom cannot but know this. I
might speak to the fashion-mongers (men and women) of our age, that they would
embrace Paul's counsel. Rom 12.2. Not to fashion themselves like unto this
world: but this having been a fashion among many my predecessors heretofore,
my self am willing to leave this fashion now: I might speak to all with my
Savior. Ioh. 5.14. and so I will and do Sin no more, because each one must
die and come to judgment, All must give account of all to the Judge of al. The
Philosopher says, Primus motor mouet primum mobile, and Primum mobile caetera
omnia: the chief mouer moves the first mouable and it all the rest. Be God
almighty the first mouer: suppose me for this time and place the chief mouable,
and your selves my judicious Auditors, the bodies to be moved. Mean while God
grant my spirit of mediocritie, the voice of the Bird of Paradise, of whom I
read that she moves all to repentance to whom she sings: which if I asking
shall receive I will think this a blessed time bestowed: in defire whereof, I
crave your atte^tiue hearts to that portion of scripture, which I find thus
written.

Act. 17.31. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed.

BLessed Paul who of a Peelar became a Pillar, of an earnest persecuter. Act.
8. became a zealous Preacher. Act. 13. being guided by the spirit from city to
city to preach, in the end he came to Athens, as appears in this 17 chapter,
verse. 15. Where being, he was brought into the Street of Mars. ver. 19. and
there passing along, he stood and told them what he had observed, An altar
wherein was written, unto the unknown God. verse. 23. Whereupon Paul took
occasion to preach unto the^ The living God, declaring unto them, that he was
the framer of this worlds Architecture that he dwelt not in ha^dmade temples,
that he is not worshipped with bandie works. ver. 25. that he gives breath to
all, and appointed to every thing his season: that in him we live, and move,
and have our being, verse. 28. and therefore that we, who live, and move, and
be, should Repent, verse. 30. Because, as my text has it in this verse. 31. He
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has appointed. In which words I note five things.

1. Parts 5.
The certainety of the day, set down by a double Affidauit: first the Author,
He, that is, God. 2. The resclution, Has appointed. 2. The uncertainty of the
day, in that it is not limited, coacted, or restrained to a day definitive.
This or that day, but to a day indefinite, A day, The end of the appointment,
to Judge the world. 4. The manner, how, In righteousness. 5. The Party who,
By that man whom he has appointed. In speaking of which words, I crave this
sole favor, that all things may be taken, and not mistaken as they are spoken.

1. For the certainty, The Power of God has an appointed day for the creation
of the (...), The great world the mercy of God had it appointed day in the
redemption of man, the (...) The little world: now the justice of God must have
the appointed day for the just punishment of the unjust little world that
soiourns in the great world, for Fundamenta, The foundations of the Continent
shall be shaken, and then Blandamenta, The follies of the contained shall be
overthrown. The Apostle speaking of the certainety of this day, says. The day
of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with
the works that are therein shall be burnt up, and we must look for new
heavens, and new earth, 2. Pet. 3.10. For I do believe that at the end of the
world there shall go a great and terrible fire either hard before, or with the
coming of the Judge. But now whether this fire shall be Elementum ignis, the
element of fire in it own proper sphere, or whether all the fires on the
earth, or in the earth among the stones and minerals, or whether such a fire,
Qualem excitabit tum deus, as the almighty shall then raise: whether, I say, it
shall be all of these Coniunctim in one or any of these Deuisim severed, that I
know not And that fire shall consume this world, it shall Corpora incinerare,
terrae nascentia absumere, and in nihilum redigere: burn bodies (not all) into
ashes, consume all the vegetative things on the earth, and bring them to
nothing. Also, I look for new heavens and new earth, but how new? Quoad
formam, non quoad substantiam: New in regard of the form and fashion: not new
in respect of the matter and substance. In this I hold with Aug. Ciuit. lib.
20. cap. 16. Elementa, id est, Caelum and terram non esse abolenda, sed in
melius commutanda: figurem, id est imaginem mundi, non substantiam berituram.
That is The Elements, heaven and earth shall not be taken quite away, but
changed into better: the fashion, that is, the likeness of the world shall
perish, but not the substance therrof. Iumping with this opinion of Augustine is
that of Saint Greg. Mor. lib. 17. cap. 5. Caelum and terra per eam quam nunc
habent imaginem transeunt, sed tamen per essentiam sine fine subsistunt: caelum
igitur and terra and transit and erit; quoniam ab ea quam nunc habet specie per
ignem tergitur, and tamen natura sua seruatur, That is, Heaven and earth pass
away through that Image which they now have: but in their Being they remain
without end: therefore beauen and earth shall both not be, and be, because
from it now-shape it is scoured and made clean by fire, but the nature and
condition thereof is still continued; agreeing to that of Psalm. 101. Thou shall
change them and they shall be changed. Now that this great and dreadful day
will come, Pie credendum we must undoubtedly and holily believe. The Prophet
Malichi says, The day of the Lord will come burning like an oven. ca. 4.1. and
it is a rule among the Schoolmen, Futurum in deo aeque certum, quam aut
presens, aut praeteritum: Will, in God give as much certainty as Is the future
tence is as sure as the present tence, or preter-perfect tence: that which is
to come in God, is as certain, as what is either present, or past. Therefore
the Prophet Joel (happily having reference to this position) says, The day of
the Lord is come, for it is at hand c. 2.1. The Prophet Esaias in the 13. chapter
of his Prophecy, and Abdi in his short Prophecy, say both, It is at hand. The
Prophet Zephaniah says, It is hard by. Therefore there needs no doubt be made
of the certainty: neither is there any question of the misery. Esaias calls it a
day of trouble and ruin. cap. 22. Jeremy calls it a day of vengeance. c. 46.
Joel calls it a fearful day. c. 2. Amos calls it a dark day. c 8. Zephoniah
calls it a day of wrath. c. 1. Zephany calls it the special day c. 14. Bern.
speaking of the dreadfulnes of this day, says, Plaugent Iudaei, plangent
gentiles, Plangent Christiani, plangent ones qui magis mundum amarunt quam
deum, plangent suam culpam quam commiserunt, suam stultitiaem quam nen
corrererunt, suam gloriam quam amiserunt, suam paenam quam incorrererunt. Jews
shall weep, Gentiles shall weep, Christians shall weep, all shall weep that
loved the world, more then God. They shall lament the faults they have
committed, their folly they have not corrected, the glory that they have lost,
and the punishment that they have incurred. And indeed well may they weep,
for above they shall see the angry Judge, whom they have offended. Beneath,
hell gaping which they have deserved; Without, the world burning which they
have delighted. Within, the conscience stinging, which they have surcharged. On
the right hand their sins accusing which they have committed: on the left
hand, evil Angels tugging them; about them good Angels driving them into hell.
Therefore let me say with the Apostle, What manner of men ought we to be in
holy conversation of life. 2. Pet. 3.11. For the time is come that Judgment
must begin at Gods house. If it begin at us first, what shall be the end
of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarce be saved,
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1. Pet. 4 17. The first judgment
was in water, to cool the riotous heat of lust, that then did abound, when
Bigamie and Polygamie was suffered: but the last judgment shall be in fire, to
purge this away raining desire of gold, and heat the lukewarm charity, that
now the world being old, waxes cold Our Savior speaking of the fearfulnes of
this day, says. The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall not give her light,
the Stars shall fall from heaven, the powers of heaven shall be shaken, all
kindreds, of the earth shall mourn, and ye shall see the son of man coming
in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. Mat. 24.29. That is, the
heavenly bodies shall endure great alteration, to terrify the wicked, and be
Criers (as it were) unto them, to su^mon them before the great Tribunal. But
how the sun shall be darkened, how the moon shall not give her light, how the
stars shall fall from heaven (which really cannot be) because the least star
is so much bigger then the whole earth) and how the powers of heaven shall be
shaken: to say truth, we cannot now justly determine: let me therefore say with
that worthy Aug. Ciuit. lib 20. cap. 30. Magis tum docebit rerum experientia
quam nostra iam consequi possit intelligentia, The experience of things which
we shall see then shall teach us better then we can conceive now. But
howsoever, it shall be terrible, yea so terrible, that as Aug: spak of God,
Verius cogitatur deus quam dicitur, and verior est quam cogitatur. God is truer
thought of, then spoke of, and yet himself much truer then both. So say I of
judgments terror, it is sooner imagined then expressed, easier thought then
spoken: and yet in it self more hideous, then either imagined, expressed,
spoke, or thought. Terribele est illud iudicium, in euitabilis paeua,
intollerabile tormentum: It is a terrible judgment, a pain inevitable, a
torment intolerable: but yet Quid sit, Directly what one it is as Aug. Eucher.
c. 38 said of the diversity of the Angels Potentiality: say I of this, Dicaut
quipossint, dummodo quoth. dicunt probare valiant, Let them speak who can, so be
what they speak they can prove. This is and thus is the second coming of
Christ, and this far different from that that was In humilitate, in humilitic
like a servant, this shall be in magistate, in magistie like a king, that was in
infirmitate in infirmity like a sheep to the ssaughter: this shall be in
potestate, in power like a Lion to his prey, that was in poverty, being Infans
in praesepio, an infant in a manger, this shall be in dignity being Index in
iudicio, A judge to give sentence, that was in misericordia, in mercy to
confirm al, this shall be In iusticia, In justice to confou^d most: He was
then Homo inter homines, a man among me^, he is now Deus supra Angelos, A God
above Angels: and yet though a God, he will come like a man to judge men and
wicked Angels: there was a time when he did Pati pro peccatis, suffer for our
sins, and after a time there will be a time when yet there shall be no time, when
we shall with him as he does now Triumphare cum liberatis Triumph with freeme^
freely freed; what time he will sever us, A damnatis, from those whom his rigor
has appointed to be damned. I remember the Scriptur speaks of David, that he
was wrath with Nabal for denying him victu als at his sheepshearing, when David
was an hungered in his flight; and so Abigaile was feign to appease him. 1. Sam.
25.^
But when Jesus Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance on the^
that know him not, nor obey his Gospel. 1. These. 2.8
No Abigaile shall serve for intercession. The terror of that day cannot be
uttered, because the judges sentence shall not be altered: man while he was
living, would ever be sinning: and God after that se^te^ce will ever
bepunishing. Then shall the Archangels loud voice be heard, that voice which
cleaves the rocks, opens the graves, raises the dead, oyneth souls to
their bodies, and all In momento, In a moment, and twinkling of an eye. Then
shall the unbelievers misery come, then shall be the strict examination, the
narrow serching, and idle words accounting: then Exigetur e nobis me tempus
impensum quomedo fuit expensum. We must give account of all time allotted us
how we have bestowed it: For, Non est capillus de capite, nec momentum de
tempore de quo rationem non reddendum. There is not an hair of our heads, nor
a moment of time, for which we must not be accountable? the reason is, Cuia qui
pro frigida agnae dabit mercedem, Becuse he who for a cup of cold water will
give a reward, Pro verbo osioso statuit paenam, For an idle word has allotted
a punishment. He that created time, and was borne for us in the fulness of time;
be assured, he will judge us for our notvsed, or abased time; the greatma^ the
world, and man the little world, both have a time, and time will come that the
Great man shall have an end, and the little man, who hued in the great man shall
be iudgd at that end. When that end shall com, the secrets of al hearts shall be
disclosed; for as Musculus on Genesis says about Sodoms destruction; Quod
noctu peccatur luce diurna punitur, Sin by night committed, by day shall be
punished. Then shall it be said to a sinner, as Nathan said to David. 2. Sam.
12.12.
Thou did this secretly, but I will do it before all Israel, and before the
Sun. In this world God afflicts his chosen, and then judge how in the next
world he will toment the wicked. And as Greg: speaking of Herod's cruelty to
holy John Baptist, says; Magna crudelit as cum sacram caput fuit decollatum,
mayor cum allatum and homicidium ostentatum, adhuc mayor quia saltatrici datum
sed Maxima quia in potestatem adulterae assignatum, It was great cruelty to
behead an holy man, more to bring the head, and make boast of the murder,
greater to give it to a Dancer, but greather then all to assign it into the
hands of an Adultresse: In the end concluds it with this remarkable note; Hinc
vnusquisq colligat quid illic passuri sunt quos reprobat, si hic ua cruciat
deusquos amat By this may alisuppose how God will torture yt wicked in ye next
world who^ he hates, when he thus afflicts his chose^ in this world who^ he
loves. In this world heads to his servants falts. Job. 14.17.
In the world to come he will sift the ungod lies sins. And as Bar: in Can. ser.
15. says, Quid in Babilone tutum si in Hierosolyma fiat scrutinum? If there
be made a search in Jerusalem, what safety can be expected for Babylon. The
Papists say, if there be but two places, Heaven and hell, and Non est quis
medius locus vt possit u^ mo esse nisi cum Diabolo qui non est cum Christo.
There is none interstitial place but that he who is not with God must needs be
with ye denil. If yt every one (as the truth is.) after this life, is
imediatly, In puncto temporis. In a very instant of time gone to soys or to
pains, has reward or punishment; what then need we a Judgment day? I answer
yes, in two respects. 1. Because the body has bin a coage^t with yt Soul in
good or in evil, and yt body, as yet lies senseless in the grave, and shall
so do until yt last dome, eue^ without any feeling: now, it is meet yt as it
has bin a coactor, so it may be a copartner, that which until then it shall not
be. 2 Because God will render to every one according to ye full measure of
Mercy, or Justice; and so it is that until that Judgment day, neither the
godly shall have their full fruition, and consummation of joys, nor yt wicked of
pains their measure: wherefore to make both co^pleat and absolute, joys to the
godly, and pains to the wicked; As also yt two old friends might meet again
together to renew old acquaintance. A Judgment day must be. Gods mercy was
refused, his son Jesus misused, therefore his injuries must be revenged, his
enemies must be confounded, the wicked must together be punished; Vt tormentis
panalibus socientur qui socij fuerunt in vitijs. To associate them in torments,
who were co^panio^s in sin. Paul ye third Pope of yt name made question of
three things living, which dying, he said he should be resolved off. 1. In
sit Deus if there were a God. 2. An Annimae immortales, If souls did live
after the bodies were dead. 3 Siqui inferno, If any were in Hell? Now these
three questions will have time after the Iudgement-time to be discussed by
leisure: the one to the Athist, the other to the careless Liver; the last to
the unrepentant offender: all three to the sail of Hell, the damned persons in
Prison.

Now to this necessity of Judgment general, two things make a certainty to
every man in particular. The Author. 2 The resolution. 1 The author is God, and
that God is, Ordo naturae, natura mentis humanae, terrores conscientiae, ordo
societatis Politicae, sacrorum hominum coucensus. The wonder full decency even
of nature the nature of man's mind the terrors and stings of conscience, the
order of political society between man and man does plainly show. As Perkins
says in his Armil. aurea. Nay, as the heathen Orator said; Nulla geus tam
sera, There is no Nation so wild, no Harbarian so barbarous, but in heart will
acknowledge it; Wherefore in his Tusc. Questions, he reports of Protagoras
Abderites, that because he began his book with doubt, De dijs vero neque vt
sint, neque vt non siut dicere habeo, As concerning the Gods, I have nothing to
say, but that they may be and may not be. He was banished the city, and the
whole contry by a public Edict, and with a general consent his books were
burnt to ashes. Now this God, that is, is Magnus sine quantitate, bonus sine
qualitate, Is great without quan titie, good without quality. As Aug. says,
Whose freewil elected us, whose power created us, whose love preserved us,
whose mercy at the appointed day will crown us, if we in our allotted days
will serve him. This God is called in Latin Deus of Do, to give: Iam. 1.17.
because, Onem dat, He gives every good and perfect gift. In English he is
called God, Quasi good, yea he is goodness it self, and no good thing will
he keep from them that fear him, and serve him in holiness and
righteousness of life. This Judgment day then, is good, in respect of God and
man; In God, to show his great mercy and just judgment, to the godly and the
wicked: In man, that a crown immortal might be absolute, that the fulness of
perfection might make a perfect fulness. 2 The resolution, he not only in a kind
of intentionall determination verbally said it, that which had bin sufficient
too, for, Psalm. 33.9.
Dixit and factum est. He spoke the word and it came to pass. But more, he
has with mature deliberation resolved upon it: for my Text says: He has
appointed a day: that is, Flatly agreed upon: As if the blessed Trinity had
held a Council about it, as about the making of man. Let us make man. So, Genesis
1.26.
Let us apoint a day for Judgment. And then after yt secret heavenly
Parliament hold, the Act was published (as a revealed thing which belongs to us
and our children for ever.) That there is an appointed day of Judgment. Deuteronomy.
29.29.
Agreeing to this is that of the He. c. 9.27. Statutum est hominibus vt semel
moriantur, pastea vero iudicium. It is appointed for all men once to die, and
after that coms the Judgment. It is appointed, and therefore needs must be; nay
both appointed, and therefore shall be, Death and Judgment too. With god is no
change no alteration, no shadow of either: for, Ego dominus and non mutor. I am
the Lord and I change not, Mal. 3, 6.
Solus deus recipit immortalitatem, quia non capit mutalit atem. Only god is
imortal because only God is imutable. The heavens change and look old as does a
garment but thouart the same and thy years fail not. Psa. 102.27.
Why does ye sun guide ye day, ye moon and ye stars govern ye night? Because god
has appointed it. why does not the sea ouerflow the earth, it being so many
degrees higher, the^ ye earth, but keep it self in it bounds which it passes
not? Because God appointed it. Why have we a winter and a Summer? and not al
one season of the year? Because God has appointed it. Why do all the godly
look for a judgment day? Because god has appointed it. So we have light and
darkness, day and a night, a spring and a fall. Al because god appointed all. If
your ask me, why Jacob was predestinat before al worlds to salvation, and Esaw
hated to damnation? I answer Statuitdeus, because god appointed. If you ask me
why Saul was casheird of his Kingdom, and David inthro^ned? I answer, Statuit
Deus, God has appointed it. If you ask me, why Absolon did hang between
heaven and earth by the ruffinly hair of his head? (A destruction to give our
now such people instruction,) I answer, Statuit Deus, God had appointed it. If
you ask me, why I do, and you must look for a Judgment day? I answer with
my Text. Quia statuit Deus, Because God has appointed it. The Rainbow has
many colors, two Dominant, Fiery and Watery, the watery color remembers us of
the Deluge past, and bids us fear it no more: the Fiery aduertiseth us of the
Judgment to come, and bids us daily look for it. If you ask me why? I have
retained my Text, and what that speaks is law, Statuit Deus Because God has
appointed it.

2 The second part of my Text, is the uncertainty of the day of Judgment:
for, Quinatus ante tempus, He that was borne before time. And Qui dedit esse
tempori, Who gave a being to all time, will come, In tempore, In a fit time;
to judge us. Pro tempore, For lost time, we who are Heirs of time, when as Non
erit amplius tempus, There shall be no more time. Time it self shall be no more,
as we read. Apock. 10.6. that is, No more time of persecution, of murder, of
Sin: whereof the sixth Angel spoke. Apoc. 9.13. The time of persecution at
that time shall cease, and yet time it self shall not have cessation.
Antechrist with all Accomplices of his shall be destroyed, so there shall be no
time for hurt, nor destruction, since the destroyer himself shall be
destroyed: but, Ipsum Tempus in quantum tempus, Time in that it is time shall
suffer no destruction. In three things appears the uncertainty of the day of
Judgment. 1 The place where. 2 The manner how. 3 The time when. It is
uncertain in what place we shall be judged. It is uncertain in what manner
we shall be Judged, and it is uncertain what time the Judge will come to
Judgment. 1 The place, any particular place of Judgment, or where the Judge
will appear to Judge, is to us utterly unknown; more then that Paul speaks
of. 1. These. 4.17. Then we who live and remain, shall be caught up in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall be with him for ever: So
that the general place is the Air. In the 6. of Mat. 64. In the 13. of Mark
26. In the 21. of Luke 27. The Judge there speaking of himself at his coming,
says; That it shall be in the Clouldes of Heaven. That is, both as the
Marginall has it, and as the most understand it. Sitting upon the Clouds, as
he was taken up: which opinion is the common received opinion of the learned.
There were of the Friars, and are at this day, of opinion, that the valley
Iehosaphat, which is situate toward the Eeast, between Jerusalem and the
Mount of Oliuet, shall be the place where (say they) the throne shall be set,
and where we shall all be Judged: the proof of which opinion, they cite out
of Joel. 2. chap. 3. verse 2. where the text says, I will gather all nations,
and will bring them down into the valey Iehosaphat. The reasons moving them to
this opinion are two. 1 Because they hold Jerusalem and the places about it
adjacent, to be near the middle of the earth; and therefore being a place so
copious, so famous, most fit for the place of Judgment. 2 Because Iohosaphat
in the Original, does singnifie the Judgment of the Lord. The which opinion of
theirs, thus I answer. That for the places cituation to be about the midst
of the earth or world, that I leave to the Cosmographers to be decided,
according to their judgment in that Art and faculty. Also the words
signisication, shall cause none alteration; since they who are learned in the
Hebrewe tongue, will acknowledge no less.

But for the places quotation, they must observe, that the Text is to be
understood, either by way of allusion, alluding to the valley where God did by
a great and vnsupposed, unexpected mean at the humble paier of Iehosaphat
overcome that good Kings enemies: for the enemies fell to Civil war among
themselves, and one slew another: Moab and Amon fell upon Mount Seir, and they
every one upon the other, as we read 2. Cr. 20.23. And so this may have a
reference to that, and may fignifie the valley of destruction for the wicked.
Or else doubtless it has relation unto the word Iehosaphat, which signifies
Judgment, or pleading, or arbitrating of matters. Wherefore I auerre
conclusiuely, that it is not to be understood of the local place of
Iehosaphat, but only of Iehosaphat so termed and called, because the Judgment
then executed on the damned, shall resemble that which was upon Ichosaphats
enemies. Thus then of the place of Judgment, no man must determine, because
the Scripture does no where define: for it is a Canon, Where the Scripture
leaves none evidence, we must lend no faith: but that there shall be a place,
we must all resolve; Latet dies and locus, and timeatur omnis dies and locus,
the day and place is vnkuowue, that every day and (happily) Place too might be
feared. 2 The manner, the manner may partly be gessed, because in holy writ it
is plainly described. Saint John says, Videbunt in quempupugerunt, They shall
see him whom they, thrust through, cap. 19.37, Ergo ait Aug. vidibunt corpus
ipsum quod lancea percusserunt, and sic videbitur, a pijs and impijs, a Justice
and iniustis, a gaudentibus and plangentibus, a conficis and confusis.
Therefore says Austine, They shall see that very body which they peareed with
a Spear: and so he shall be seen of the godly and the wicked, of the just and
the unjust, of them that shall rejoice and those that shall lament, of those
that be saved and those that be confounded. The circumstances then of the
manner of the Judges coming partly shall be these five. 1 The Judge shall
Judge in the mere form of a man; yet not in the form of a mere man, since he
is, was, and will be more then man. Licet homo verus, non tamen homo merus.
this is plain. Act. 1.2. Where when be was taken up into the Clouds from his
Apostles, as they stood looking steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went; the Text
says, Two men stood by them in white apparel, which said, Ye men of Galile,
why stand ye gazing into Heaven? This Jesus which is taken up from you into
Heaven shall so come as ye bane seen him go into heaven. So, like a man he went,
and like a man he shall come. Vnde Aug. Ser. 64 De verbis De; Forma illa erit
Iudex quae sub iudie estetit, illa iudicabit quae iudicata est. That form
shall be Judge that yielded to a Judge; that shall judge, which was judged it
self. And if judgment should be only among the just and holy Ones, to them
would the Judge appear as in the form of God, (says this Docter) but because
all must be judged, just and unjust, and since it cannot be that the unjust
and wicked should see God. Talis apparebit, Iudex qualis videri possit and
abijs quos Coronaturus est, and abijs qua damnaturus est. Tract. in John cap. 5
The Judge shall so show himself as he may be seen, both of those that
shall be crowned, and those which shall be damned. For at that time he will,
Dare praemia secundum bona opera, non propter bona opera. Give rewards
according to good works, but not for good works; As may be proved. Apocal.
20. And Matthew 16.27. Also Ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 24. Manifestus veniet inter
iustos and iniustos indicaturus just, qui prius veuit occultus ab iuiustis
iudicandus unjust: He shall manifestly come among the both just and unjust,
to judge justly; who before obscurely hidden, came among the unjust to be
judged unjustly.

In the form of a Servant shall the Judge be seeene. Occulta erit forma Dei,
Occultus erit in Seruo Filius Dei, Hidden shall be the form of God, and the
Son of God in thee form of Man. The Son of man shall appear, because the
power of GOD shall make that appearance: and the Son of God shall Judge the
appearers, because he will take the form of man for the Judgment. 2 Canet
tuba, The Trumpe shall blow, that is, some admirable sign Accipitar, Shall be
received; which by divine appointment, Dabitur, Shall be ginen: and this sign
is diversely termed in the Scripture: Sometimes to be The voice of an
Archangell: sometimes The trumpet of God: sometimes The voice of the Son of
God. And verily, it may well be called a Trumpet, because God does come then
like one who is ready to wage war against his enemies: and such shall be the
virtue of it, that at the hearing thereof all shall arise. Though some, with
the Martyrs, have their bones burnt to ashes; others devoured by beasts, some
rotted in the grave, some lost in the earth, and one perhaps a thousand miles
from the other: yet these all by Gods divine power and might, shall be united
and knit together; and being the felse same bones which the creature had
before it dyed, shall receive the very same flesh, though it be denoured by
worms, and returned to dust from whence it came. Yea, and that Eaendem numero,
the same numerarie flesh, as the Logitians term it; and not Specie in shape
and likeness, as the Anabaptists falsely hold: Deum noua creare corpora: sed
his similia, That God will create new bodies, but yet like to our former. In
the 1. These. 4.6. it is said, The Lord shall descend from heaeuen with a shout,
with the voice of an Archangell, with the trumpet of God. A shout does properly
belong to mariners, who for encouragement do al shout together when they cast
forth their oars: and it should seem the Apostle alludeth to these, both as
the marginall note has it, and as Aretius on that place expounds it. The same
Aretius holds, the shoute to be the loud cry of the Angels: Lyra and Wirth,
expounds this shoute, to be the cry of the Judge calling all to judgment:
o-others think it shall be the confused cry of all the unreasonable
creatures. The voice of the Archangel, is thought by some to be The great and
general noise of the heavenly troop, that shall attend the Judge. Bucer
thinks it the hie note of the Captain of the heavenly Host: Lyra says, The
voice of Christ, commanding all to judgment, shall be vox imperatiua, the
swaying, ouercomming voice, the voice of the Archangell calling to judgment,
shall be vox executiua, The accomplishing or sinishing voice, the voice of
execution: that as the Saints shall judge the world. 1. Cor. 6.2: so when the
Lord shall cry, Arise ye dead to judgment, even that cry shall be the Echo,
(as it were) and cry of the angelical multitude. The trumpet of God, says
the Gloss, shall be the commanding all to arise. after which rising, instantly
shall be the judgment. Others think, the trumpet shall be the manifest
appearing of the Judge. Musculus thinks, it shall be some outward sign which
may be called and termed A Cry terrible and horrible, causing astonishment.
But in this scrupulositie no mortal weight can be a true Arbitrator: let me
therefore say with Aug. Hoc est in concilio dei: This is in Gods counsel. This
we know, that when the Law was given to the Israelites upon mount Synai, The
mount smoakt and trembled, and a trumpit blew. Exodus 19.18. all was to move
terror and fear: and this believe, the trumpet at the last day shall
dreadfully blow, to terrify the wicked, and comfort the godly, as also Aretius
holds. A trumpet is an instrument of vocalitie, properly used in war, and by
the call of a Trumpet (not a material one, dimentionate) shall we be called
to judgment: what time, God will go to battle with his enemies, and the
field be yeeded into his hands. Thirdly, The dead shall arise, the living
shall be changed; which change shall be in stead of death. 1. Cor. 15.51.
Fourthly, The Angels shaell gather together the elect from the four Winds: Mat.
24.31.
that is from the four quarters of the world.Fifthly, The Stars shall be dark,
either (...) indeed and truly, the Son was at the passion of our Savior, when
Far non poterat creatura videre iniuriam creatoris. The creature was ashamed
to see the injury offered to the creator, and so blushed for shame or else (...)
by reason of a great light then coming. These are the maine circumstances of
that great man's manner of coming: among great men every where so meanly
considered. The Romans had a custom, that when any offender was convicted,
they would put into the number or their names the double number of letters, the
letters were A and C. and these were put In vrnam, into some holloe thing. A
was the letter of absolution, and if the offender drew that Lot, it was a
Supersideas, he had his pardon, notwithstanding both his ofience and sentence
given on him. C. was the letter of condemnation, and if the poor prisoner drew
that; then the silly querdon was to prepare himself for execution: for then,
a Tamberlins, black tent was up, nothing to be expected but destruction. But
alas, no such A. shall be at Doomes day; when a sinner without a Savior, shall
miss the venite. Mat. 25, 34. and the too late repentant, shall will he, nil
he, draw the black C. of a lamentable He, against which time, God make us all
provided. 3. The time, the time is to us merely uncertain, Modium patefecit
tempus celare voluit: He has made known the manner, and conceiled the time.
Aug. Epist. ad Hesenchium, says. There are, Lord, which say they can make a
computation of thy coming, but yet, of the very day and hour, (whereof my
Savior speaks. Mat. 24, De die autem and horae illa nemo nouit, Of that day
and hour, knows no man,) They say indeed they can give no guess at all: for
mine own part, I say nothing but this, Id me velle scire, quod Christ us ait
neminem scire posse, I would be glad to know that, which Christ says none can
know at all. Wherefore the same father in another place gives this good
counsel, That we should not be like the idle servant to say Moram faciet
dominus meus, My Lord will defer his coming. Luke 12.45. and so begin to
eat and drink with the dunken; nor yet resemble the Thessalonians. 2. c. 2.
To give credit to every false report and tale, as if the day was now in being:
but to watch carefully, as if it were In tergo, at hand, and at our very backs
behind us; concluding thus, Nos itaque quod dominus scire noluit, libenter
nesciamus. Let us rest in willing ignorance, where the Lord would have us be in
Nescience, and be content not to understand, what God would have no man to
know. But as in the rules of Physic, a disease is gessed by the Symptoms, so
in this great secret of heaven we may aim at it a lofe off, and deem it to be
nigh: but yet cannot tell, being aided only by the Signs, to divine when.
John Bap. was a Prodromus, a forerunner of our Savior and preached repentance.
Mat. 3.2. Thirdly, So there be certain signs which are Prodromi, Preparers of
the way, and bring tidings of Judgments coming; which teach us that lesson of
our Savior; Be ye therefore ready, Mat, 24, 44
for in such an hour as you think not, will the son of man come. Now among
these signs, I note three sorts. 1. Some going long before ye day of iugdment,
of which sort are these. First, The preaching of the Gospel throughout all the
world among al nations. 2. Mat. 24, 14.
The great security and gluttony, as was in the days of Noah. Mat. 24.38.
Such did go before the judgment of water, and such shall go before the
judgment of fire, 3. The perelous times when me^ shall depart from the faith,
and give heed to spirits of error, and doctrine of devils. 4. 1. Tim. 4.^
The disastrous disorder in men's conversation, Pride, covetousness, cursing,
disobedience, truce breaking, with a bedroule more reckoned up by Paul. 5. 2.
Tim. 3, 1
The disclosing of the man an of sin, Antichrist, the Popish son of
perdition. 6. 2. These. 2, 3
The persecution of the godly, the Church when men shall think they do God
good seruince in killing them. John 16.2. Whereupon the Poet says, Sanguine
fundata est ecclesia sanguine saepit: sanguine succreuit, sanguine fiuis erit,
The foundation, beginning, increase of the Church was with blood, and with
blood shall the end be. 7. Charity shall be cold, And the love of many shall
abate. Mat. 24.12. which thing being but seriously thought on, who would not
think, but either we lived under the frozen Zone, or that there was a
continual winter, in men's hearts. Secondly, there are signs going hard before
the day of judgment, as first, The Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon, both
darkened scarce yielding light. Mar. 13.24. where in I say with Hemingius in his
Syntagma, Quicquid accidit, Whatsoever coms to pass though a naturalist may
give a reason thereof; yet if it be extraordinary, as Ecclipses, Inundations,
Tempests, and the like, it is Portentum, foredoometh some thing. Secondly, The
falling of the Stars, which is meant not really, but supposedly, as men shall
imagine: meaning that al creatures severally and jointly, shall be Praecones,
Cryars to summon us before that horrid seat of judgment. Thirdly, In the
earth shall be tumultuous quaking, on the earth nation shall rise up against
nation, about the earth strange rumors of wars, plagues, diseases, famins,
persecutions. Luke 21.10. In the Sea strange breakings out and the
ouerflowings, that which our late woeful experience can too truly testify. In
the Air dreadful sights, as were over Jerusalem upon her imminent
destruction, whereof Josephus writes. Fourthly, The calling of the Jews, which
Paulo proves by three reasons that it shall be. Romans 3. but how soon, he
alone knows that knows all. Thirdly, There are signs going with the day of
judgment. 1. The sign of the Son of man. 2. The lame^tations of the Sons of
men, All kindreds of the earth shall mourn, then shaell the Son of man come
to indge, and the Angels be sent out to gather. Mat, 24.30. It is doubted
among writers, what this Sign of the Son of man shall be. Calvin seems to
hold it to be the glory, and majesty, and power of Christ, giving notice as
it were of his coming. Vt caele sti potentiae praeditus, quae si sign in
sublime erecte, ad se conuertat totius muldi intuitum. That being furnished
with heavenly power he might set the whole world a looking at him, as it were
with an elected sign on high. Many hold it to be the very body of Christ,
retaining the wounds of his passion, in his hands, feet, and side; as Musculus
cites the opinion. Theophilact on the 24 of Matthew, holds this sign, to be the
sign of the Cross. Qua apparebit in caelo suprae solemn fulgens adarguendos
Iudaeos: which shall appear in heaven shining above the sun to reprehend the
Jews and be a Trophe, and kingly Ensine. This is likewise the opinion of
Chrysostom Hom. 77. on Matthew. Signum filij hominis erit signum Crucis, (non
crux lignea in quam passus dominus, sed Lux in dominum Crucis) sole
splendidiori: The sign of the son of man shall be the sign of the Cross,
brighter then the Sun: for the Sun shall be dakened, but the cross shall
appear to abash the impndencie of the wicked, says this golden mouthed
father. Hier. in Mat. 24. says, We understand the sign of the cross, by the
sign of the Son of man, that the Jews may see him whom they thrust through:
as Zachar. speaks. cap. 12.10. A worthy writer has this comparison, As a king
entering 2 city, goes before the army, and has his Banners and Vexilla
regalia, Kingly flagges carried before him: So the Lord of heaven, the King of
kings, descending from the heaven of heavens, does go before his host of
Angels, and Archangels; who carrying before the sign of the Cross, as a
standard of triumph: will relate to wretched men the coming of the heavenly
King on earth to judge the world. Now among those peroursarie signs, they are
all expired but these two, The preaching of the Gospel through out all the
world. Mat. 24. And the calling of the Jews Romans 2. throughout the whole chap.
1 As for the preaching of the Gospel, if by all the world is meant (by the
figure Sinecdoche) the most parts of the world; or the Jews and Gentiles, the
whole world being into them two divided, as Master Calvin understands it: then
is the signealso expired, as he auerreth; for so it has been. 2. And for the
calling of the Jews though as yet it is not, (for there must not be a calling
peculiar of one particular, Jew, or a few Jews, but a general calling of them
all) nevertheless how soon it shall be Man knows not: but that (they being
in number so many, in places so dispersed, in religion so backward) as yet they
are not, all do grant. Howsoever these signs being in a manner all
fulfilled; they rub our dull memory of the end of all things at hand, to be
expected. Saint Hier. cites 15 signs out of the old Rabbis that should go
hard before the day of judgment, all which Scholast. Hist. says that Hierome
found in the Annalibus libris Hebreorum: and these signs in number 15. are to
be expired in 15 days before the worldslast expiratio^; the breathing out the
last gasp of the last day. 1. The first day, the Sea shall raise it self 40
cupits higher then the mou^tains, standing like a wall in it own place. 2. The
seond day it shall so much go again into it self, that it shall scarce be seen.
3. The 3 day, the habitants of the Sea, fishes shall appear above the waters
bellowing out, roaring and crying even to hearten. 4. The fourth day, the sea
and all waters shall burn, 5 The fifth day, the trees and herbs shall have a
bloody deawe. 6. The sixth day, All edifices, and buildings shall fall. 7. The
seventh day, there shall be a general rupture of the rocks in pieces 8. The
eight day, the whole earth shall quake. 9. The ninth day, the ground shall be
made plain and level. 10. The tenth day, men shall go out of caves and dens
of the earth like mad men, and not able to speak one to another. 11. The
eleauenth day, the bones of the dead shall arise, and be over their graves. 12.
The twelfth day, the Stars shall fall from heaven, to the judgment of many 13.
The thirteenth day, the living men shall die, that they may rise with y dead.
14. The fourteenth day, heaven and earth shall burn. 15. The fifteenth day,
there shall be a new heau, and new earth, and all me^ shall arise. I quote not
these as though I did, or would have you believe those Rabbis from whom Hier.
made this relation; both because the 13. is false, as also because we have
Scripture for the certainty but of some of them, and for the order of none of
them: Only to tell you that no Adamantine stony heart, can but tremble at the
consideration of these things and to teachyou with care and conscience to
prepare against the ensuing time of death and judgment: for it you be ready
against death comes, you shall be happy when judgment comes. Every man's
deaths day is his particular judgment day, and Quocunque ceciderit arbor ibi
erit Eccles. 2.3. As the tree falls, so it lies: mankind resembles crecs
some cut down in their spring, some in their full grouth, some when they are
dead. So is man, some die in youth, some in middle age, some in old age: and as
the Axe, death, cuts down the tree. Man, as the tree falls, so it lies: as
death does lean us so shall judgment find us, and as judgment finds us so
shall sentence pasle upon us. Qualis exieris ex hac vita, talis redderis
futurae, Such as a man goes out of this life, such shall he become at the
future life. God has hidden fromvs this time of the last judgment in diverse
respects, 1. To try our faith and patience, to possess our souls therewith.
Lu. 21.19. vincit quipaetitur. 2. To have us ever ready. 3. That the wicked
might be without excuse. Mat, 24, 44
4. Romans 2.5
To bridle curiosity not to search into secret things which belong to the Lord
our God. In the 1. Deuteronomy. 29, 29
of the Acts and 7 ve. the disciples were told, It was not for them to know
the times and seasons, which the father has put into his own power: and if we
growinquisitiue, Moses tells us, The things reucaled belong to us. Our Savior
himsel speaking of the judgment day, says; Mat. 24.
But of that day and hour know eth no man, no not the Angels of heaven, save
the father only: what then needs man grieve to be ignorant, when the blessed
Angels are content not to know it? yea more, Jesus the Son of God, was
content to be nescient for our sakes; In quantum homo, in that he was man. Some
say, he knew it, even Quatenus homo, as he was Man: but not Eatenus, to reveal
it to men. Some have boasted of revelations, and by the^ to set down
desinitiuely a certain day of judgment; some by the Astrological aspects of
stars: some by Arithmetical supputario^s of numbers would divine the time of
the last time, and al salse, to seduce the simple. Of which sorts of people, I
may say as Cato said of the Soothsayers of his time: I wonder that they do
not laugh, when they meet each other in the streets. There were diverse of the
learned in times past; who held that as the walls in Jericho fell down the
feue^th day after they were co^pasled about with blowing of tru^pets, and
shouting of the children of Israel, as we read. Ios 6.20. So the balding of
this world, after those 6 great days whereof one is to the Lord as a 1000. Pet.
3.8
years, and a 1000. years as one day, shall fall: and the^ shall be that
continual sabbath, when al times and seasons shall meet together in
conjunction, whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks. ca. 66.23. Theold (Thadalmost
said the idle Prophecy of Elias falsely shrouded under his name in the Jews
Thalmuld) is much tossed and haled by many that the world shall last 6000.
years, 2000. vacui before the Law, 2000: under the Law, and 2000. under the
Gospel. The strength of their weak conjecture is. 1 As in six days the Lord
made heaven, earth, and all that therein is, so in 6000. years the Lord shall
govern this world, being subject to generation and corruption: and as the
seventh day he rested, so in the 7000. shall he (having gatheredtogether his
Church by the preaching 'of his word) bring all to everlasting rest and peace.
2. As the Sabbath was instituted in the evening of the sixth day. So by this
Sabbath, being understood the last Sabbath, in the end of the last 2000. years
or a little before, shall come the heavenly Sabbath, when all shall rest. 3. As
the six first Fathers, Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Malaltel, Gared, are dead,
and Enoch, the seventh from Adam, was translated into Heaven alive, and saw
no death: So for the space of 6000. years, the world, and death in the world
shall be and in the 7000. shall be blessedness and immortality. To show the
error of this Prophecy, in false computation of years, it will more trouble
your Honorable and judicious cares, then edify your hearts; only thus much,
know that there were before the Law above two thousand and five hundred years,
and under the Law sewer then two thousand. Besides this, the opinion wants a
grou^dworke: for it has no Scripture for Evidence, now where that foundation
fails, there the building falls.

But, what shall be under the Gospel, we shall not know until the Audit day
come: at what time, every Man's bill of accounts shall be put in by appointment
of the Creator of Time, and wages (God make us meanwhile good servants) given
in particular to all. Some have supposed, that because Christ lived upon the
earth 32. years and some six months: that therefore the Time under the Gospel
shall be so long: for, say they, The Church has a relation to Christ, and the
body of the one, a type of the other. So then, as the natural body tinued on
earth 32. years, so shall the mistical body; the Gospel, the Church we who
are his members: provided still, that since at the end of these years, say
they, shall be the everlasting Iubiiee of our souls; that in the Interim, every
one of these years have a relation to the Mosaicall Iubile, that after so many
fi^^es be expired, the end shall come. But this being but opinion, and the
opinion of some, I leave it in have to your reverend opinions now, and to
beescanned by the opinions of all at leisure hereafter: only desiring you to
consider with me thus much, That all ages of man are limited to a certain
number of years, except the last part of old age.

Infancy is reckoned to hold until the third or fourth year, Childhoode
until ten years, Pubertie unto e^ighteene, youth unto five and twenty,
Courage until thirty five, or forty years, Constant age unto fifty,
lu^pish age until 65 only decrepit crookedage hathno time of yers presixt, but
even to last until the last, and the last gasp, be it sooner or farther off,
to be the Stage, post or bound of tha. So likewise this last age of the world
cannot be determined, until by the Determiners appointment we see a certain
determination. In the mean time, let us redeem the time, considering the
time; Let us redeem the time or euilnes of the time, with the goodness of our
lives. Let us take his counsel who gave the best council, even council for
our souls. To watch and pray least that day come upon us unawares and find us
unprovided. Consider at that day what a Judge we shall see, afrowning Judge, he
that damned the poor servant, Mat. 25.28. for hiding his Talent, and bringing
him only his own without inerest. He that damned the poor soul, Mat.
22.13. for coming to the marriage feast without his wedding garment. He that
damned the five foolish virgins, Mat. 25.12. for not coming iumpe at the hour;
and final threatens to dame all those that work iniquite. Mat. 13.41. Do
not we read how he cast out Adam, the first man, for eating an apple? Drowned
the old world wholly, for wicked imaginations, al but Noah and his family,
saved by a seely Arc of pine-trees? Rejected Saul and cast him out of his
Kingdom for sparig the Amalekites? Punished David, a man otherwise after his
own heart, with plagues, and his rebellious son; for the committed acts of
adultery and murder? Threw the Angels out of heaven. That light as Austine
thinks, which Moses speaks of in the first of Genesis? Turned Lots wife into a
pillar of Salt? And then, Qui Angelis, and pijs non pepercit, He who neither
sparde the Angels, nor good men, how shall we wretched Sinners look to
escape? It is good for us to think upon these things, and to consider that Our
redemption draws nigher now, then when we first believed. Romans 13.11. For if
Paul held those the last days wherein he lived, who lived so many years
since, even but 37. years after Christ's Passion; and beheaded in the 14.
yoeere of Nero, what may we think of ours? The great Papist Bellarmine affirms
that we have not 400. to come: but be it, we had 4000. to the worlds end, what
is that to us? The Psalmist says; Our daeyes are but threescore years and
ten: and if they be of strength, fourscore years, and if so, all is but
labor and sorrow, cut off and we soon gone. Psalm. 90 10. And Hier. says, Sin
amplius vixerimus, If we live above 80. years it is no life to be called, but
a death rather. Now when we die, the world is at an end with us, we go to the
house of our age, and come forth no more to tell any tales. Wherefore, Jesus
make us ready against death comes, and then Mercy will make us happy when
judgment coms. The very period of the Judgment time, some say, shall be at
midnight. Quia illahora Angelus Egyptum deuastauit, eademque hora electos suos
de mundo liberabt, Because in that hour, say they, the Angel did slay the
Firstborn in Egypt; and that in that hour will he deliver his elect from
Egypt of this world. Some say, Econtra, The judgment time shall be in the day,
either because the Prophets do call it, The day of the Lord; Or else because
that night if the time of night, shall be as bright as the day. Others say,
whose opinion Isodore cites, that, The general Resurrection shall be in the
same night, wherein our Savior made his Resurrection: that is, On Easer even,
a the feast of the Pasouer; and for that cause, says he, many in the
Primitive Church of the faithful, did watch that whole night, as expecting the
Judges coming, if we may beleene this Author. But these men I answer, first
with that worthy father; Haec est fidei regnla dixit Christus, dixit Apostulus,
This is the rule of Faith, to say; Thus said Christ, thus the Apostle. Now this
is more then Christ or his Apostles said, and so more then you or I must
believe.

Next, for that they speak of the Night time, I answer, either with Aug. It
shall be, Nocte rerum, In the niht of the knowledge of actions; Non temporum, Not
in the night seasn of time. Or else I say with he meaning of the Text, He shall
come in the night, that is, Suddenly, unexpected, when no man so much as
dreameth on his then coming: and as in the night things are done that men know
nor, so that time shall be when men think not. This is sure, whenever it
shall be A Trumpe shall blow, Inerrorem, To terrify: As Theophilact in Mat.
24 ait; And a shrill cry shall be so loud, that All Souls in Heaven and
Hell, and bodies in the grave shall hear, and at the hearing thereof appear
before the Judge. Who as Beda in cap. 21. Lucae, says; Ea forma electis
apparebit, qua in monte apparuit, reprobis vero in ca forma qua in Cruce
pependit, Sall appear to his chosen in that form wherein he appeared to
Peter, lames, and John on the mountain, that is, gloriousl, his face and
clothes glistering. Mat. 17.2. But to the reprobate he shall appear in that
form and shape which he had, when he hanged on the Cross. Let us then who
desire and hope for salvation, work it by faith, and serve God here, that that
blessed day may be welcome to us hereafter, and how God will be served. Old
Hier. tells you, It will be better by Aduerbs then by Verbs. Videat quisque vt
bonum opus, been and bona intention faciat; quia non bonum facere, sed been
facere laudabile est, non enim in eo quod facimus, sed quod been facimus. Let
every one, says he do good works well, and with a good mind, for the praise
is, not in the doing good, but in the doing well. Example be the Pharisie, he
did good: I fast twisea week, I give tithes of all I possess. I am no
Extortioner, unjust, adulterer. Lu. 18.2. But he did not well, for he wanted a
good intention, which he had not, and waned not a proud heart, which he had.
Wherefore he said, Not like this Publican. Ver. 2. And Christ said, Not
justified. Verse. 14. Thus all unregenerate persons may do Bonum, Good: but not
Bne, Well: they cannot do good well, because they have not in the sight of God
a good will: the person before God is not plausible, because be wants Faith:
nor the work to GOD acceptable, since it wants not sin, What is not of Fath
is sin, Romans 14.23. 3. The end, to judge the world, is the third part of
my text, and this third part is taken in five sneses. First, for all creatures
in the world. Secondly, for all mankind. Thirdly, for the elect. Fourthly, for
the reprobates. Fifthly, for the desires of the world, as lusts of the yes,
desire of the heart, pride of life: and in the second senese, for all mankind
is world, in my text properly taken: for God shall judge all mankind, good
and badde, and bring them all to judgment. In the twentieth Chapter of the
Revelation and twelfth verse, Saint John saw the dead both great and small
stand before God for their iudgeent: and the books were opened, and euory one
was judged acording to the things written in those books: and the Sea gave up
her dead and death and hell gave up his dead.

A question is here moved, how the damned souls in hell, and the Devils the
fallen Angels shall be judged at the last day, that are judged already at this
day?

Solu. I answer, that in respect of condemnation they shall not at the last day
be judged; seeing they before hand are condemned by Gods eternal decree, by
his word, by their own consciences: but in regard of aggrauation they shall be
judged, because their pains shall be increased, and themselves strictly looked
unto, for hurting the godly any more. In this world Peter was sitted, and Job
was wounded: in the next world they are and shall be blessed: and the blessed
shall be crowned, crowned with a crown of immortality, white array, Apoc. 3.5.
And thus much by the way let me tell you, as I pass along this third part of
my text: that White shall be the last apparel that we shall lastly wear, it
shall be the last wear which we shall wear, and it will wear lastingly: even
so long as this mortal shall wear immortality, after this mortal has put on
immortality.

White is a color betokening purite, and so the fitter color for Heaven,
where als is Purity. It is the color which we shall have in Heaen, where no
impure, nor unclean thing is. Ephe. 5.5. This white was the color wherewith
Christ was mocked, and this where shall be the color wherewith we shall be
crowned. White was a color wherewith Christ was clad when he was in misery
Luke 23.15. And white shall be that color, wherewith we shall be clothed
when we are in majesty.

In the 1. of John, chap. 3. ver. 2. It is said, We shall be like unto him:
that is, as Calvin says, Corpus nosrum, humile reddet conform corpori suo
glorioso, He shall make our clay bodies like his gloriou body. And in the 17.
of Mat ver. 2. the Text says, When he ea transfigured his face didshine like
the Son, and his clothes were as white as the light. So he is white, and we
shall be white.

Now to this great Judgment, (to which we must come, when our corruptible
shall have on this incoruptible white) there are three Apparators that do
summon the World, as my text has it: Us, I say, Mankind who live in the world.
1. Infirmitas paenalis, Infirmity penal. 2 Senectus temporalis, Age
temporary. 3 Mors ineuitabilis, Death inevitable. And these three sammon all
to Judgment, because all are sublunary, and subject to corruption: all had a
beginning, ad must have an ending, even ended by him, by whom they were
begun: him I say, That has appointed a day in which he will Judge the
World. The first of these Apparators does threaten, the second does prosecute,
the third does produce. Infirmity threatens misery, Age does prosecute
calamity: and Death does bring us with him into the High Commission Court of
Iudicium speciale, Our particular Judgment, before the Judge of the World, to
answer for iniquity, where if our Lawyers be not good, the Cause will go
against us.

We see in these days that booke-cases alter, and what is Law before one
Judge, is ouerruled by another: but sure I am that what is Law in this world,
shall not be Law in the world to come. Else would I deem no people sooner
saved then Lawyers, because they who are good and conscionable Lawyers, (as we
have diverse) such as will talk for their Clyents now; I suppose they would
plead harder for themselves then. 1. Infirmity does summon us, for that is a
punishment for the first sin, (which whether it was Lust, as many of the old
writers held it out of Genesis 6.2. or whether it was ignorance as sme say: or
whether Pride, to have an equalizing of themselves with God, as Hierome,
Gregory Nazianzene prove, and Augustine Tract in Job. 49. affirms) that I
leave because my text does not find it. And this infirmity is, partly in the
soul, which delights not in heavenly things as it should; but in earthly
things as it should not: partly in the body, subject to hunger, cld,
nakedness: and as Job says: Man borne of a woman has but a short time to
live, and is full of miseries. Job. 14.1. For befides miseries natural, of
which as Gallen says, there are three hundred; as yes sbiect to blindness,
bleerednesse, thickness: Ears to deafness, impostumes, foulness: Mouth
and tongue to cankers, toothache, dumbness: Head to rewmes, megrims giddines:
Throat to stuffings, stranglings hoarcenes: hands and legs to palsies, gowtes,
feeblenes: there are also miseries accidental, imprisonings, venummings perils
by fire, waters, cattle, men. These all are miseries, and all these miseries
are all messengers; even Remembrancers to put us in mind of the judgment day
at hand: for man's miseries are like Jobs bad tidings, chap. 1.23. the end of ne
evil message was the beginning of another. 2. Age does cite us that when we
see our hairs gray, our bodies bend, our eyes dim all decline; we cannot
choose but think of our end at hand unless, Nolumus agnoscere quod igno.
norare uon possumus, We will not know what we cannot but know. The very
passing by graves, the vewing of Monuments, (fading memories, for monuments and
all must dye) the sleeping of Nature, the impayring of strength: these things,
me thinks, being cnsidered, should teach us to remember that, which will close
up our eyes, stop up our breath, lay us in a companilesse bed, a dark
narrow six foot grae. 3 Death (this Vltimum terribilium, Last of all terrible
things, as Aristotle calls it) does serve a certain uncertain Summon upon us
for Judgment, since after the one, instantly comes the other, and there is no
purging third place, as the Papists vainly, vilely salsely hold. Dives dyed
and was in Hell in torments, Lazarus dyed, an was carried into Abraham's bosom.
Duo sunt habitacula, in igne aeterno, in regno aeterno, and non est quis medins
Locus vt possit nemo esse nisi cum Diabalo, qui non est cum Christo, There Is but
two places, says Augustine in the everlasting kingdom and in eternal fire,
and there is no third place, that he who is not with God, must needs be with
the devil.

Many things there are that put us in mind of death, and death puts in mind
of judgment: and when Mors fecit quod potuit, death has done what must be;
Indicium faciet quod erit: Judgment will perform what shall be. One faith,
God will one day ask us all at the last day three questions. 1. Qui. 2.
Qnales. 3. Quanti. What we are by creation, what by continuation, how we have
profited. Suppose the Almighty examine any of us here upon these
interrogatories, we cannot but answer Ad idem directly to the quesion, for it
is folly to lie to him, who knows better then we. 1. Well then for our
creation, we will confess that we are Ad imaginem dei facti; Vessels (take
heeue we make not our selves vassels) made after his own image. 2. If we be
asked, what we are by continuation: why that the Devil without (who fees our
actions, hearts, our counsels knows our very thoughts. Quatenus animus externis
se prodit sigus. As our mind bewraies it self by outward signs, as P. Mat.
in 1. Sam. says: who shall Astare iudicio, be by the Lord at judgment, as one
says, and whom Augu. brings in pleading his indictment against us, thus, These
sinners, O just judge are thine, Per gratiam, through grace in which they were
made, but mine Per culpam through sin, by which they are marde: thine as they
were framed, mine as they are fowled: thine in mercy, mine in justice; thine
by thy death, mine by their life, etc. can tell: and our conscience within,
(which is as a thousand witnesses) can testify. 3. But when he comes to
Quantum profecimus, How much we have profited, though with that idle servant
Luke 19.22. Ex ore nostro, Out of our own mouth he might judge us, ye out of
his mercy fraught with justice, he goes to his own books, searches the
records, there he ways our sins and Christ's merits together in a balance,
to see how our faith can cacth hold to turn the scales. I pray God therefore
we may live in this world like just men: for they live like Paul, and Paul
lived by the Faith of the Son of God. Gal. 2.20. So if we live like just
men, we shall have the rewards of just men; even the kingdom of heaven, where
God and his Son is, and whethe God and his Son Jesus send us all. A
question more curious then needful is moved by some about this day of
judgment: to wit, whether the definitive sentence shall go and pasle on us
Mentally, or Vocaly; that is, whether it shall be only in men's minds,
hearts, and consciences: or whether we shall all be called name by name? It
should seem Augustine thought it to be Vocal, for De ciuit. liber 20. cap.
1. Circa medium capitis, He has these words. Per quot dies tendatur iudicium
hoc, incertum est, sed Scripturarum more sanctarum diem poni solere pro tempre,
nemo qui illas litter as quamlibet negligenter, ligerit, nescit: How many days
that judgment time shall hold, it is uncertain; but its the custme of the
Scripture to put a day for the length of time, and none have been so little
conversant in the Scriptures, but know this: Had Augustine thought it should be
mental, he need not have spoken of Days, for it would have a short cut, and
be soon dispatched. On the other side, Some supposeit shall be Mental only,
and they bring the not Canonical Scripture for proof, Wisedeme cap. 4. ver.
19. Without a voice he shall burst them Others hold, that the Sentence of
judgment shall be both Mental and Vocal; because the Judge shall judge both
as God and man: therefore that his judgment shall be both after a divine and
an human manner. But for these opinion, although I rater think with the
last: yet I say, Of secret things which belong to the creator, there can be no
sure determination by the creature. Thus I pray, O Lord increase our faith tell
our death, so shall we be sure to be Christ's when we are dead, and then shall
we not care whether the judgment be vocal, or mental, ne or both. Some are
of opinion, that so many men shall be saved; as diuelsfell: Some that so many
shall be saved, as Angels stood. A third sort say, That there shall be in
heaven two walls, the one of Angels, the other of men, and that the ruin of the
Angels shall be restored with Virgins, the other walls shall have so many Saints
to make up that, as there are both Angels and Virgins. But these uncertain
opinions of men, I leave to the future trial of such holy men, as shall enjoy
blessedness there, where they shall truly judge of these opinions: In the
mean time my Quaere is, whether the number of the Angels that stood, or the
devils that fell, be the greater. Of the Angels that stood, some think they
are more in number, now remaining, then all the material things created: and the
Prophet speaking of them, sets down no determinate number of them, but they are
thousand thousands, and ten thousand thousands. Deuteronomy. 7.10. that is, they are
innumerable, Quoad nos, in respect of us. As for the devils that fell, though
with Bucanus in his book of Angels, I suppose that there is Paene
innnmerabilis numerus, Almost a number without number, not to be numbered: yet I
believe that more stood by the mercy of God, then were suffired to fall in his
justice: only what I think in this to be true, I know not; This I know, if
that the redeemer of our souls has written all our here-names in the
Cataloque of the holy ones that shall be saved, it will not hurt us, though we
know not the number of them that shall be sued: true faith will assure us of the
one now, and bring us assuredly where we shall know the other hereafter, 4 The
fourth part of my text, is the manner how we shall be judged: set down to be
In righteousness: for the goodness of the upright Judge, may be a warrant to
us for righteousness in judgment. Righteousness in God is De essentia, A part
of his essence, nay it is God: for Quicquid est in deo deus est, Whatsocuer is
in God is God: therefore to have him give Rectum in dicium, right judgment, it
is no doubt David says, He is inst in all his ways, and righteous in all his
works: and according to a work of righteousness he will judge the world:
therefore he says, Psa. 35. Judge, me according to ty righteousness, True
justice is Suum cuique tribuere. To give every one his own, says the
Philosopher: and so will God, render to cuery one according to their works, be
they good or evil. Among many petty Judges, Ignorantia legis, the ignorance
of the law makes a default in judgment. But our Judge was the lawgiuer
himself, and therefore there needs no writ of error be sued out among all
Judges Ignoratia facti, the ignorance of the fact for want of true Evidence may
produce a wrong sentence: but this Judge is Serntator cordium, The searcher of
all hearts, he knows al thoughts, as the Psalmist says: Yea, knows what
we will do before it is done, and therefore he must needs judge aright when
it is done. This Judge who shall judge us, was once iudgd himself: and we who
one day must be judged, do at this day often in dge others, but yet others and
our selves shall be once judged by him, who will one day be judge of all: yea,
and that in righteousnesle, as himself was not judged. Pilate the judge
yielded that he found no fault in him at all, and yet against all right, with
more wrong he gave sentence upon him: the tenor whereof the Evangelists have
concealed, yet in an old writer, I find it thus recorded, Jesus Nazari,
seductor populi, quem gens tua namprobauit regem, propter contentum Caesareae
magistatis, praecipio te primum, flagellari secundum principum statuta, deinde
in cruce ileuari: I lictor, expedi crusom: Jesus of Nazareth, a seducer of the
people, one whom thine own nation have allowed King: for contempt of the
Majesty of Caesar: I do command that according to the Laws of Princes, Thou
be first whipped and then lifted up to the Cross: Go Sergeant prepare the
Gibbet. Thus dealt Pilate with him, in whose mouth was found no guile: then
what shall become of us, in whom is found so much? For if the just man fall
seven times a day. Pro. 24.16. How shall they escape whose life is continual
fall? Howsoever, my text says, we shall be judged in righteousness, we shall
have our due, and bear but our own burden; and yet that without help, God
knows is too heavy. Were the Judges in the world; like the Judge of the
world, to judge all in righteousness, oh it were well: Socrates laughed because
he saw great thieves hang up little the^ues but we may grieve to see poor
flies entangled, where Bees pasle through without any stoppage; the best is
this, All are but Stewards, and al must be countable. Habent supremi iudices
superiorem iudicem. Chief Judges shall have the chief Judge to judge the^, if
they for favor do not give true judgment: If in a country thou see the
oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not
astonished at the matter, for he that is higher then the highest regards, and
there be higher then they. Eccl. 5.7. Si tanta in terris haberetur fides,
quanta in caelis exspectatur merces, If men had so much faith on earth, as they
expect teward with the son of man in heaven, good Lord what a world should we
have? But farth of late has betaken it self to it wings, and is fled from
peoples hearts; godliness is become as a vagrant, gees up and down, from town
to town, from party to party for want of employment: the intertainment
thereof is a passeport, whipped away from the earth, and sent home to heaven, the
place where it was borne. Religion is fixed in the sphere of no man's heart,
there is none that does good, no not one, it is now Plannet-like sometimes
nigher, sometimes farther off. and he who gives it o^be-rome. This month
discards it, the month following: we have so many temporizers, that few shall
be eternized: so many on earth, that few in heaven. So much dissimulation that
Momus his wish to Jupiter (as the Poets faint) to have a glaslewindow in men's
breasts, to diseerne between their hearts, and their words, would be a Boon to
the world. So little fidelity, that an honest plain dealing man, is Animal
rarum, like a nightrauen, seldom seen: so that we may instly with Diogines
take a candle and a lantern at noone day, and say Quae, to hommem I seek a
man. We live in an age, I cannot say the least (God be thanked, it is the last)
but I may too truly say the worst: and as the Cynicke said of an Italian, Take
a light and seek cuerie hole, and not find a worse; so say I of our times.
Take pains and search all stories, and not find the like. Hence I infer
that these be the last days and farthest times of our Saviors coming: that
the appointed day is at our very heels, because now our good friends doubt may
be easily resolved, when the Son of man shall come, shall he find faith on the
earth. Luke 18.8. Yea. doubtless some, and but a little, and yet some, else
the world could not stand. For I dare say, we have some saithfull Eliahs that
obtain rain in time of need: some holy Moses, that stand in the gap of Gods
wrath, to keep his judge me^ts from us: some blessed Abraham's that plead with
God, even the case of this city, else I believe that the walls hereof had been
down long ere this. Prevention is the heart of policy, and let us learn
Christian policy to prevent, the policy shall be that which Peter teaches
us, To amend our lines. Act. 2.38. Every one to mend one: the prevention
will-be this, we shall b^ nesther punished with the wicked, nor shall we perish
with the wicked. Not pnnished; My people be not partakers of her sins, least
you bear a part of her plagues. Apoc. 18.4. Not perish He that turns to the
Lord, his souleishall live. Ezech 18. Let us then who desire to escape both
punishing and perishing too, look to all Christ tells us, ignorance shall
excuse no man: the servant gave his master none answer at his reture the text
ait, and the reason is given by Chri, Vt sciamus in die inditij cessare
excusationem peccati. To give us to understand that at the day of judgment
none excuse will sarue the turn: only my text tells us, we shall be judged in
righteousness, and right is no wrong. In righteousness God created man, in
righteousness created man should live, in righteousness living man should die,
and in righteousness living and dead menshal be judged, Gifts blind the eyes
of the wise, but our Judge will not be bribed: Judges may be partial to
parties but God is no accepter of persons: Judges may be moved with pity, but
our now Jesus will be then Iudex. A judge, all for justice; In isto tantum
seculo misericors est. Hier. in 105 Psalm, Only in this world God is
merciful, in the next world mercy has no sear, pity has no plea. Let all
then take heed how they live in this interstiticall time before judgment,
least being found gu^tie, when they shall be conuented before the great Judge
at the great Assise of the world: they have that dismail Mittimns made, of Ite,
to their distressed souls from the hands of him who will judge in
righteousness.

5. The sift part of my text, is the party, who must judge us Your honorable,
worshipful and religious patience has afforded me eyes and ears in this more
then two houtes travel through the way of my tex^: I beseech you let not now
my prolixitie make you think ouerlong the time, to stay until the end of my
tourney: that you may hear the whole discourse; for thast a pace, and press
toward the mark. It any then ask me, who this judge shall be? who the man
is, that is appointed to judge the world? I answer, It is the man Jesus Christ
God and man, who died for man to judge man. For he that was God was borne upon
the earth as man for us, he that was borne upon the earth as man for us,
wrought upon the earth as God for us; he who wrought upon the earth as God for
us, died upon the eresle as man for us, and he who died upon the crosle as man
for us, rose again the third day as God for us to make us the adopted sons of
his father? Now he that was thus borne, did thus work, so die, and so rise
again: he who was God and man, to adopt man, shall judge man.

The truth of this appears out of our creed: Where we believe in Jesus
Christ, who ascended into heaven and shall thence come to judge both the quick
and the dead, tappeares out of Rom 14.10 where the text says, We shall al
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and it is plain, loh. 5.22. The
father indgeth no man, but has given all judgment to the son, which words
are spoken by our Sau our himself, Jesus Christ the Judge. The Son then
shall be judge, and yet we must not think that the Father and the holy Ghost
are seduced from this judgment: but this we must hold, that the son Jesus
Christ our Savior shall judge immediately, really, locally, personally, visibly,
the other two shall judge inuisibly, only by giving their consent. Christ
shall execute sentence upon the world personally, In forma hominis, In the
form of a man, in the same form which he took on him when he was on earth.
Whereupon Bernard says, Vulnera seruanit in diem iudicij: vt videant ea
Iudaes, and confund^^tur He has kept his wounds unto the day of judgment,
that the Jews may see them, and be confounded. The whole Trinity shall judge
Authoritatiue, with equal authority; but Christ shall judge executatiue, with
execution of sentence: be cause Iudex debet esse manifestus omnibus iudicandis.
The Judge must show himself, and be manifest to all that shall be judged. For
we must know that the Father and the holy Ghost shall not be seen, according
to their divine nature of all that must be at judgment, for then all should be
blessed, and all should be blessed, for the seeing of God is blessedness, and
blessedness is the seeing of God. For as in hell, Maxima paena, The greatest
punishment is the privation of the seeing God: whereupon Chrysostom. says. Impij
non tantum dolebunt de ipso supplicio, quam quod repelluntur a tale consortio.
The wicked shall not so much lament the pains which they suffer: as the
company from which they are kept. So in heaven the greatest happiness (all
being happiness, and being all happiness) is to see God, that is, as we can
see him, and as he will be seen. For in the world to come God shall be seen
of all whole, but not of all wholly: of all whole because the whole number of
the Elect shall see him, but nor of all wholly, because God is infinite. God
shall be seen in the world to come so far forth as is fit, either for the
creator to reueal himself to his creature, or for the creature to see the
creator: but the whole Deity neither is, nor can be seen: for be is a
spirit, and Deum nemo vidit unquam, never man saw God at any time. 1. John
4.12 Therefore whereas Job says, I shall see God in my flesh cap. 19.26. And
whereas John says, We shall see him as he is. 1. cap. 3. verse: 2. and
whereas it is of Jacob Genesis 32. and of Moses, Exodus 33. said, that they saw God.
And whereas Paul says, We shall see him face to face, 1. Corin. 13.12. We
must not take the words literally, but the meaning of the words: That we shall
see God as he will be seen. Wherefore by this seeing of God in the world to
come, is meant the clear knowledge which we shall the^ have of God, which
knowledge shall not be with the eyes of our body, but the eyes of our mind: and
that too, either by means, as by his word, works or outward signs: or else
without means by special Revelation: For only God has seen God, John 6.46.
For I do bele ue that in the world to come, there shall be diversity of joys,
one star differs from another in glery, 1. Cor. 15.41. that is as Wirth and
diverse of the learned expound it there shall be Honoris and gloriae graedus vna
tamen and eadem: faelicitas aeterna, Degrees of honor and glory, and yet but
one eternal felicity. Also my Savior says, In my fathers house there be many
dwelling places, Job. 14.2. Which although Calvin observing the word many
says, the text does not nominate Diverse, as Difference in glory, and therefore
thinks that there shall be in heaven no degrees of glory; yet for mine own
particular, I belceue with them that thus expound this place. Multitudo
mansionum differentiam quoque gloriae significat: the multitude of manfions,
signifies diversities of glory. But as in the odds of joys I hold that the
least shall be full, neither able to hold any more, nor desiring any more: so
doubtless the difference of seeing God, shall be ex part videntis non visi;
Of the party seeing, not of him who is seen. Fill two vessels of unequal
bigness with any liquor, and the bigger holds more then the less, yet both
are full: so an old declined, or an ill imperfect eye sees the Sun much
worse then a young and perfect eye, and yet the Sun shows it self, and
shieth to all alike. Thus do I believe it will be between God and his Saints,
the holy ones in the world to come. God is known 3. manner of ways. 1. Quod
est. 2. Quid est 3. Sicut est. That heis, What he is, As he is. 1. That he is,
and so he is known to the Devils and the wicked; Credunt demones et trement:
the Devils believe there is a God, and tremble, I am. 2.19. 2. What he is, and
so is known to the Angels in heaven, in our blessed country. 3. As he is, and
so he shall be neither seen nor known neither of Saints nor wicked, neither in
this world nor the world to come: for Finitum nequit comprehendere infinitum,
They that are finit can never comprehend what is infinite. The Church also at
the last day shall judge as Christ tells us, Ye shall sit on seats and judge the
twelve tribes of scaell, Luk 22.30. that is, as some expound it, Ibierunt omnes
sancti iudicis sententiam approbantes. There shall be all the holy ones to
approve Christ's sentence, and subscribe to his judgment.

Upon this text a worthy writer says thus, The Apostles judge the world at
this day, by the preaching of the Gospel, whosoever believes shall be saved: at
the last day the whole world shall be judged by Christ, according to the
Gospel preached by the Apostles; and in this sense, the Saints being members
of Christ, Iudicabunt cum Christo mundum, et Angelos, hoc est, Diabolos, Shall
judge together with Christ the world and the cuill Angels the Devils: as we
may read 1. Cor. 6.2. Musculus expounds it thus. The faith of the Apostles
shall take away aell excuses from the Ifraelites, that is, At that day of
judgment shall rise up to condemn them, as our Savior tells the people, Luke
11.31. The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with the men of this
generation, and condemn them, for she came from the utmost parts of the earth
to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater then Solomon is here:
the men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation and shall
condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater
then Jonas is here. And as our Savior speaks, John 12.4. The word that I
have spoken shall judge you at the last day: otherwise we must know that Christ
the Judge shall sit alone in judgment. In that will be the blessed day, the
day in which we shall be blessed; and after which we shall enjoy eternal
blessedness in heaven. In heaven, Sciemus, amabimus, gaudebimus, laudabimus:
We shall know, we shall love, we shall rejoice, we shall praise, says Hugo.
First we shall know God, his counsels, his secrets, his judgments, the
causes, natures, beginning and endings of all creatures says this Cardinalis:
yea I assure my self, that in Heaven we shall know one another: but how? Not
with an earthly knowledge: I suppose that shall vanish away with all earthly
desire: since our will shall then be the same with Gods will, we shall be
glad to see them damned, whom God has damned; and them saved whom God has
made heirs of salvation.

Branmelerus is of an opinion, that heaven we shall know those with whom on
earth we have conuersed, as Parents. Kindred, friends, yea all the Patriarchs
and Apostles, Adam, Abraeham, Moses, David, Peter, Paul, and the rest, even
those that we never saw: his reasons are. 1. Because the Apostles in Mount
Tabor at the time of Christ's transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias whom they
never saw before, Mat. 17.4. If they did so, being in corpore infirmo, In a
body of infirmity, what shall they and we do when we are In corpore
glorioso. In a body of glory? 2. Again, we shall be, in heaven as Angels, and
equal to them. Luke 20.36. and the Angels in heaven do assuredly know one
another, as appears, Dan 10.13. where the Angel that appeared to Daniel told
him how he was withstood by the Prince of Persiae; if he had not known him,
how could he have distinguished him to be that Prince? ^^^eside, if we shall
know God himself, as I have showed you ^ much more shall we know one another:
thus Adam being cast into a sleep, knew his Wife Euah, and could say, This is
flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone; When as yet he never before had seen
her. But this he did Spiritu sancti plenus, et vera Dei cognitione praeditus,
Being full of the holy Spirit, and endued with the true knowledge of God,
says this Author: And Greg. Dial lib. 4. says, Quia illic omnes communi
claritate conspiciunt, non est quod ibi nesciant vbi Scientem omnia sciunt;
Because that in Heaven with a common clear brightness, and bright
clearenesse, all there do see, it cannot be that they may be nescient, where
they know him that knows all, 2. Amabimus we shall love God, good things, one
another; God, that there has crowned us; good things, that there are with us:
one another that there are all brethren among us: for manent haec tria, now
remain these 3, Faith, Hope and Love: But the chief of these is Love, 1. Cor.
13.13, because Faith and Hope are but in this world to crown us in the next,
and when they have obtained their end, they leave. But Love does never leave
us, it goes with us to Heaven, where whilst we live, we shall love: there
ever live, and there ever love. 3. Gaudebimus, we shall have joy without
measure, without compare, without end: without measure, for it cannot be
equald: without compare, for it shall be infinite: without end, for it shall
be everlasting. 4. Laudebimus, we shall praise God without grief, without
trouble, without weariness, without grief, for all reares shall be wiped
from our eyes; without trouble, nothing shall molest us: without wearines, for
no mortal accident shall comencere our bodies; since Aquinas says, They shall
be seven times clear er then the glorious Sun. O the glory of that
happiness, thrice happy are they that are so happy; that kingdom where youth
shall flourish without age, where life knows none end, where beauty never
fades, love never cools, sickness never pierces, joy never cease. That
kingdom where sorrow is never felt, complaint never heard, mourning never
seen, ill never feared. That kingdom where our knowledge shall be perfected,
our understanding shall be polished, our acquaintance increased. That kingdom
where our souls shall be in felicity, our bodies in eternity, both souls and
bodies in majesty. Oh thrice happy day, when soul and body shall there mere,
and welcome be that appointed day which brings with it this blessed day. The
meditation of this day, and these things, will teach us many things; and as
Jonas gourd did comfort him, chap. 4.7. so this may instruct us. Mark. 13.37.
that kept him from heat, and this may shelter us from danger. It may teach us
to watch and pray, since we know not the time of our dissolution; whether our
special judgment shall be in the morning of our youth, the noonetide of our
strength, or the evening of our age: Whether we shall be Praemoniti,
forewarned, that we may be Praemuniti forearmd: or whether we shall have a
Scarbrough warning, suddenly be gone. We read of a certain watery serpent,
called Ephemeron, that Simul oritur and moritur, no sooner bred but dead. And
Aristotle writes of certain flies by the river Hippanis, that they are bredde
in the morning, strong at noone, and dead ere night. These are the Emblemes of
man, as in a map describing our mortality. Let us then be warned, for Qui non
cauet pauet; He fears that takes no heed: Nemo cauenda timet quimetuenda
cauet, whosoever fears what is to be prevented, needs not prevent what is to be
feared. Gregory says, Nemo in huius vitae itinere torpeat, ne in Patria locum
perdat; quiae enim adhuc been licet agere scimus, an cras liceat ignoramus: Let
none go dully in the journey of this life, least he loose his place in the
heavenly country: for though we know we have time to do well to day, we know
not whether we shall live to morrow, yea or nay. Let us therefore confess our
sins, not to man as the Papists bid us, who are Curiosum genus hominum ad
cognoscendam vitanialienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. A certain curious
company of Shauelings to correct other men's lives, and stothfull in mending
their own: but to God, Is enim nunc vidit quae fiunt, and postea punit eos qui
paenitentiam non agunt: For he sees what we do now, and punishes them that
repent not, hereafter: If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, 1. John 1 9.2. It may teach us to set a guard about our
actions, and a watch about our lips with good David, least we offend with our
tongue. 3. It may teach us to season all our actions with discretion, least at
any time we deal rashly as Saint Peter did, when he did cut off Malcus ear.
4. It may teach us obedience, with Noah to provide the Arc while the weather
is calm: with Joseph it may make us provident, in time of plenty to lay up
against a day of scarcity; in the Summer of our youth against the winter of our
age.

If Lot had aboade in Sodom in the time of burning, how could he have escaped?
If we love the world in this time of sinning, how shall we be saved? We see in
the example of Sodom, that what is offended at midnight, is punished at noone
day, for the sun did rise upon Sodom that day, and yet soon after came
Sodomes destruction: now Sodemes judgment has a reference to the last
judgment, thus. The light, or Sunrise is Gods judgment, the night or Sodomes
fall is the committing of wickedness: the parallel is this whatsoever it
committed in the night of the Sodom of this world, shall be made manifest in
the Sunrise of the world to come. Lastly, it may comfort us who are Gods
chosen, whose names are written in the book of life, to think that the will
of our maker, has given all judgment to our redeemer: if our friend be our
Judge, we will hope to escape the vigor of judgment; if sentence come from
our Savior, we may be assured of salvation. This made Hillarion so often call
to his soul. Exi anima mea, exi. Go out my soul, go out willingly from the
prison of my body, thou have served God these 70. years, never fear now, nor
be loath to be going: whose life and death when good Saint Hierome read, he
clapped up his book, saying Hillarion shall be the champion whom I will follow.
This made Policarpus, that he would never by flattering, nor threatening be
drawn from the feruice of his Savior, living he never did him hurt, and dying
he believed glory. This made that holy man on his deathbed, say. Neu vitam
sperno, nec mortem timeo, quia dominum bonum babeo: I neither loath my life,
nor dread my death because I have so good a maisten. This made Paul desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. This makes the
godly in the book of the Revelation, cry so earnestly. Veni domine Jesus
venicito: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Even so Amen, and let Amen say Amen.
Come Lord Jesus to make an end of a wicked, miserable, unconscionable,
uncharitable word: Come Lord Jesus to seal up the kingdom of grace, which
makes thy Saints stay so long, and with long weary waiting cry, Qamdiu
domine, How long Lord just and true? Come Lord Jesus to hasten thy Kingdom of
glory, that we may the sooner meet the King of glory, and be carried among the
Angels into the place of glory, there to enjoy the crown of glory, with all
the company of heaven, to sing glory to God on high. Al which he that made us,
for his Sons sake grant us, even Christ the righteous: to whom with the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all praise, power, majesty,
and dominion throughout all ages, now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

