The truth of the most wicked and secret murdering of John Brewen, Goldsmith
of London, committed by his own wife, through the provocation of one John
Parker whom she loved: for which fact she was burned, and he hanged in
Smithfield, on wednesday, the 28 of June, 1592. two years after the murder
was committed.



Imprinted at London for John Kid, and are to be sold by Edward White, dwelling
at the little North door of Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1592. Tho^ Kyde

The murder of John Brewen Goldsmith of London, who through the entisement of
John Parker, was poisoned of his own wife in eating a measse of Sugersops.
HOw hateful a thing the sin of murder has been before the sight of the
eternal God, the holy Scriptures do manifest, yet from the beginning we may
evidently see how busy the devil has been to provoke men thereunto, in so
much that when there was but two brethren living in the world, the only
sons of the first man Adam; he provoked the one most unnaturally to murder
the other. And albeit there was none in the world to accuse Caine for so foul
a fact, so that in his own conceit he might have walked securely and without
blame, yet the blood of the just Abel cried most shrill in the ears of the
righteous God for vengeance and revenge on the murderer. The Lord therefore
ordained a Law that the cruel and unjust blood-sheader should have his blood
justly shed again: of which law, although no man is ignorant, and that we see
it put in execution daily before our eyes, yet does the Devil so work in the
hearts of a number, that without respect either of the fear of God, or
extreme punishment in this world they do notwithstanding commit most
heinous and grievous offenses to the great hazard of their souls, and the
destructions of their bodies on earth, only through Satan's suggestions, as by
this example following may evidently be proved.

There was of late dwelling in London a proper young woman named Anne Wells,
which for her favor and comely personage, as also in regard of her good
behavior and other commendable qualities, was beloved of diverse young men,
especially of two Goldsmithes, which were Batchelers, of good friends, and well
esteemed for fine workmanship in their trade: The one of them was called John
Brewen, and the other John Parker, who although he was better beloved, yet
least deserved it (*as the sequel hereafter will show) But as the truest
lovers are commonly least regarded, and the plain meaning man most scorned of
indiscreet maidens, so came it to pass by Brewen, who notwithstanding his long
and earnest suite, the gifts and favors which she received was still disdained
and cast off, albeit he had the good will and favor of al her friends and
kinsfolk: but no man was so high in her books as Parker: he had her favors
whosoever had her frowns: he sat and smiled, when others sobbed, and
tryumphant in the tears of the dispossessed. It came to pass that this nice
maiden had upon a promise between them, received of Brewen both gold and
jewels, which he willingly bestowed upon her, esteeming her the mistress and
commaundres of his life, but when he saw his suite despised, and his good will
nothing regarded, and seeing no hope of her good will and favor, he
determined, that seeing his suite took no effect, to demand his gold and
jewels again. And upon a time coming unto her, requested that he might have
his gifts again, to whom disdainfully she made answer that he should stay for
it: and the young man having been thus driven off longer than he thought good
of, made no more ado but arested her for the jewels.

The stout damsel that had never before been in the like danger, was so
astonished and dismayed, that she concluded on condition he would let his
Action fall, and not to think ever the worse of her afterward, to marry him by
a certain day, and to make him her husha^d: And this before good witness she
vowed to perform. Brewen was hereof very joyful and released his prisoner on
his own peril being not a little glad of his good success. And thereupon so
soon as might be, made preparation for their marriage, albeit it proved the
worst bargain that ever he made in his life. Now when Parker understood of
this thing, he was most grievously vexed, and as one having deep intrest to
the possession of her person, stormed most outragiously, and with bitter
speeches so taunted and checked her, that she repented the promised she made to
Brewen, although she could not any way amend it, nevertheless it kindled such
a hatred in her heart against her new made choice, that at length it turned to
Brewens death and destruction. And this accursed Parker although he was not as
then in estate to marry (notwithstanding he ere then had lien with her and
gotten her with child) and would never let her rest, but continually urged her
to make him away by one means or other. Diverse and sundry times had they talk
together of that matter, and although she often refused to work his death, yet
at length the grace of GOD being taken from her, she consented by his direction
to poison Brewen: after which deed done Parker, promised to marry her so
soon as possibly he could.

Now she had not been married to Brewen above three days when she put in
practice to poison him. And although the honest young man loved her tenderly,
yet had she conceived such deadly hatred against him, that she lay not with him
after the first night of her marriage, neither could she abide to be called
after his name but still to be termed Anne Wells as she was before: And to
excuse her from his bed, she said she had vowed never to lie by him more till
he had gotten her a better house. And the more to shadow her treachery and to
show the discontent she had of his dwelling she lodged never a night but the
first in his house, but provided her a lodging near to the place where this
graceles Parker dwelt. By this means the villain had free access to practice
with her about the murder, who was so importunate and hasty to have it done
that the wednesday after she was married she wickedly went to effect it, even
according as Parker had before given direction: which was in this sort. The
varlet had bought a strong deadly poison, whose working was to make speedy
haste to the heart without any swelling of the body or other sign of outward
confection. This poison the wicked woman secretly carried with her to her
husbands house, with a merry pleasant countenance, and very kindly she asked
her husband how he did, giving him the good morrow in most courteous manner,
and asked if he would have that cold morning, a measse of sugar soppes, (for
it was the week before shrouetide) I mary with a good will wife (quoth he) and
I take it very kindly that you will do so much for me, alas husband (quoth
she) if I could not find in my heart to do so small a matter for you
(especially being so lately married) you might justly judge me unkind, And
therwithall went to make ready his last meat, the thing being done, she powered
out a measse for him, and strewed secretly therein part of the poison, and
having set the porringer down beside her while she put the posnet on the fire
again, with her rising up from the fire, her coat cast down that measse which
for her husband she had prepared, out alas quoth she, I have spilt a measse of
as good sugar sops as ever I made in my life. Why, quoth her husband, is there
no more? Yes, quoth she, that there is, two, as good as they or I will make
them as good, but it greenes me that any good thing should so unluckily be cast
away. What woman quoth he? vex not at the matter, your ill luck go with them:
mary Amen, quoth she, speaking God knows with a wicked thought, though the
well meaning man thought on no evil.

But I pray you John (said she) shall I entreat you to fetch me a penny worth
of red herrings, for I have an earnest desire to eat some, that I will quoth
he with a good will. This siy shift she devised to have his absence, that she
might the better perform her wicked intent, and by the time he came again she
had made ready a mess of sugar sops for him, one for her self, and another
for a little boy which she brought with her, but her husbands she had poisoned
as before: when he was come, she gave her husband his mess, and she and the
child fell also to eating of theirs. Within a pretty while after he had eaten
his, he began to wax very ill about the stomach, feeling also a grievous
griping of his inward parts, whereupon he told his wife he felt himself not
well, how so quoth she you were well before you went forth, were you not? yes
indeed was I said he, then he demanded if she were well, she answered I: so
likewise said the child. Ah quoth her husband, now I feel my self sick at
the very heart: and immediately after he began to vomet exceedingly, with such
strains as if his lungs would burst in pieces, then he requested her to have
him to bed, never mystrusting the treachery wrought against him. Now when it
drew somewhat late, she told her husband she must needs go home to her
lodging, and when he requested her to stay with him, she said she could not nor
would not: And so unnaturally left the poisoned man all alone that whole night
long, without either comfort or company. All that night was he extreme
sick, worse and worse, never ceasing vomiting til his intrailes were all
shrunk and broken within him (as is since supposed.) The next morning she came
to him again, having been once or twice sent for, but made little semblance of
forrow, and when he quibd her with unkindness, for not staying with him one
night, she asked him if he would have her forsworn, did I not quoth she swear
I would not stay in the house one night, till you had gotten another: well Anne
quoth he, stay with me now, for I am not long to continue in this world, now
God forbid quoth she) and with that she made a show of great heaviness and
sorrow, and then made him a caudle with sugar and other spices, and so on the
thursday, immediately after he had eaten it he dyed, and on the Friday he was
buried. No person as then suspecting any manner of evil done to him by his
wife, but esteemed her a very honest woman, although through her youth, she
knew not as then how to behave herself to her husband so kindly as she ought,
which they imputed to her ignorance, rather then to any malice conceived
against her husband. Now you shall understand that within a small space after
her husband was dead, she was known with child, and safely delivered: every
neighbor thinking it had been her husbands, although she since confessed it
was not, but that child lived not long but dyed.

The murder lying thus vnespyed, who was so lusty as Parker with the Widow,
being a continual resorter to her house, whose welcome was answerable to his
desire. And so bold in the end he grew with her, that she durst not deny him
any thing he requested, and became so ielious, that had she looked but merely
upon a man, she should have known the price thereof, and have bought her
merement dearly. And yet was he not married unto her, yea to such slavery and
subjection did he bring her, that she must run or go wheresoever he pleased
to appoint her, held he up but his finger at any time, if she denied him
either money or whatsoever else he lifted to request, he would so haule and
pull her, as was pity to behold, yea and threaten to stabbe and thrust her
through with his dagger, did she not as he would have her in all things, so
that he had her at commandment whenever he would, and yet could she scant
please him with her diligence. In this miserable case he kept her unmarried
for the space of two years after her husband was dead, at length he got her
with child again, which when the woman knew, she was careful for the saving
of her credit to keep it unspied so long as she could, in so much that she
would not go forth of her doors for fear her neighbors should perceive her
great belly. In the mean space Parker coming unto her, she was upon one day
above the rest most earnest with him to marry her. You see (quoth she) in
what case I am, and if you will not for your own credit, yet for my credits
sake marry me, and suffer me not to be a poynting mark for others, and a
shame among my neighbors. The varlet hearing the great moan she made unto him
was nothing moved therewith, but churlishly answered, she should not appoint
him when to marry, but if I were so minded (quoth he) I would be twice advised
how I did wed with such a strumpet as thy self, and then reviled her most
shamefully: whereunto she answered she had never been strumpet but for him,
and woe worth thee (quoth she) that ever I knew thee, it is thou and no man
else that can triumph in my spoil, and yet now thou resusest to make amends
for thy fault: my love to thee thou have sufficiently tried, although I never
found any by thee. Out arrant queen (quoth he) thou would marry me to the
end thou might poison me as thou did thy husband, but for that cause I
mean to keep me as long out of thy fingers as I can, and accursed be I if I
trust thee or hazard my life in thy hands: why thou arrant beast (quoth she)
what did I then, which thou did not provoke me to do, if my husband were
poisoned, thou know (shameless as thou art) it had never been done but for
thee, thou gave me the poison, and after thy direction I did minister it unto
him, and woe is me, it was for thy sake I did so cursed a deed. These
speeches thus spoken bet ween them in vehemency of spirit, was over heard of
some that revealed it to the maiestrates, whereupon the woman was carried
before Alderman Haward to be examined, and the man before Justice Young, who
stood in the denial thereof very stoutly, neither would the woman confess any
thing, till in the end she was made to believe that Parker had bewrayed the
matter, whereupon she confessed the fact in order, as I have declared. Then was
she carried into the country to be delivered of her child, and after brought
back to prison. And then she and Parker were both araigned and condemned for
the murder at the sessions hall nere newgate, and the woman had judgment to be
burned in Smythfield, and the man to be hanged in the same place before her
eyes. This was accordingly performed, and they were executed on wedensday last,
being the 28. of June 1592. two years and a half after the murder was
committed. The Lord give all men grace by their example to shun the hateful
sin of murder, for be it kept never so close and done never so secret, yet at
length the Lord will bring it out, for blood is an vnceassant crier in the
ears of the Lord and he will not leave so vilde a thing unpunished.

FINIS. Tho. Kydde.

