A Lamentable List, of certain Hidious, Frightfull, and Prodigious Signs,
which have bin seen in the Air, Earth, and Waters, at several times for
these 18. years last past, to this present: that is to say, Anno. 1618. until
this instant. Anno. 1638. In Germany, and other Kingdoms and Provinces
adjacent; which ought to be so many several warnings to our Kingdom, as to
the said Empire.
To the tune of Aim not to high.


YOu who would be informed of foreign news,
Attend to this which presently insues,
And you shall hear such marvels here expressed,
In eighteen years last past made manifest.
In Germany that famous Empire fair,
Strange sights were seene'ith water earth and air,
Which from good testimonies hither brought,
That we may know with wonders God has wrought
In Anno sixteen hundred and eighteen,
A blazing Star was over Bohemia seen,
Which for the space of seven and twenty days,
Within the sky most fearfully did blaze.
And in Hungaria (as it is understood,)
Water was Metamorphos'd into blood.
In Brunswick-land (within an evening fair,)
Were seen two armies fighting in the air.
Three Raine-bowes and three Suns (all in one day)
Were at Vienna seen in Austria:
And over Lints in Austria (named before,)
A noise like Ordinance in the air did roar.
At Darmsted blood did drop from leaves of trees,
And what at Tursin hapt with this agrees,
Where chaires, stools, walls, and other things did sweat,
An oil resembling blood by just conceit.
In The Dukedom of Wirtemberg it reigned gore,
(As it has bin in England heretofore.)
Over Bohemia fiery beams did oppose
The Sun, and cracked like Rockets in our shoes.
A dreadful tempest haild at Ratisbone,
Strange fruit near Frankendal yt like never known.
Crows in Silesia fought a mortal battle,
Lightning and thunder in the sky did rattle.
The Sun in monstrous forme'ith air was shown
With a strange Rainbow over Hunborow town:
Great bands with horsemen in array did stand,
With Ordnance in the air over Pomerland.
Near Strausburg was brought forth a monstrous birth.
Such as was seldom seen upon ye earth.
A sword, and rod within the Heavens were,
At Saxon in (Sylesia) seen to' appear.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.
Strange fire ran through the town of Coburg, and
No hurt it did (that men could understand.)
In Saxony water to blood did turn,
At Magdenburg a child in armor borne.
Over Lutzin was a beauteous Virgin seen,
A Candle, and a Hand-kercheife between
Her hands she held, (in open view of all:)
Water turned blood in Saxony at Hall.
Blood issued from a loaf of Bread, (firm dry,)
At Frowensteine a Town in Saxony:
A monster borne at Kempton in Swabland,
And like wise blood did spring out of a Pond.
In Brandenburg (at Berlin) heaven sent
Both blood, and brimstone, from the firmament:
A fiery Scepter was in the air beheld,
Great flocks of Birds fought, and each other killed.
Blood perfect from a water Conduit ran,
A Worm was found to the full shape of a man.
At Weimer water did to blood convert,
These wondrous Signs may move a Christian heart.
At Vienna a Woman strange appeared,
(Whereat some of the people were affeard:)
And at St. Stephens Church, the Bells did ring A wondrous thing.
Without the help of man.
Now what events these progidies have wrought,
(And what effects have since to pass bin brought,)
England (and all the Christian world) has had,
Sufficient notes and motives to be sad.
Intestine war, contagious pestilence,
And other miseries deduced from thence;
As pinching Famine (which has caused) of late,
A desolation of that fir^ile State.
Such wondrous signs, and tokens Heaven sent,
That fair Jerusalem might in time repent:
Prodigious sights, and fearful blazing stars,
As learned Josephus speaks ^^'s Jewish wars.
But all these tokens served to no end,
For the rebellious Jews did still offend;
And slighted these Celestial warnings still:
The Viols of Gods wrath their sins did fill.
Which caused the utter ruin (...)
The Romans them did qui^ (...)
And Captive led captivity (...)
Unto their enemies becam^ (...)
Even so fair Germany, he (...)
That she his holy meani^ (...)
And left her pride, desent^ (...)
Of Gluttony and (swini^ (...)
Desention has with hos^ (...)
Ambition with loss of L^ (...)
Gluttony and drunkenne (...)
With raging hunger, as (...)
Let England then take (...)
Although our Lord (in (...)
Seeing our sins with (...)
It Is fit that by her wa^ (...)
Let Us leave security an (...)
And learn to fear our (...)
For we may think ou^ (...)
But that our share of (...)
One fire is kindling v^ (...)
And Scholars (often (...)
God grant us grace the (...)
And (with humility (...)
Although we live in (...)
And spend our (preci^ (...)
Yet Heaven's not (...)
By the success of t^ (...)
Wherein although (...)
(As in precedent ti^ (...)
Yet still the Pestil^ (...)
Has almost all the (...)
This his Paterna^ (...)
And yet ingratefu^ (...)
Each one seeks (...)
But few regard t^ (...)
I for my part do^ (...)
That every one (...)
And that in tim^ (...)
(With gratit^ (...)
Printed at London for Tho. Lambert, and are to be sold at the Sig^


