A VOYAGE INTO NEW ENGLAND Begun in 1623. and ended in 1624.

Performed by CHRISTOPHER LEVETT, his Majesty's Woodward of Somersetshire, and
one of the Council of New England.

Yorkes Bonauenture.
Ship

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES. August 21. 1624

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, George Duke of Buckingham his Grace, Thomas Earl of
Arroundell and Surrey, Robert Earl of Warwick, John Earl of Houldernes, and
the rest of the Counsel for New England.
MAy it please your Lordships, that whereas you granted your Commission unto
Captain Robert Gorges, Governor of New England, Captain Fraunces West, my
self, and the Governor of New-Plimoth, as Counselors with him, for the
ordering and Governing of all the said Terretories, wherein we have been
diligent to the uttermost of our powers, as we shall be ready to render an
account unto your Honors, when you shall be pleased to require us thereunto. In
the mean time, I thought it my duty to present unto your viewes, such
observation as I have taken, both of the Country and People, Commodities and
Discommodities: as also, what places are fit to settle Plantations in, in which
not, what courses ate fit in my understanding to be taken, for bringing Glory
to God, Hounour to our King and Nation, good unto the Commo^wealth, and profit
to all Adventurers and Planters: which I humbly beseech your Lordships to
accept of, as the best fruits of a shallow capasitie: so shall I think my time
and charge well employed, which I have spent in these affairs.

I have omitted many things in this my discourse, which I conceived to be
Impertinent at this time for me to relate, as of the time of my being at Sea,
of the strange Fish which we there saw, some with wings flying above the
water, others with manes, ears and heads, and chasing one another with open
mouths like stone Horses in a park, as also of the steering of our Course, the
observation of the Sun and Stars, by which the elevation of the Pole is
found, the degrees of latitude known, which shows how far a ship is out of his
due course, either to the North or South: likewise of the making of the land at
our arrival upon the choast of New England, how it did arise and appear unto
us: how every Harbor bears one from another upon the point of the Compass: and
what Rocks and dangers are in the way: how many fathom water is found by
sounding at the entrance of every Harbor: and from how many of the several
winds all the Harbors are land locked. But by this means I thought I should
not only be tedious, but also be in danger of loosing my self, for want of fit
phraises, and sound judgment, in the Arts of the Mathematickes and Navigations,
(being but a young Scholar, though an ancient trauiler by sea) and therefore
thought better to omit those, then any thing I have relate.

Thus beseeching God to bless your Honors. I rest at your Lordshippes service.

CHRISTOPHER LEVETT.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. Contains my discovery of diverse Rivers and Harbors, with their
names, and which are fit for Plantations and which not. CHAP. II. Shows how
the Savages carried them selves unto me continually, and of my going to their
Kings howses: and there coming to mine. CHAP. III. Shows the nature and
disposition of the Savages, and of their several Gods, Squanto and Tanto.
CHAP. IIII. Contains a description of the Country, with the commodities and
discommodities. CHAP. V. Certain objections and answers, with sufficient
proofs how it may be exceeding profitable to the common wealth, and all
Planters and Adventurers. CHAP. VI. Shows how by aduenturing of 100 pounds
more or less, a man may profit so much every year for 20. years, or more
without any more charge then at the first. CHAP. VII.Shows how every Parrish
may befreed of their weekly payments to the poor, by the profits which may be
fetched thence. With certain objections against the things contained in this
and the former Chapter: with answers there unto. CHAP. VIII. Contains certain
directions for all private persons that in^
A VOYAGE INTO NEW ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
Contains my discovery of diverse Rivers and Harbors, with their names, and
which are fit for Plantations, and which not.

THe first place I set my foot upon in New England, was the Isles of Shoulds,
being Islands in the Sea, about two Leagues from the Main.

Upon these Islands, I neither could see one good timber tree, nor so much good
ground as to make a garden.

The place is found to be a good fishing place for 6. Ships, but more cannot
well be there: for want of convenient stage-roome, as this years experience
has proved.

The Harbor is but indifferent good. Upon these Islands are no Savages at all.

The next place I came unto was Pannaway, where one M. Tomson has made a
Plantation, there I stayed about one Month, in which time, I sent for my men
from the East: who came over in diverse Ships.

At this place I met with the Governor, who came thither in a Bark which he
had from one M. Weston about 20. days before I arived in the Land.

The Governor then told me, that I was joined with him in Commission as a
Counselor, which being read I found it was so. And he then in the presence of
three more of the Counsel, administered unto me an oath.

After the meeting of my men, I went a coasting in two boats with all my
company.

In the time I stayed with M. Tomson, I surveyed as much as possible I could,
the wether being unseasonable and very much snow.

In those parts, I saw much good Timber. But the ground it seemed to me not to
be good, being very rockey and full of trees and brushwood.

There is great store of foul of diverse sorts, whereof I fed very plentifully.

About two English miles further to the East, I found a great River and a good
harbor called Pascattaway. But for the ground I can say nothing, but by the
relation of the Sagamore or King of that place, who told me there was much good
ground up in the river about seven or eight leagues.

About two leagues, further to the East is another great river called
Aquamenticus. There I think a good plantation may be settled, for there is a
good harbor for ships, good ground, and much already cleared, fit for planting
of corn and other fruits, having heretofore ben planted by the Salvages who
are all dead. There is good timber, and likely to be good fishing, but as yet
there hash been no trial made that I can hear of.

About 6 leagues further to the East is a harbor called Cape Porpas, the which
is indifferent good for 6 ships, and it is generally thought to bean
excellent place for fish, but as yet there has been no trial made, but there
may be a good plantation seated, for there is good Timber, and good ground, but
will require some labor and charge.

About four leagues further East, there is another harbor called Sawco
(between this place and Cape Porpas I lost one of my men) before we could
recover the harbor a great fog or mist took us that we could not see a
hundred yards from us. I perceiving the fog to come upon the Sea, called for a
Compass, and set the Cape land, by which we knew how to steare our course,
which was no sooner done but we lost sight of land, and my other boat, and
the wind blew fresh against us, so that we were enforced to strike sail, and
betake us to our Oars which we used with all the wit and strength we had, but
by no means could we recover the shore that night, being imbayed and compassed
round with breaches, which roared in a most fearful manner on every side us:
we took counsel in this extremity one of another what to do to save our
lives, at length we resolved that to put to sea again in the night was no fit
course, the storm being great, and the wind blowing right of the shore, and
to run our boat on the shore amongst the breaches, (which roared in a most
fear full manner) and cast her away and endanger our selves we were loath to
do, seeing no land nor knowing where we were. At length I caused our Killick
(which was all the Anchor we had) to be cast forth, and one continually to hold
his hand upon the roode or cable, by which we knew whether our ancker held or
no: which being done we commended our selves to God by prayer, and put on a
resolution to be as comfortable as we could, and so fell to our victuals. Thus
we spent that night, and the next morning, with much ado we got in to Sawco,
where I found my other boat.

There I stayed five nights, the wind being contrary, and the weather very
unseasonable, having much rain and snow, and continual foggse.

We built us our Wigwam, or house, in one hours space, it had no frame, but
was without form or fashion, only a few poles set up together, and covered
with our boats sails, which kept forth but a little wind, and less reign
and snow.

Our greatest comfort we had, next unto that which was spiritual, was this, we
had foul enough for killing, wood enough for felling, and good fresh water
enough for drinking. But our beds was the wet ground, and our bedding our wet
clothes. We had plenty of Craine, Goose, Duckes and Mallard, with other foul,
both boiled and roasted, but our spits and racks were many times in danger of
burning before the meat was ready (being but wooden ones.)

After I had stayed there three days, and no likelihood of a good wind to
carry us further, I took with me six of my men, and our Arms, and walked
along the shore, to discover as much by land as I could: after I had traveled
about two English miles I met with a river which stayed me that I could go no
further by land that day, but returned to our place of habitation where we
rested that night (having our lodging amended) for the day being dry I caused
all my company to accompany me to a marsh ground, where we gathered every man
his burden of long dry grass, which being spread in our Wigwam or House, I
praise God I rested as contentedly as ever I did in all my life. And then came
into my mind an old merry saying, which I have heard of a beggar boy who said
if ever he should attain to be a King, he would have a breast of mutton with a
pudding in it, and lodge every night up to the ears in dry straw, and thus I
made my self and my company as merry as I could, with this and some other
conceits, making this use of all, that it was much better then we deserved at
Gods hands, if he should deal with us according to our sins.

The next morning I caused 4 of my men to row my lesser boat to this river,
who with much ado got in my self, and 3 more going by land: but by reason of
the extremity of the wether we were enforced to stay there that night, and
were constrained to sleep upon the river bank, being the best place we could
find, the snow being very deep. The next morning we were enforced to rise
betime, for the tide came up so high that it washed away our fire, and would
have served us so too if we had not kept watch. So we went over the river in
our boat, where I caused some to stay with her, my self being desirous to
discover further by land, I took with me four men and walked along the shore
about six English miles further to the East where I found another river, which
stayed me. So we returned back to Sawco, where the rest of my company and my
other boat lay. That night I was exceeding sick, by reason of the wet and
cold and much toyling of my body: but thanks be to God I was indifferent well
the next morning, and the wind being fair we put to sea, and that day came to
Quack.

But before I speak of this place I must say something of Sawco, and the too
rivers which I discovered in that bay, which I think never Englishman saw
before.

Sawco is about one league to the Northeast of a cape land. And about one
English mile from the maine lies six Islands, which make an indifferent good
harbor. And in the maine there is a Coue or gutt which is about a cables
length in breadth, and too cables length long, there too good Ships may ride,
being well mored a head and starne, and within the Coue there is a great Marsh,
where at a high water a hundredth sail of Ships may floate, and be free from
all winds, but at low water must ly a ground, but being soft oase they can take
no hurt.

In this place there is a world of foul, much good timber, and a great
quantetie of clear ground and good, if it be not a little too sandy. There
has been more fish taken within too leagues of this place this year then in
any other in the land.

The river next to Sawco eastwards, which I discovered by land, and after
brought my boat into, is the strangest river that ever my eyes beheld. It
flows at the least ten foot water upright, and yet the ebb runs so strong
that the tide does not stem it: At three quarters flood my men were scarce able
with four Oars to row a head. And more then that, at full Sea I dipped my
hand in the water, quite without the mouth of the River, in the very main
Ocean, and it was as fresh as though it had been taken from the head of a
Spring.

This River, as I am told by the Salvages, comes from a great mountain
called the Crystal hill, being as they say 100 miles in the Country, yet is
it to be seen at the sea side; and there is no ship ariues in New England,
either to the West so far as Cape Cod, or to the East so far as Monhiggen,
but they see this Mountain the first land, if the weather be clear.

The next river Eastward which I discovered by land, is about six miles from
the other. About these two rivers I saw much good timber and sandy ground,
there is also much foul, fish and other commodities: but these places are not
fit for plantation for the present, because there is no good coming in, either
for ship or boat, by reason of a sandy breach which lies along the shore,
and makes all one breach.

And now in its place I come to Quack, which I have named York. At this place
there fished diverse ships of Waymouth this year.

It lies about two leagues to the East of Cape Elizabeth, it is a Bay or Sound
betwixt the Maine and certain Islands which lies in the sea about one English
mile and half.

There are four Islands which makes one good harbor, there is very good
fishing, much foul and the main as good ground as any can desire. There I
found one River wherein the Savages say there is much Salmon and other good
fish. In this Bay, there has been taken this year 4. Sturgions, by fishermen
who drive only for Herrings, so that it is likely there may be good store taken
if there were men fit for that purpose. This River I made bold to call by my
own name Levetts river, being the first that discovered it. How far this
river is Navigable I cannot tell, I have been but 6. miles up it, but on both
sides is goodly ground.

In the same Bay I found another River, up which I went about three miles and
found a great fall, of water much bigger then the fall at London bridge at low
water, further a boat cannot go, but above the fall the River runs smooth
again.

Just at this fall of water the Sagamore or King of that place has a house,
where I was one day when there were two Sagamors more, their wives and
children, in all about 50. and we were but 7. They bid me welcome and gave me
such victuals as they had, and I gave them Tobacco and Aqua vitae. After I had
spent a little time with them I departed and gave them a small shot, and they
gave me another. And the great Sagamore of the East Country, whom the rest do
acknowledge to be chief amongst them, he gave unto me a Bevers skin, which I
thankfully received, and so in great love we parted. On both sides this river
there is goodly ground.

From this harbor to Sagadahock, which is about 8. or 9. leagues, is all
broken Islands in the Sea, which makes many excellent good Harbors, where a
thousand sail of Ships may ride in safety; the sound going up within the
Islands to the Cape of Sagadahock.

In the way betwixt York and Sagadahock lies Cascoe, a good harbor, good
fishing, good ground, and much foul. And I am persuaded that from Cape
Elizabeth to Sagadahock, which is above 30 leagues to follow the Maine, is all
exceeding commodious for Plantations: and that there may be 20 good Towns well
seated, to take the benefit both of the sea, and fresh Rivers.

For Sagadahock I need say nothing of it, there has been heretofore enough
said by others, and I fear me too much. But the place is good, there fished
this year two ships.

The next place I came to was Capemanwagan, a place where nine ships fished
this year. But I like it not for a plantation, for I could see little good
timber and less good ground, there I stayed four nights, in which time, there
came many Savages with their wives and children, and some of good account
amongst them, as Menawormet a Sagamore, Cogawesco the Sagamore of Casco and
Quack, now called York, Somerset, a Sagamore, one that has been found very
faithful to the English, and has saved the lives of many of our Nation, some
from starving, others from killing.

They intended to have been gone presently, but hearing of my being there, they
desired to see me, which I understood by one of the Masters of the Ships, who
likewise told me that they had some store of Beauer coats and skins, and was
going to Pemaquid to truck with one Mr. Witheridge, a Master of a ship of
Bastable, and desired me to use means that they should not carry the^ out of
the harbor, I wished them to bring all their truck to one Mr. Cokes stage and I
would do the best I could to put it away: some of them did accordingly, and I
then sent for the Sagamores, who came, and after some complements they told me
I must be their cozen, and that Captain Gorges was so, (which you may imagine
I was not a little proud of, to be adopted cozen to so many great Kings at one
instant, but did willingly accept of it) and so passing away a little time very
pleasantly, they desired to be gone, whereupon I told them that I understood
they had some coats and Beauers skins which I desired to truck for, but they
were unwilling, and I seemed careless of it (as men must do if they desire
any thing of them:) But at last Somerset swore that there should be none
carried out of the harbor, but his cozen Levett should have all, and then they
began to offer me some by way of gift, but I would take none but one pair of
sleeves from Cogawesco, but told them it was not the fashion of English
Captains always to be taking, but sometimes to take and give, and continually
to truck was very good. But in fine, we had all except one coat and two
skins, which they reserved to pay an old debt with, but they staying all that
night, had them stole from them.

In the morning the Sagamores came to me with a grievous complaint, I used the
best language I could to give them content, and went with them to some Stages
which they most suspected, and searched both Cabins and Chests, but found none.
They seeing my willingness to find the thief out, gave me thanks, and
wished me to forbear, saying the Rogues had carried them into the woods where
I could not find them.

When they were ready to depart they asked me where I meant to settle my
plantation, I told them I had seen many places to the west, and intended to
go further to the east before I could resolve, they said there was no good
place and I had heard, that Pemoquid and Capmanwagan and Monhiggon were granted
to others, and the best time for fishing was then at hand which made me the
more willing to retire, and the rather because Cogawesco the Sagamore of Casco
and Quacke, told me if that I would sit down at either of those two places, I
should be very welcome, and that he and his wife would go along with me in my
boat to see them, which curtesey I had no reason to refuse, because I had set
up my resolution before to settle my plantation at Quacke, which I named York,
and was glad of this oppertunity, that I had obtained the consent of them who
as I conceive has a natural right of inheritance as they are the sons of
Noah, and therefore do think it fit to carry things very fairly without
compulsion (if it be posible) for avoiding of treachery.

The next day the wind came fair, and I sailed to Quacke or York, with the
King, Queen, and Prince, bow and arrows, dog and kettell in my boat, his
noble attendance rowing by us in their Cannow.

When we came to York the Masters of the Ships came to bid me welcome, and
asked what Savages those were, I told them, and I thanked them, they used them
kindly and gave them meat, drink and tobacco. The woman or reputed Queen,
asked me if those men were my friends, I told her they were; then she drank to
them and told them, they were welcome to her Country and so should all my
friends be at any time, she drank also to her husband and bid him welcome to
her Country too, for you must understand, that her father was the Sagamore of
this place and left it to her at his death having no more Children.

And thus after many dangers, much labor and great charge, I have obtained a
place of habitation in New England, where I have built a house, and fortified
it in a reasonable good fashion, strong enough against such enemies as are
those Savage people.

CHAP. II.
Shows how the Savages, carried themselves unto me continually, and of my
going to their Kings Houses: and their coming to mine.

Whilst I stayed in this place I had some little trucke but not much, by
reason of an evil member in the Harbor, who being covetous of trucke used the
matter so, that he got the Savages away from me.

And it is no wonder that he should abuse me in this sort, for he has not
spared your Lordshipps and all the Counsel for New England.

He said unto the Governor that the Lords had sent men over into that Country
with Commissions, to make a prey of others. And yet for my own part I never
demanded or took from any man in that Countery, the value of a denier, neither
had I so much help from any Ship or Ships company as one man's labor the
space of an hour, nor had I any provision or victual upon any terms
whatsoever, save only, 1000. of bread and 22. bushells of pease, which was
offered unto me, and not by me requested, for which I gave present
satisfaction in Beuer skines: and also one Rownlet of Aqua vitae, which was
brought to me 16. Leagues unexpected, which good manners bid me buy. Much more
provision was offered to me by many Masters of Ships, but I had no need
thereof, so I gave them thanks for their kindness, and refused all.

Nay it is well known, that I was so far from doing wrong to any: that I
suffered the Land which was granted to me by Pattent and made choice of before
any other man came there, to be used, and my timber to be cut down and
spoiled, without taking or asking any satisfaction for the same. And I doubt
not but all others to whom you gave authority, will sufficiently clear
themselves of all such imputations.

He said also he cared not for any authority in that place, and though he was
forbid to trucke, yet would he have all he could get: in despite of who should
say to the contrary, having a great Ship with 17. pieces of Ordinance and 50.
men.

And indeed his practice was according to his words, for every Sunday or once
in the week, he went himself or sent a boat up the river and got all the
trucke before they could come down to the Harbor. And so many Savages as he
could get to his stage, he would enforce the^ to leave their goods behind
them. One instance amongst marry I will give you.

On a certain day there came two Savages to his place, who were under the
command of Sommerset or Conway I know not whether, at which time they were both
with me at my house, but the other two who went to him, knew not so much, but
afterward they understanding of it, came prefently over, but left their Cotts
and Beauer skines behind them, whereat Somerset and Conway were exceeding
angry: and were ready to beat the poor fellows, but I would not suffer them
so to do. They presently went over the Harbor themselves in their Cannow to
fetch their goods, but this man would let them have none, but wished them to
truck with him, they told him they would not, but would carry them to Captain
Levett, he said Levett was no captain, but a Iacknape, a poor fellow etc.
They told him again that he was a Rogue with some other speeches, whereupon
he and his company fell upon them and beat them both, in so much that they
came to me in a great rage against him, and said, they would be revenged on his
Fishermen at sea, and much ado I had to diswade one of them for going into
England to tell King James of it, as he said; when they came to me in this
rage, there was two or three Masters of Ships by, and heard every word.

But all this did me no hurt, (save the loss of the trucke, which by diverse
was thought to be worth above 50. li.) for the two Sagamores whom he enticed
from me, and incensed against me, at length used means to be friends with me,
sending one who asked me, if I were angry with them, I told them no, I was not
angry with them for any such matter as lousy Cotts and skins, but if they
were Matchett, that is, naughty men, and rebellious: then I could be Mouchick
Hoggery, that is very angry, and would Cram, that is, kill them all.

When they came them selves to me to seek peace, they brought me a Beauer
Coat, and two Otters kines which they would have let me had for nothing, but I
would not take them so, but gave them more then usually I did by way of Trucke,
I then told them likewise that if at any time they did Trucke with me, they
should have many good things in leiu of their Beauer: and if they did not
Trucke it was no matter, I would be good friends with them, at which they
smiled and talked one to the other, saying the other man was a Iacknape, and
that I had the right fashion of the Aberieney Sagamores, then they began to
applaude or rather flatter me, saying I was so big a Sagamore, yea four
fathom, which were the best words they could use to express their minds: I
replied that I was a poor man as he had reported of me. They said again it
was no matter what I said, or that Iacknape (which is the most disgraceful
word that may be in their conceit,) for all the Sagamores in the Country loved
poor Leuett and was muchicke sorry that he would be gone, (and indeed I cannot
tell what I should think of them, for ever after they would bring me any
thing they thought would give me content, as Eggs and the whole bodies of
Beauer, which in my coneite eat like Lamb, and is not inferior to it: yea
the very coats of Beauer, and Otter-skinnes, from off their backs, which
though I many times refused, yet not allwaies, but I never took any such
courtesy from them but I requited them answerably, choosing rather to neglect
the present profit, then the hopes I have to bring them to better things, which
I hope will be for a public good, and which I am persuaded were agreeuous
sin, to neglect for any sinister end.

And a little before my departure there came these (...) mores to see me,
Sadamoyt the great Sagamore of the East Country, Manawormet, Opparunwit,
Skedraguscett, Cogawesco, Somersett, Conway and others.

They asked me why I would be gone out of their Country, I was glad to tell
them my wife would not come thither except I did fetch her, they bid a pox on
her hounds, (a phrase they have learned and do use when they do curse) and
wished me to beat her. I told them no, for then our God would be angry. Then
they run out upon her in evil terms, and wished me let her alone and take
another, I told them our God would be more angry for that. Again they bid me
beat her, beat her, repeating it often, and very angerly, but I answered no,
that was not the English fashion, and besides, she was a good wife and I had
children by her, and I loved her well, so I satisfied them. Then they told me
that I and my wife and Children, with all my friends should be heartily welcome
into that Country at any time, yea a hundredth thousand times, yea Mouchicke,
Mouchicke, which is a word of weight.

And Somersett told that his Son (who was borne, whilst I was in the
Country, and whom he would needs have to Name) and mine should be Brothers
and that there should be mouchicke legamatch, (that is friendship) betwixt
them, until Tanto carried them to his Wigwam, (that is, until that they died.

Then they must know of me how long I would be wanting, I told them so many
Months, at which they seemed to be well pleased, but wished me to take heed I
proved not Chechaske in that (that is, a lier.) They asked me what I would do
with my house, I told them I would leave 10. of my men there until I came
again, and that they should kill all the Tarrantens they should see (being
enemies to them) and with whom the English have no comarsse. At which they
rejoiced exceedingly, and then agreed amongst themselves, that when the time
should be expired, which I spoke of for my return, every one at the place
where he lived would look to the Sea, and when they did see a Ship they would
send to all the Sagamores in the Country, and tell them that poor Leuett was
come again. And thus instead of doing me hurt, I think that either he or I
have done good to all Planters, by winning their affections, (which may be
made use of without trusting of them.)

But if your Lordship should put up this wrong done unto you, and the Authority
which you gave them, never expect to be obeyed in those parts, either by
Planters or Fishermen; for some have not stuck to say, that if such a man,
contemning authority, and abusing one of the counsel, and drawing his knife
upon him at his own house, which he did, should go unpunished, then would not
they care what they did hereafter.

And truly let me tell your Lordships, that if ever you intend to punish any
for disobedience, or contempt of authority, this man is a fit instrument to
make a president of, for he is rich, and this year will gain the best part of
500 pounds by that Country, and he has nether wife nor child, for whose
sakes he should be spared.

And if he go free, as he has domineered over us, to whom your Lordships
gave authority, but no power to put it in execution, so will he grow unmannerly
too with your Lordships, as he has already begun.

And it will discourage men hereafter to take any authority upon them, or to
go about to reform any abuses in those parts.

And also it will hinder Planters for going over, if Fishermen be suffered not
only to take away their truck, but also to animate the Savages against them,
for this is the way to cause all Planters to have their throats cut.

But I leave these things to your Lo. consideration, who have as well power
as authority to punish such rebellious persons.

Thus having acquainted you with what I have done, seen, and heard; now give
me leave to tell you what I think of the Savages, the inhabitants of that
country: as also to justify the innocent, I mean the Country of New England,
against the slanderous reports of this man, and some others which I have heard,
and likewise to deliver my opinion, what courses I conceive to be most
convenient to be taken, for bringing most glory to God, comfort, honor and
benifit to our King and our own Native Nation.

CHAP. III.
Shows the nature and disposition of the Savages, and of their several Gods,
Squanto and Tanto.

I Have had much conference with the Savages, about our only true God, and have
done my best to bring them to know and acknowledge him, but I fear me all the
labor that way, will be lost and no good will be done, except it be among the
younger sort.

I find they have two Gods, on they love: and the other the hate, the god they
love: they call Squanto, and to him they ascribe all their good fortunes.

The god they hate they call Tanto, and to him they ascribe all their evil
fortunes, as thus, when any is killed, hurt, or sick, or when it is evil
wether, then they say Tanto is hoggry, that is angry. When any dies, they say
Tanto carries them to his wigwam that is his house, and they never see them
more.

I have asked them where Squanto dwells, they say they cannot tell but up on
high, and will point upwards. And for Tanto, they say far west, but they know
not where.

I have asked them if at any time they have seen Squanto, or Tanto, they say
no there is none sees them, but their Pawwawes, nor they neither, but when they
dream.

Their Pawwawes are their Physicians and Surgions, and as I verily believe they
are all Witches, for they foretell of ill wether, and many strange things,
every Sagamore has one of them belongs to his company, and they are altogether
directed by them.

On a time I was at a Sagamores house and saw a Martins skin, and asked if he
would trucke it, the Sagamore told me no, the Pawwawe used to lay that under
his head when he dreamed, and if he wanted that, he could do nothing, thus we
may perceive how the devil deludes those poor people and keep them in
b^in^nesse.

I find them generally to be marvelous quick of apprehension, and full of
subteltie, they will quickly find any man's disposition, and flatter and humor
him strangely, if they hope to get any thing of him. And yet will they count
him a fool if he do not show a dislike of it, and will say on to another,
that such a man is a Mechecome.

They are slow of speech, and if they hear a man speak much they will laugh
at him, and say he is a Mechecum, that is a fool.

If men of place be to familiar with them, they will not respect them:
therefore it is to be wished that all such persons should be wise in their
Carriage.

The Sagamores will scarce speak to an ordinary man, but will point to their
men, and say Sanops, must speak to Sanops, and Sagamors to Sagamors.

They are very bloody minded and full of Tracherie amongst themselves, one will
kill another for their wives, and he that has the most wives is the brauest
fellow: therefore I would wish no man to trust them, what ever they say or do,
but always to keep a strickt hand over them, and yet to use them kindly and
deal uprightly with them; so shall they please God, keep their reputation
amongst them, and be free from danger.

Their Sagamors are no Kings as I verily believe, for I can see no Government
or Law amongst them but Club Law: and they call all Masters of Ships
Sagamore, or any other man, that they see have a command of men.

Their wives are their slaves and do all their work the men will do nothing
but kill Beasts Fish etc.

On a time reasoning with one of their Sagamors about there having so many
wives, I told him it was no good fashion, he then asked me how many wives
King James had, I told him he never had but one, and she was dead, at which he
wondered, and asked me who then did all the Kings work. You may Imagine he
thought their fashion was universal, and that no King had any to work for
them but their wiufs.

They have no apparel but skins except they have it from the English, or
French, in winter the wear the hair side inwards, in summer outward. They
have a piece of a skin about their loins like a girdle and between their
legs goes another, made fast to the girdle before and behind, which serves to
cover their nakedness, they are all thus apparrelled, going bare headed with
long hair, sometimes you shall not know the men from women but by their
breasts, the men having no hair on their faces.

When their Children are borne they bind them on a piece of board, and sets it
upright, either against a tree or any other place. They keep them thus bound
until they be three months old, and after they are continual naked until
they be about five or six years. Ye shall have them many times take their
Children and bury them in the snow all but their faces for a time, to make them
the better to endure cold: and when they are not above 2. years old, they will
take them and cast them into the Sea, like a little dog or Cat, to learn
them to swim.

Their weapons are bows and arrows, I never saw more then two fowling pieces,
one pistall, about four Halfe-pikes, and three Curt-laces amongst them, so
that we need not to fear them much, if we avoid their Treachery.

Their houses are built in half an hours space being only a few powles or
boughs stuck in the ground and covered with the barks of trees.

Their Language differs as English and Welsh. On a time the Governor was at my
house, and brought with him a Salvage who lived not above 70. miles from the
place which I have made choice of, who talking with another Savage they were
glad to use broken English to express their mind each to other, not being able
to understand one another in their Language.

And to say something of the Country: I will not do therein as some have
done, to my knowledge speak more then is true: I will not tell you that you
may smell the corn fields before you see the Land, neither must men think
that corn does grow naturally (or on trees,) nor will the Dear come when
they are called, or stand still and look one a man, until he shute him, not
knowing a man from a beast, nor the fish leap into the kettle, nor on the dry
Land, neither are they so plentiful, that you may dipp them up in baskets, nor
take Codd in netts to make a voyage, which is no truer: then that the fowls
will present themselves, to you with spitts through them.

But certainly their is foul, Dear, and Fish enough for the taking if men be
dilligent, there be also Vines, Plume trees, Cherey trees, Strawberies,
Goosberies, and Raspes, Walnutts, chestnut, and small nuts, of each great
plenty, there is also great store of parsley and diverse other hole some Earbes,
both for profit and pleasure, with great store of Saxifrage Cersa perilla and
Anni seeds.

And for the ground there is large and goodly Marsh to make meddow, higher land
for pasture and corn.

There be these several sorts of earth, which I have seen, as, Clay, Sand,
Grauill, yea and as black fatt earth, as ever I saw in England in all my life.

There are likewise these helps for ground, as Seasand, Oreworth or Wrack,
Marle blew and white, and some men say there is Lime, but I must confess I
never saw any Limestone, but I have tried the Shells of Fish, and I find them
to be good Lime.

Now let any husbandman tell me, whither there be any fear of having any kind
of Corn, having these several kinds of Earth with these helps, the Climat
being full as good if not better then England.

I dare be bold to say also, there may be Ships as conveniently built there
as in any place of the world, where, I have been, and better cheap. As for
Plancke, crooked Timber, and all other forts what soever can be desired for
such purpose, the world cannot afford better. Masts and Yeards, of all sises,
there be all so Teees growing, whereof Pitch and Tar is made.

And for Sails and all sorts Cordish you need not to want, if you will but
sow Hemp and Flax seed, and after work it. Now there wants nothing but
Iron, and truly I think I have seen Iron-stone there, but I must acknowledge
I have no great judgment in Mineralls, yet I have seen the Iron-workes in
England, and this Stone is like ours. But howsoever if the Country will not
afford Iron, yet it may be easily brought, for it is good Ballast for Ships.

There is also much excellent Timber for Ioyne^s and Coopers: howsoever a
worthy Noble man has been abused, who sent over some to make Pippestaues, who
either for want of skill or industry, did no good. Yet I dare say no place in
England can afford better Timber for Pippe-staues, then four several places
which I have seen in that Country.

Thus have I relaited unto you what I have seen, and do know may be had in
those parts of New England where I have been, yet was I never at the
Mesachusett, which is counted the Paradise of New England, nor at Cape Ann. But
I fear there has been too fair a gloss set on Cape Ann. I am told there is
a good Harbor which makes a fair Inuitation, but where they are in their
entertainment is not answerable, for there is little good ground, and the
Ships which fished there this year, their boats went twenty miles to take
their Fish, and yet they were in great fear of making their Voyages, as one of
the Masters confessed unto me who was at my house.

Neither was I at New-Plimoth, but I fear that place is not so good as many
other, for if it were in my conceit, they would content themselves with it and
not seek for any other having ten times so much ground as would serve ten
times so many people as they have now amongst them. But it seems they have no
Fish to make benifit of, for this year they had one Ship Fisht at Pemoquid,
and an other at Cape Ann, where they have begun a new Plantation, but how long
it will continue I know not.

Neither was I ever farther to the West, then the Isles of Shoulds.

Thus have I done with my commendations of the Country. I will now speak the
worst I know by it.

About the middle of May you shall have little Flies, called Musketoes, which
are like Gnatts, they continue as I am told, until the last of July. These are
very troublesome for the time, for they sting exceedingly both night and day.
But I found by experience that boots or thick stockings would save the
legs, gloves the hands, and tiffeney or some such things which will not much
hinder the sight will save the face, and at night any smoke will secure a man.

The reason of the abundance of these creatures, I take to be the woods which
hinders the air, for I have observed allwaies when the wind did blow but a
little, we were not much troubled with them.

And I verily think that if there were a good number of people planted
together, and that the woods were cut down, the earth were tilled, and the
rubbish which lies on the ground wherein they breed were burnt, and that there
were many chimneyes smoking, such small creatures would do but little hurt.

Another evil or inconvenience I see there, the the snow in winter did lie
very long upon the ground.

But I understand that all the parts of Christendom, were troubled with a cold
winter so well as we. Yet would I ask any man what hurt snow does? The
husbandman will say that Corn is the better for it. And I hope Cattle may be
as well fed in the house there as in England, Scotland, and other Countries,
and he is but an ill husband that cannot find employments for his servants
within doors for that time. As for Wives and Children if they be wise they
will keep themselves close by a good fire, and for men they will have ne
occasion to ride to Faires or Markets. Sysses or Sessions, only Hawks and
Hounds will not then be vsefulll.

Yet let me tell you that it is still a most Christmas before there be any
winter there, so that the cold time does not continue long.

And by all reason that Country should be hotter then England, being many
Degrees farther from he North Pole.

And thus according to my poor understanding I have given you the best
information I can of the people and Country, commodities and discommodities.
Now give me leave to oppose my self against the man before mentioned, and
others, who speaks against the Country, and plantations in those parts, and to
set down such objections as I have heard them make, and my answers, and
afterward let wisdom judge: for my desire is, that the saddle may be set on
the right horse, and the Ass may be rid, and the knave punished, either for
discouraging or encouraging too much, whosoever he be.

CHAP. V.
Certain objections and answers, with sufficient proves how it may be
exceeding profitable to the Commonwealth, and all planters and adventurers.

THey say the Country is good for nothing but to starve so many people as comes
in it.

It is granted that some have been starued to death, and others have hardly
escaped, but where was the fault, in the Country or in themselves. That the
Country is as I have said, I can bring 100 men to justify it; but if men be
neither industrious nor provident, they may starve in the best place of the
world.

About two years since one Mr. Weston sent over about 50 persons to plant,
with little provision; when they came there, they neither applied themselves
to planting of corn nor taking of fish, more then for their present use, but
went about to build Castles in the Air, and making of Forts, neglecting the
plentiful time of fishing. When Winter came their forts would not keep out
hunger, and they having no provision before hand, and wanting both powder and
shot to kill Dear and Foul, many were starued to death, and the rest hardly
escaped. There are four of his men which escaped, now at my plantation, who
have related unto me the whole business.

Again, this last year there went over diverse at one time, and to one place,
with too little provision, some of them are dead, yet I cannot hear of any
that were merely starued, except one whose name was Chapman, a Londoner, and
whether he was starued or no is uncertain; but if he were, Gods just judgment
did appear. For this man (as I am told, by an honest man, who came from London
with him) brought at the least 80 pound worth of provision, and no more but
himself and two servants, which was sufficient for at the least 18 months, if
it had been well used. And yet in 5 months after his arivall in New England he
dyed miserably.

Let me tell you a strange thing of this man (I have it but by relation from
one of his companions) he paid for his passage, and his men's, and provision,
so that he needed not to have spent any thing until his arival in New England,
yet would he at Plimoth (where the ship stayed too long for him and others,
spent seven or eight pound a week in wine, Tobacco, and whores, and for the
maintaining of this expense he daily fetched his provision from aboard, and
sold it at a low rate. And when they were at Sea, his Tobacco being spent, he
gave usually six pence for a pipe; he gave also a suit of clothes, valewed to
be worth 50 shillings for so much Tobacco as was not worth half a crown. Nay
at last, as his Comrade told me, he was glad to become servant to one of his
servants. Then his Master told him, that if he would work he would allow him
one biscuit cake a day, if not he should have but half a cake. He made choice
of half a cake, without work; and so a base lazy fellow made a lamentable
end. Where was the faultnow, in the men, or the Country?

Another objection which I have met with is this: That there is nothing got or
saved by sending men over to plant; neither is it beneficial either to private
men, either Aduenturer or Planter, or good for the Commonwealth.

For answer hereunto, first for matter of profit, it is well known to all
the Merchants of the West Country, who have left almost all other Trade but
this, and yet is grown rich thereby.

Secondly, for the Commonwealth consider these things: 1 the great complaint
that has for a long time been made in England, that our land is overburthened
with people, and that there is no employment for our men; so that it is likely
they must either starve, steal, or prove mutinous. And whether plantations be
a means to help this inconvenience or no, I desire to know?

It has been likewise said unto me, that it benefits the Commonwealth
nothing at all to send men over with provision of clothes victuals, and
continual supplies.

To that I say, let such men as you send thither to plant have provision as
Chapman had for 18 months, and if after they cannot live of themselves, and be
beneficial either to the common wealth or to themselves, let them dye Chapmans
death.

Again, Plantations may be benificiall to the Common wealth, by the
enlargement of his Majesty's Dominions.

Again, by the increase of Shipping, (which is the strength of a Nation, and
that without wasting of our timber which is a commodity that I fear England
will find the want off before many years pass over, for if timber go to
decay as now it does, we shall scarce have any to build or repare, Ships or
houses. Again tell me whither it would be benifitiall to the Commonwealth to
have all our idle persons keept to work and our populous Nation disburthened,
and yet to have them ready to serve our King and Country upon all occasions.

Lastly, tell me whither it would be benifitiall to the Commonwealth to have
all poor people maintained out of those Arts. And every parrish freed from
their weekly paiments to the poor, which if I do make to appear, then let
me be accounted an unworthy fellow. But first let me set down an other
objection, which seems to be of great force, and yet in my conceit is like the
rest shallow, and that is this.

If say they there be so many plantations, there will be no room in the
Country for such Ships as do come yearly to make voiages, and by this means
Ships shall lie still and decay Mariners and Fishermen shall want
employment, and so all will be out of frame if ever we shall have wars. And
therefore howsoever it may be benefitiall to some few persons, yet it will be
hurtful to the Commonwealth. And consequently all such as have any hand in
such businesses are evil members in the Commonwealth.

I answer that if these things were thoroughly examined by his Majesty, the
Parliament or Counsel Table, it would plainly appear, that the most of them
which keep such ado against Plantations, are the greatest enemies to the
public good, and that their show of care for the Commo-wealth is nothing but
a color, for the more cleanely concealing of their unknown profits. It will
also appear, that plantations are for the public good and by that means
there shall be more an better cheap Ships built, and employed, more Mariners
and Fishermen keept to work then now there are, and more people pertakers of
the benefits then now there oath.

Which I prove thus, first there may be Timber had to build Ships, and ground
for Corn and keeping of Cattle, and all for little or nothing.

Secondly there may be more men trained up in fishing then now there is, whose
trade is decayed in England, and they ready to sterue for want of employments.
Thirdly, there may be twice so much fish taken every year as now there is.
For Ships that go to make Voyages, seldom or never keep their boats at Sea
above two Months or ten weeks, for making their Voyage, and I dare maintain
that there is Fish enough to be taken, seven Mounths in the year, if men be
there ready to take all opportunities. Fourthly, the more Fish that is taken
the more Ships there must be for the transportation of it. Fifthly, whereas
now none does take the benifite but a few Merchants, not all the Merchants in
the Land, no not one of a thousand.
By Plantations, not only all the Merchants in the Land, but all the people in
the Land may partake thereof.

And now to show you how the profit may arise.

CHAP. VI.
Shows, how by adventuring of a 100. pounds more on less, a man may profit
so much every year, for 20. years or longer, without any more charge then at
the first.

I Must confess I have studied no other Art a long time but the Mysteries of
New Englands Trade, and I hope at last: I have attained to the understanding of
the secrets of it, which I think the Fishermen are sorry for. But it shall be
no longer concealed, for that I think every good subject is bound to prefer
the public, beforre his own private good.

First therefore, I will show you the charge which every Merchant is at
yearly, in sending their Shipes to fish there, and so near as I can the
profit they make of such Voyages. Then we will see the charge which planters
must be at, in sending men over to stay there, and the profit they are likely
to make, and so by comparing the one with the other, we shall see, which is the
better and more profitable course.

A Shipp of 200. Tunn, commonly does carry in those Voyages 50. men, these men
are at no charge but 20. shillings a man toward their vittels, neither have
they any waiges, but in leiu thereof they have one third part of all the fish
and train.

Another third part there is allowed the owners of the Ship for their
fraught, and the other third part is allowed for the victual, salt, nets,
hooks lines and other implements for taking and making the Fish.

The charge of victualling (which is usually for 9. Mounths,) the salt etc.
does commonly amount to about 800 pounds, and for that they have (as I said one
third part of the Fish) which is, near 67. tun, the Ship being laiden,
which will make 1340, Kintalls, (at the Market) sometimes when they come to a
good Market they sell their Fish for 44. Rialls a Kintall, and so to 36 Rialls,
which is the least, but say they have 40, one time with another, and at that
rate one third of that Ships layding does yield 1340 pounds, which they have
for disbursing of 800 pounds nine Mounths.

Now take notice that they are but 8 or 10 weeks in taking all their Fish, and
about one Mounth longer in making it fit to be Shipped.

Which being considered, then say that such men as are sent over to plant, have
12 Months provision, which will amount to 1066 pounds 13 shillings 4 pence,
these men stay in the Country, and do take the benefit both of the first and
last fishing season, and all other oportunities, the Fishing continuing good,
at the least seven Months in the year, though not all at one time: now I
hope you will grant that they are as likely to take two Ships lading as the
other one, which if they do, one third thereof at the same rate will amount to
2680 pounds, the charge you are at being deducted, the profit is 1019 pounds 6
shillings 8 pence. Now tell me seriously, which is the more profitable course?

Again consider, that in all likelihood this Fish is to be taken in 5.
Months, then have you 7. Months more to employ your men in the Country every
year, about building of Ships, cleaving of pipestaues, or any other thing,
and will that be worth nothing?

Truly this I will say, send men over but with 18 Months provision, and
Cattle, and Corn to plant, and other necessaries, and they shall afford you
thus much profit yearly, without ever putting you to more charge if God bless
them with health, and you from losses, (and I never heard of any great loss by
aduenturing thither) and that you be fitted with good and understanding men to
over see the business, who is able to direct them.

CHAP. VII.
Shows how every parish may be freed of their weekly payments to the poor,
by the profits which may be fetched thence. With certain Objections against
the things contained in this, and the former chapter, with answers thereunto.

AND thus have I showed you what hopes there is of profit by plantations, yet
have I showed you no other means to raise it, but by fish and timber. I would
not have you say there is nothing else in the Country to make any benefit of;
for I assure you it is well known to my self, and others who have been
there, that there are diverse other good things there to be had; but I do not
love to speak of all at one time, but to reserve some, to stop the mouths of
such prating coxcombs as will never be satisfied with any reason, but will
always cavil though to little purpose.

And me thinks I hear some such people buzzing in some other objections, and
bidding me stay, and not fish before the net, for there are many lets, as
these; There are many ships go, that makes not so good voyages as I speak of;
for they are so long beaten in their passage, or on the coast, that the best of
the fishing is past before they be there.

To that I answer, I speak not what every ship does, but what some do, and all
others may do, if they be in the Country to take all opportunities.

2 Obict. That it is not possible to make Plantations so public a business,
as that it should redound to the benefit of all the Kings Subjects. And again
that there will never be so much money rased as to establish such Plantations,
for that most men in this age respects their own profit 100 times more then the
public good; and their hearts are so glewed to the world, that you shall as
soon hang them as draw any thing from them, though it be to never so
charitable an use. And if it should be by way of commandment, it would be a
grievance not to be endured.

But I would ask such men whether they be so void of charity, as that they
will not do themselves good, because some others shall have some by it also?
And whether they will be grieved at a man for showing of them how, by the
disbursing of 20 shillings, they shall have 20 shillings a year for seven, ten
or twenty years, and perhaps for ever?

My desire is not that any should be compelled. Only this I could wish, that
every parish would adventure so much as they pay weekly to the relief of the
poor (which is no great matter.) And so every shire by it self, would send
over men to plant. And if after 18 months they shall not yearly return so
much profits continually as will keep their poor, and ease their purses
(provided always, as I said before, that they send such men as are fit, and
that the Justices of every Shire be careful to appoint such a man to be their
Captain and Director as is honest, and of good understanding, and that God
bless them from losses,) will I be contented to suffer death.

And yet let me tell you, that if it should please God, that once in seven
years a ship should be cast away (which is more then has been usual, for I
dare say, that for every ship that is cast away in those voyages, there is 100
which comes safe) yet it is but that years profit lost, and perhaps not
half.

Another objection may be this, That all men are not Fishermen, and that it is
not so easy a thing to take fish, as I make it.

To that I answer, That take a survey of all the men that goes in these
voyages, and there shall not be found one third of them that are merely
fishermen, and no other Trades.

Nay, I know many ship-Companies, that have amongst them house-Carpenters,
Masons, Smiths, Tailors, Shooemakers, and such like, and in deed it is most fit
they should be such: and I saw by experience, that diverse who were never at Sea
before this year, proved very good fishermen: but I could wish that ever a
fist part of a Company be Fishermen, and the rest will quickly be trained up,
and made skillful.

I would to God that some one Shire, or more, would begin this godly and
profitable course. For certainly, God has created all for the use of man, and
nothing has he created in vain.

And if we will endure poverty in England wilfully, and suffer so good a
Country as this is to lie wast, I am persuaded we are guilty of a grievous
finne against God, and shall never be able to answer it.

I could also wish, that the Lords both spiritual and temporal, the Knights
and others to whom God has given abundance of these outward things, would
(for the honor of God, the comfort of the poor of our Land) join together,
and by a voluntary contribution raise a sum of money, and employ it this way:
And that the profits might go to the maintaining of poor children, and
trayning them up in this course, by which they may be kept from begging and
stealing.

CHAP. VIII.
Contains certain directions for all private persons that intends to go into
New England to plant.

NExt unto this I could wish, that every private man that has a desire this
way, would consider these things which I will here set down before he go too
far, lest he deprive himself of the profit I have showed may be had, and be
one of those that repent when it is too late, and so bring misery upon
himself, and scandalize the Country, as others have done.

1. That it is a Country, where none can live except he either labor
himself, or be able to keep others to labor for him. 2. If a man have a wife
and many small children, not to come there, except for every three loyterers,
he have one worker; which if he have, he may make a shift to live, and not
starve. 3. If a man have but as many good laborers as loyterers, he shall live
much better there then in any place I know. 4. If all be laborers, and no
children, then let him not fear, but to do more good there in seven years
then in England in twenty. 5. Let no man go without 18 months provision, so
shall he take the benefit of two seasons before his provision be spent. 6. Let
as many plant together as may be, for you will find that very comfortable,
profitable and secure.
FINIS.

