THREE GODLY TREATISES.

1. To Comfort the Sick. 2. Against the fear of Death. 3. Of the
Resurrection.
WRITTEN IN FRENCH By Mr. I. D. L'Espine, Preacher of the word of GOD in
ANGEERS.

And Translated into English, by S. VEGHELMAN.

Nullo nisi in Deo Salus.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Richard Ba^^werth. dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the Sign of the Sun. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Sir THOMAS MIDLETON Knight, and Alderman of this
City.
SIr, your Worship may well account me bold to dedicate this my bare
Translation unto you but indeed I know not well how to avoid the imputation,
because that if I should have presented it to any other, I must have done you
wrong, as the case stands; for may it please you to understand, that being in
your Sons study at Grayes Inn (unto whom for a while I read the French
tongue,) he chanced amongst other books to find out the original of the two
last Treatises of this book, which in our perusing, J in my poor judgment
found to be such worthy matters, that I could not content my self with the
reading of them, but borrowed the book of him, and my wast times took
occasion (as well for my own further satisfaction, as to impart it unto
others, my particular friends,) to translate it into our English tongue, not
meaning to have had it published in print. Which when your said Son (whom J
have still found to be a lover of such godly works) understood, he was very
desirous to have it printed, alleging that it could not choose but be very
profitable for the Commonwealth, whereunto (although somewhat unwilling in
regard of my weakness in the performance thereof) yet at last I condescended,
and to amplify the volume, annexed another excellent Treatise to comfort the
sick, written by the same Author, which for order sake I have placed before
the other two, and do present them together unto your Worship, as belonging
unto you of right; beseeching you to take them in as good part as they are
willingly offered, and to have in mind in your judicial censure, that although
I have not showed the part of an excellent Orator in setting of it forth in our
new refined Phrases, yet that J have done the duty of a faithful Translator,
in following the original word for word so near as with sense J could. And if
this my first little labor shall prove agreeable and profitable, I shall not
only think it well bestowed, but also be much encouraged, to go on with the
rest of the same Authors works which will be of a greater continent, wherein
at the request of some, J am already well entered. And thus beseeching the
Almighty to grant you plenty of his Graces, I commend you, and all yours to
his most blessed protection. From my house in London this 14. of May. 1611.

Your Worships at command, S. Veghelman.

To the Overseers of the Church of ANGEERS.
Jesus Christ not without cause amongst those things which he commands us to
require of God in our prayers, does enjoin us to demand that he lead us not
into temptation: for, regarding on the one side the weakness and infirmity which
is in us, and on the other the envy and desire which the devil has of our
ruin, the diligence and pursuit which he uses to procure it, and finally the
subtilties, means and practices that he holds to attain thereunto,
incessantly searching for to devour us like unto a roaring Lion ravening after
his prey: we have great need to stand upon our guard, and to watch and pray for
to prevent his ambuscadoes and surprisings, to the end we be not caught in his
nets. And for as much as the last assaults which an enemy gives to those that
are besieged, are ordinarily the hardest and most furious, we must prepare
betime, and provide our selves (during our life) of those things which shall be
necessary for us at our death, for to arm our selves against the great
assaults which then the devil makes to carry us away. knowing well that if he
fail at that time the place is lost for him, and that it behoues him
shamefully to raise his siege, without hope to come thither any more. Now the
weapons and engines wherewith we should principally furnish our selves, are
faith, and the word of God; faith by the which we apprehend the grace of God,
and the justice of Jesus Christ, for to serve us for a buckler and target, to
cover and defend us from the flames of the enemy. And the word for to assault
him vigorously, and to cast him on the ground, as did Jesus Christ. For there
are but these two means by the which we are able to withstand or repulse his
assaults, and carry away a full victory over him. Therefore is it (my brethren)
that I have gathered you out of the Scripture some notes, proper for to comfort
and strengthen you against the tentations, wherewith you may be assaulted at
the point of death. But I pray you not to stay till that hour, to take them,
and to arm your selves with them; doing as do the negligent Captains, who
stay to furnish the places which are committed unto them, with things needful
for to keep them, till they are compassed and environed with men of war,
whereby it often happens, that finding themselves unprovided of means needful
for to defend themselves, and so finding themselves astonished, they presently
forsake them, and easily yield unto the enemy. But by the example of the Ant
and the Be, make your provision in due time and season, to the end that when
the winter comes you may be well provided of all that shall be needful easily to
pass and sustain the rigor thereof. Above all, I pray you to note in the
treaty which I send you those places which are therein alleged against rashness
and presumption. For they are the two principal tentations which the devil
ordinarily employeth for to overthrow us: representing before our eyes, either
the multitude and greatness of our sins, for to cast us headlong into a
mistrust of the mercy of God: or our virtues and good works, for to raise us up
unto presumption and vain confidence therein. These are the two ropes (says S.
Augustine) which this torme^ter does continually use to strangle and stifle men
with, if they take not heed of him. But it shall be easy for you to prevent
these dangers, calling often to mind that which is said in the scriptures,
touching the corruption and vanity of men to humble them, and on the other side
that which is also spoken of the great and infinite mercy and grace of God, to
assure them of their salvation. I hope that with his help, my labor writing
unto you this little Treatise, and yours in the reading of it attentively, shall
not be unprofitable. So be it.

THE PREFACE.
FOR as much as death of it self is fearful, and that we cannot choose
naturally when we see it come near us, but we must abhor it, and that our
minds must be then assailed with many and sundry fears, and tired with many
cares, it is good to think upon it in good time, and foreseeing it, make a
good provision in our minds, of that which may comfort and strengthen us,
against all the apprehensions that either may any way trouble or disturb them
in us. Whereunto nothing is more necessary, then to have the word of God
always ready and at hand, thereby to strengthen our faith on every side, where
the devil would either break, or make breach therein: as we see our Savior
JESUS CHRIST did, who by this means sent back Satan confounded, who came to
present himself unto him in the wilderness to tempt him. And it is an
undoubted thing that a faith so grounded upon such rocks as are the promises
of God and Jesus Christ, who is the warranty thereof, can never be beaten
down, what shockes soever the devil and our other enemies can hit against it.
Which is the reason that has induced me to write this little Treatise of the
comfort of the sick, wherein I have briefly gathered the passages of the
Scripture which have seemed me most fit, to treat and deduct this matter
well. If it may profit and bring any edification to the Church of God, it is
all that I have pretended or desired in the writing thereof.

A TREATISE TO COMFORT THE SICK, AND TO ASSVRE THEM AGAINST THE FEARS AND
APPREHENSIONS OF THEIR SINS, OF DEATH, OF THE DEVIL, of the Law, and of the
Anger and Judgment of God.
THE life of all men that live in the world is besieged on every side with many
adversities; whereof some are particular to some, and the others are general
and common to all, as are Death, and the diseases which tend thereunto, the
which ordinarily astonish us by so much the more, as they are more dangerous,
and that there is less means to avoid them. For although that Kings,
Emperors, and other Princes, and great Lords can sometimes (with the help of
God, and the great means which he has administered unto them preserve and
warrant themselves from many dangers; yet none of them can save or exempt
themselves, but in the end they must die, either in the wars, by the sword,
or in their beds through age or sickness, or elsewhere, by such accidents, as
God by his providence, even before they were borne, had appointed unto them:
which David teaches us in many places, as in the 82. Psalm where he speaks
of Princes.

Psalm. 82.
I had decreed it in my sight,
As Gods to take you all,
And children to the most of Might,
For love I did you call;
But not withstanding ye shall die,
As men and so decay,
Psalm. 49.
Though Princes you, yet must you pass,
As others clean away.
Item elsewhere where he speaks in general of the condition and end of all men.

Psalm. 89.
What man is he that lives here,
And death shall never see,
Or from the hand of hell his soul,
Shall be delivered free?
or And again in the Psalm following.

Thou grindest man through grief and pain, Psalm. 90.

To dust, to clay; and then,
And then thou say again return,
Again ye sins of men.
So here we see it is an inviolable decree and ordinance of God, that all men
that come into the world, come with this charge not to stay there long, like
unto trees, which are fastened to it by the roots; but to thrill lightly
through it as does the water, 2. Sam. 14.
and to go forth of it as soon as it shall please the Lord to call them. And
although that the most part of us endeavor (as says the Prophet) to make
alliance with death, Isay 28.
or at the least to have some truce or respit with it, for to put back and
stay the coming thereof; we experiment nevertheless every day, that our time
being come, and the day of our assignation past, we must appear before the
Judge at the hour present, and at the very instant, to hear from his mouth a
diffinitiue sentence, by the which life or death is adjudged unto us. Then the
first and principal care which we ought to have, Psalm. 62.
is not too seek as did the King Asa, for the Physicians, 2. Chro. 16.
and to use the recreates and directions which they appoint us, to arm us
against the diseases which may befall us; nor yet presentatiues as used
Metridates, to avoid the danger of poisons which our domesticques or others
may prepare for us; nor finally a strong horse, Psalm. 33.
a well tempered sword, a corslet of proof, to assure us again the hazards of
a battle, for there is nothing of all these that can break the ordinances of
God, or warrant us from his anger, nor (in brief) in any sort turn the
effects and executions of his will; But the first thought that should present
it self before our eyes, whether it be that we will anticipate the evils,
which we foresee may happen, or turn away those which are already happened
unto us; is to desire and seek after the favor and grace of God, which is the
most sovereign and fittest remedy that men can choose, suddenly to prevent all
their adversities. Now by reason that I have been prayed by some brethren my
friends, to gather together and set down in writing, some passages and places
of Scripture to comfort the Sick, and to strengthen them against the terrors
and apprehensions, which then they may have, as well of their Sins, as of
Death, of the Devil, and of the Judgment of God, Romans 13. 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor.
12. Ephesians. 4.
which is yet more fearful then all the rest; knowing that charity binds me
unto it, by the which as with a band all the members of the body of JESUS
CHRIST, are straightly tied together, and that also it was one of the parts of
the charge which God did impose, not only upon the Ministers of the Gospel;
but also upon the overseers, which are given and associated unto them for helps
and assistants; I would not refuse them, although I am not ignorant that diverse
of my fellows, unto whom God has imparted more of his graces, are more
sufficient to deal therein then I am; nevertheless, seeing that the members
in what rank or degree soever they be, ought not to deny any labor to the
body, which is in their power, I will assay with the help of my God, what by
his grace I can do for to content them, and satisfy to their desire. Leaving
then apart all other sorts of affliction, wherewith it pleases God to chastise
and exercise his children: Let us here only speak of sickness and of death,
and let us propound briefly the means and consolations the fittest we can, for
to instruct and accustom men to take and bear them wisely, and moderately;
beginning at sickness which is not a casual thing, and which happens rashly,
now to some, then to others, as it falls out, but we must think that it is sent
by the providence of God.

And although that the ends and occasions are not all alike, nevertheless the
Author of it is alike, as he is of health: for it is from the mouth and
ordinance of God, as says Jeremy, Lamen. 3.
that the good things proceed, and also the evil which are contrary unto them.
And there is no evil (as says Amos) whether it be in the City, Amos. 3.
or in the Country, but comes from God. Then even as Peace and War,
Poverty, and Riches, Liberty and Prison are of God; so are health and
sickness; which David in all his sicknesses did always confess and
acknowledge. In the sixth Psalm does he not say,

Psalm. 6.
Lord in thy wrath reprove me not,
Though I deserve thine ire?
Acknowledging that the sickness wherewith he was so grievously afflicted, was
an effect of the wrath of God whom he had offended. As much says he of it:
Psalm. 38.
Thine arrows do stick fast in me,
Thy hand does press me sore:
And in my flesh no health at all,
Appears any more.
Psalm. 32.
For day and night thy hand on me,
So grievous was and smart,
That all my blood and humors moist
To dryness did convert.
I was as dumb, and to complain, Psalm. 39.

No trouble might me move,
Because I know it was thy work,
My patience for to prove.
Lord take from me thy scourge and plague,
I can them not withstand:
I faint and pine away for fear
Of thy most heavy hand.


Ezechias and Job likewise do not attribute their sickness to any other but to
God* Esaias. 38. Job. 1. Job. 5.19. and 27.
and Job said that in the stink which came out of his flesh half rotten, and
in that heap of worms which it did produce, he did behold one of the hands of
his Savior which stroke him, for afterward to heal him with the oother. Even
the Paganes and unfaithful, have sometimes acknowledged, that their sicknesses
had happened unto them by no other means, but from God, who punished them,
because they had offended him: As Pharao and his family in the time of Abraham,
the Egyptians in the time of Moses, Genesis 12. Exodus 9. Philistines.
and the Philistines in the time of Samuel, when they would have kept in their
country the Arc of the alliance as a captive and prisoner, after they had
taken it in the war, where the children of Israel were euercome; we must then
conclude that all sicknesses, and generally all afflictions come unto us from
God, Psalm. 33.
who does nothing but justly and wisely; for all his works are so well
ordained, that there is nothing but is done by weight, number, and measure, and
grounded upon good reason, although that sometime it be unknown unto us. Then,
as the Goodness, Power, Wisdom, Justice, Doctrine, Constancy, and Verity,
which do appear in all the works of God, are cause that we approve and praise
them; also acknowledging all his virtues in our sicknesses and other
adversities; ought not we to take it in good part, and arm our selves with
this faith and cogitation against the impatience and bitterness of the heart,
which pricks and summons us to murmur and to dispite against God, and sometimes
horribly to blaspheme him, when he does not conform himself, to the
disordinate will and desires of our flesh; which if he did he should become
like unto us, Psalm. 50.
that is to say, flatterers and dissimulators of our vices. To the contrary,
for to be good, holy and virtuous, we ought to endeavor to render our selves
like unto him, and to submit and subject all our desires unto his will; for
otherwise we are hypocrites, Mat. 6.
and every time when in our prayers we ask that his will be done, our heart
secretly belyeth our mouth, and says in our ears, Ha hypocrite, if thou were
at thy choice thou had rather that thine were done then Gods. When in
general men speak unto us of the providence of God, and that by the great,
men ask us whether all that God does be not well done, we yield unto it
presently, and do even propound it to our neighbors and friends, when they are
in any trouble to comfort them, as the fittest, the presentest, and singularest
remedy that we can counsel them: but when we come to apply it to our selves;
we do as Physicians, Simil.
who can well appoint Physic for others, which they will not take for
themselves; nevertheless there is nothing so healthful and necessary for us,
as to exercise our selves daily in the meditation of the providence of God, and
to acknowledge that it rules, ordaines, turns, and disposes all things, to
the end that contemplating always the workman in his works, we may presently
approve it, knowing well that nothing can come out of that shop, but is
polished and perfectly accomplished in all points. And if we do this honor to
good Artificers, Simil.
to receive their work as soon as we see their mark upon it, should we be
more unjust, in esteeming and approving of the works of God, wherein we see
the marks and signs of his goodness or justice so apparent?

It is true indeed that that which happens unto us directly of his goodness,
is more answerable to our taste, then that which is of his justice; as it
happens also, that in the works of nature, some of them are more pleasant unto
us then others, the day is more agreeable then the night, and Summer then
Winter, Comp.
and fair and clear weather rejoices us more then does a weather gloomie,
rainie, and dark. When in like manner, God smileth upon us, and shows us an
open countenance, and that with a soft and favorable regard, he cherishes and
embraces us on every side with his mercy, multiplying without ceasing his
favors upon us, and honoring us every day with some new benefit, Psalm. 89.
(as says the Prophet) that without doubt is a great deal more pleasing unto
us then when he shows us a sad and frowning visage, and when he makes us to
feel some rigor and pricks of his justice. Psalm. 89.
Did not David take more pleasure to hear the fair promises which God made
him, firmly to establish his kingdom, Psalm. 18.
and to continue it to him and his children for ever, to give him victory
against all his enemies, which he saw on every side spread like mudde on the
ground; to see his glory and renown to fly and be noised on every part, among
strange nations, Psalm. 32.
to hear from Gods own mouth, who had found him according to his own heart,
to consider how God had taken and chosen him amongst the sheep, 1 Samuel 13.
Psalm. 78.
to raise him above all the houses of Israel, and in a manner to disgrade wholly
all the house of Saul for to enrich him, and to adorn him with his Roa^s,
having been induced to do him all these favors by nothing else but his only
grace and good will. I demand if so many and so ample demonstrations of the
goodness and mercy of God toward him, were not a great deal more easy for
him to digest; then the great reproaches which he gave him for his ingratitude,
1. Sam. 12.
after he had oftended him? and the fearful threats which he added
thereunto, to discover and publish his sin? to cause that his house should be
filled with murder and with blood and that the honor of his wives should be
tamted by his own son? and nevertheless although that such exploits of the
justice of God were heard, and a burden which was importable unto him, yet did
he yield his shoulder unto him, and old submit himself altogether to his will,
assuring himself always upon his mercy (of the which he did remember
himself always in his judgments) that the charge which he should lay upon
him should not be altogether to press him down. Abac. 3.
And we have a singular example of his patience of this humble obedience which
he was resolved to render unto God in all his adversities, when with so
peaceable, and so moderate a spirit, he bare the great and scandalous injuries
that Semei spoke unto him, at that time when for to save himself from the
conspiracy made by his son, and by his people against him, 2. Sam. 16.
he was constrained to fly in great diligence, and to abandon the City of
Jerusalem; for the principal cause which made him so soft and supple; was that
he did refer all the insolency and bravery which that little mastiffe did
unto him, unto the providence of God which had stirred him up to speak those
injuries unto him, to humble him and try his patience and virtue; Which was
cause likewise, Job. 1. and 2.
that Job after so many and notable losses of all his goods and children, and
finally of the health of his body, did praise God as cheerfully as he did in
his abundance; and when he had the scope of his desires, except the regard
which he had to the providence of God, the which he did contemplate in all his
miseries, for (...) them at his hands as special blessings and favors which
he does to his children, yea the most dear and best beloved. And it suffices
not that we believe that all our sicknesses come from God: but we must
believe it in all the circumstances thereof, as that they are great, long,
tedious, painful, languishing, and sometimes incurable, that by reason of
their contagion, they let our friends and kindred from coming to visit and
comfort us; that we find no remedy no more then that poor woman that had
the bloody flixe which held her twelve years, Mat. 9. Luc. 5. John. 5.
and the poor man who was eight and thirty years bound in his bed, by reason
of a palsy wherewith he was stricken in all the members of his body. We must
also attribute all that to God, and think that he is equally free to dispense
of the good and evil, which he draws from his treasures, unto whom he
thinks good, and in such portion and measure as it pleases him, without that
any one can justly complain of him, or with reason demand of him why he
does so or so.

After that we are resolved in our minds; that not only the sicknesses, but
also all other evils, happen unto us by the providence of God, and that from
them we have gathered all the comforts which may be drawn: Then, to comfort us
yet more, we must consider who is this God that sends them unto us, and how
near he is unto us; for it is not such a God as are those that these foolish
people worship, Psalm. 96.
and are but a thing of nothing whereto they give themselves, Psalm. 115.
who cannot see anything with their eyes, nor hear with their cares, nor smell
with their nose, nor taste with their tongues, nor speak with their mouths,
nor take, nor give with their hands, nor walk with their feetes, who in brief
can neither do well nor ill; for they are not only mortal like unto men and
beasts, but things altogether dead, who have neither sense, nor understanding,
nor moving, nor feeling, nor force, nor vigor. But the God in whom we believe,
Act. 14. Hebr. 1.
is the Creator of heaven and earth, who causes every thing to live, and die,
and breathe, who bears the world and all things contained therein, by the only
virtue of his powerful word, who with one of his fingers measures and poises
the earth, as with a beam, Esaias 40. Psalm. 147.
who knows the number and names of the Stars, Romans 4. Revel, 1.
who calls the things that are not, as well as if they were; who bears the
keys of life and death, who is infinite in himself, and all his virtues are
infinite: for his Goodness, Mercy, Wisdom, Justice, and Virtue, are so high
and so great, that the length thereof can be no more covered then the breadth,
nor the breadth then the thickenesse.

Now this most good and most great God is not far from us, 1. Cor. 3. Psalm.
5. Psalm. 17.
neither in presence nor in affection: he is in us as in his Temple, for to
sanctify us, and round about us for to cover us with his favor, and to hide
every part of us under the shadow of his wings. He dwells in us as in his
house, 2. Cor. 6.
for to govern and enrich us, to furnish and adorn us; our understandings and
our hearts are his galleries, wherein he walks and takes his pleasure, there
devising with us by the divine thoughts and holy affections which he has
inspired. And albeit that he replenisheth heaven and earth, and that the love
which he bears to his creatures, and the care which he has of them, are
cause that he does assist and accomodate them with all that is necessary for to
preserve and entertayne them. Nevertheless, Psa. 148.
we are nearer to his heart, Job 3. Ephesians. 6.
having received of him so many favors, as to have espoused, conjoined, and
united our selves inseparably unto him, and by the means of this union, to
receive us into a participation and communalty of all his goodness. Then even
as a woman that knows her self well beloved of her husband, and which does
wholly possess him, cannot fear that he should use to her any evil
intreatment; Simil.
also we ought to assure our selves, that God who loves us infinitely, cannot
do nor suffer any thing to be done unto us to hurt us; Romans 5.
for if as says S. Paul, when we are enemies, we were reconciled unto him by
the death of his Son; much more rather being already reconciled unto him,
shall we be delivered by his life; Is there any thing more absurd then to
think that God who is the sovereign good, can be the author of any evil;
Iam. 3.
does a fountain cast our both sweet and bitter water?

The Heretics themselves as Marcion, and the Manicheans, for the horror which
they had of such a blasphemy, would establish two principles; the one of life
and of the light, the other of death and of darkness, not being able to
persuade themselves that of God, Psalm. 36.
who is the fountain of life and all happiness, can proceed any misery:
Wherein they were not deceived, but insomuch only that from a good maxim, they
drew a bad conclusion. For indeed, the good in such a degree as God is, that
is to say, sovereign and infinite, can no more produce evil, then fire cold,
light darkness, and life death. And it is the reason for the which God after
he had created the world and all that therein is contained, and attentively
considered all his works, did testify that they were all very good; which
ought not only to be referred to the works themselves of the creation; but
extended generally unto all that God does, without any exception.

For seeing God is always like unto himself, and that in him, as says S.
James, Psalm. 102. Iam. 1.
there is no mutability nor shadow of changing, as his goodness is eternal;
also at all times it can produce nothing but good works, and good things; And
this is the reason for the which answering by his Prophet unto the people, Ose
13.
who did complain of the great calamities which had befallen them, he says,
that he was not the cause of them, and that as for him he had only procured
their good and their salvation. But that they themselves were cause of their
ruin, and of all the desolations that were seen in their Country; Simil.
for as the fire produces fire, and all other things produce or bring forth
their like; so does God from whom no evil can come. Yea, but sickness,
famine, poverty, sterility, wars, are they not evils which God sends, and
so is the author of them? God sends them indeed as well to the good as to the
wicked, to the one to punish their sins, which is a just and laudable act, to
the other to exercise their virtue, or to draw and bring them to repentance.
And if we would be good husbands, and appropriate our sickness well, and
refer it to the ends for the which God sends them unto us, we might gather
much fruit, and many good lessons by it: In the first place, there is nothing
that is so necessary, as to know our sins, and the vice and corruption which
is in us, to humble our selves to God, and to dispose our selves to require and
seek after his grace, which is the only means by the which they may be
remitted, covered and hidden before him, to avoid his judgment, and the
condemnation which otherwise should therein be prepared for us, if they were
not pardoned unto us. Now so it is that naturally we are blind in the judgment
which we have of our selves, by reason that the excessive and unmeasured love
which we have of our selves, does blind our eyes, in such sort that we cannot
perceive, nor discover the malice, the hypocrisy, the pride, the vanity, the
mistrust, the injustice, the impiety, the idolatry, the inhumanity, and all the
infinite peruersity, which from our childhood is bred in our hearts, and
discloseth it self with the time, according to the occasions which are
presented unto us. For although that we do all endeavor for a time to hide
the malice which we have conceived in our hearts, Simil.
like unto women that desire to steal their children: Nevertheless, when the
belly comes to swell, and that their time of childing draws near, they are
constrained to avouch that which they had always denied. Also we never
confess our debts, until such time as by certain proofs we are convinced of
them, yet will we then shuffle and always abate something if we can of the
enormity of our faults; whereof we have a notable example in our first
Parents, who although they were before God, (from whom nothing can be hid
nor covered) and that they were lively pursued and accused by their own
consciences; nevertheless, they sought all the slights they could to disguise
and turn from them the fault which they had committed, Genesis 3.
and could not be brought, neither by the fear and reverence of God who spoke
to them, neither by the accusation and witnessing of their own conscience,
which urged them on every side, to come to this point, to confess clearly,
and without any inuolution, their disobedience, their ingratitude and their
ambition, by the which they were precipitate; wherein men may see how difficult
it is to men, to acknowledge and confess their sins in verity, and without
hypocrisy. It may likewise be seen in the Patriarks, who did so long
dissemble their wickedness, and the cruel and inhumane conspiracy, Genesis 42.
which they had made against their poor brother, the which they did never
acknowledge until such time they were compelled thereunto by the anguish and
distress whereunto God reduced them to put them in mind thereof; and David
how long did he sleep in his sin, whereupon he never thought earnestly,
until such time as he felt himself touched to the quick by the hand of God,
and that he found himself almost undone, as he himself does confess it.

Psalm. 32.
For night and day thy hand on me,
So grievous was and smart,
That all my blood and humors moist,
To dryness did convert.
I did therefore confess my fault
And all my sins discover,
Then thou o Lord did me forgive,
And all my sins pass over.
And S. Peter after he had so oftentimes denied his Master, even cursing and
swearing that he never knew him; Would he not have perseuered therein, and
altogether have abandoned the Church of God as well as Judas, and infinite more
Apostates, that go from it every day, if Jesus Christ had not cast his eye
upon him, Luke 22.
and by his looking on penetrated into his conscience, for to make him to feel
and weep for his sin? And S. Paul who like unto a furious ravening beast,
sought every where for Christians to slay and devour them; would he ever have
repented of these faults? But to the contrary, would he not have been
obstinate and hardened, Act. 9.
to have spoiled and dispersed the flock, if the strong hand of the
Sheep-heard who watched over it, had not held him back and slaid him short,
and compelled him perforce to know and feel the great evil that he had done?
By these few examples, may be clearly perceived that although men are covered
and filled with an infinite number of sins, they cannot nevertheless know
nor feel them, if God does not give them the grace to set them before their
eyes; Which is the reason for the which in many passages of the Scripture,
Penitence (which co^sists partly in the knowledge and displeasure that man has
of his sin) is called the gift of God. 2. Tin. 2.
For as we cannot know God, nor the goods which we ought to seek for in him,
and hope for of his goodness; if first we be not inwardly illuminated by his
spirit, and outwardly taught by his word; Also we cannot well know our selves,
nor well sound the vice and evil which is in our hearts, if the spirit of God
does not give us eyes for to behold our selves, in the looking glass of his
law. For to see our selves and that which is in us, we have no eyes naturally,
no more then that old Lamia, Compar.
who as fables recount had eyes which she laid away in her house, because she
would there see nothing, and put them on when she went forth, to spy and
observe what was done at her neighbors. Whereunto also agrees the fable of
Esop, wherein is said that we carry every man his wallet, in the hinder part
whereof we put our own sins that they may never come before our eyes, and in
the forepart, the sins of our neighbors, to the end that seeing them we may have
argument to detract and speak evil of them. And it is a marvelous thing that
our sins should be such great and dangerous diseases, and even mortal, and
that notwithstanding they are so little sensible to those that by them are
detayned; for we see how the Idolaters, hypocrites, ambitious, covetous, and
voluptuous men do solace themselves without sorrow, not any whit complaining
of their evil. Which is more, the Idolater has never more pleasure, then when
he beholds, kisses, and worships his Idol; nor the hypocrite is never more
content, then at such time as by the appearance of some counterfeit virtue, he
can insinuate himself into some good opinion, and purchase the estimation and
reputation to be virtuous; and the others never esteem themselves more happy
then when they peaceably enjoy the honors, riches, pleasures of this world,
which they desire; and the cause of all this is, that they have no feeling of
their evil, which is so much the more dangerous. As amongst the bodily
diseases, Simil.
the most pernicious are those that bring least pain, as Palsies, Lethargies,
Apoplexies, and other cold Catarres, for such diseases are ordinarily
incurable; which was cause in times past to make an ancient man to say, he did
well desire not to be sick altogether, but if he were, he desired also to
feel his pain: giving to understand thereby, that there is nothing more
dangerous then to be sick, and not to think they are so. What shall then
become of us, who never think we are so vicious as we are, and always to be
more virtuous then we are? for we never balance nor weigh our vices with our
virtues, but with false weights and false measures; by reason that when we
weigh our vices we take the small weight, and the great when it is question of
our virtues, the which we always think to be greater then they are, by
reason of this furious love of our selves, the which stops our eyes, and
blinds our sight. Simil.
And even as the vapors and mists which evening and morning rise from the
earth, being put between us and the Sun, make it seem greater unto us then
it is; so when we behold our virtues through this love which couers our eyes,
we judge them always to be more greater and more perfect then they are. What
must we then do to correct and amend this false judgment which we have of our
selves, esteeming our selves more virtuous and less vicious then we are? we
must learn to know our selves, and to that end meditate the law of God day and
night, referring thereunto, our thoughts, our affections, our words, our
actions, and in sum all the estate of our life, as the straight rule,
according to the which it ought to be measured. But because we are badde
Scholars, and that we never use a full and entire duty to apply our selves to
this study; God like unto a good Master and careful for the profit of his
children, is constrained often times to take rods, to awake and set us forward,
and by sicknesses and other mortifications of our flesh, makes us to
acknowledge the corruption which is in us, for there is nothing that rangeth us
better under the obedience of the will of God, then a good discipline (as says
Esaias) that men learn justice when the judgments of God are upon the earth.
Esaias 26.


Ere thou did touch me with thy rod, Psalm. 119.

I erred and went astray,
But now I keep thy holy word,
And make it all my stay.
It is then a thing very profitable to man, to have sickness and all other
adversities, which happen unto us, when we can use them well; for they make us
to know and feel our sins; As to the contrary health and prosperity makes us
to forget them; for when in prime of age, we are healthful and Iustie, and
that all things smile upon us, we think upon nothing but of leaping and
dancing like to young fawnes and young beasts. Simil.
And if any one should come toward us then, to give us some instructions of
our duty, he should lose his labor and his time; for there is nothing more
fiere, more resty, more contrary and indocible then a man cherished and made
wanton by fortune, and puffed up with his prosperity: which God reprooues in
the people by his Prophet, I would speak unto thee in thy felicity, Iere. 22.
but thou would never vouchsafe to hearken unto me; and such has been
always thy fashion from thy youth. And Solomon speaking of the prosperity of
fools, Prou. 1.
says, that it is that which ruinates and makes them foolish. Surely faith
Xenophon, it is very difficult for a man to be wise and happy also, and that
being raised up to honor, and abounding in riches, and in pleasures, he should
acknowledge himself to be dust and ashes, Genesis 18. Psalm. 39.
as did Abraham, or to be nonothing but vanity, as did David; But to the
contrary all think themselves Gods, or half Gods, as we may plainly see in
Senacherib, Jsa. 10. Jsa. 14.
Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus Theus, Xerxes, Alexander; King Herod, Domitian, who
became so insolent and proud, by reason of their prosperity, that they would
compare themselves with God; Which Philip of Macedone considering, because that
by the happy success of his business he should not come to fall into such
an arrogance, appointed one of his Gentlemen of his chamber, to say to him
every morning at his awaking, Remember (Philip) that thou art a mortal man;
and did very wisely therein, foreseeing that prosperity is a very slippery
thing, which makes men drunk, Simil.
and sleep more easily then does sweet wine when men drink it, or the
whisling of a sweet air which is heard. The sicknesses then which do awake
us, and make us to acknowledge what is our condition, and that the sin which
is in us, is the principal cause that brings them, are very healthful unto
us, and we ought to take them as so many aduertisementes, which God sends us
that we should remember him, and do our duty in seeking to him. The which we
do when first we confess our sins and faults before him, with a sorrowful and
contrite heart, Psalm. 40.
with a feeling of his anger, and by the displeasure which we have for having
offended him, after we have received so many graces and favors which we have
received from him in so great abundance, that we cannot not only number and
reckon them, but also sufficiently comprehend them. Hereupon to be the more
stirred up and pricked to the quick with the feeling of our ingratitudes, we
ought to remember, that having been created after the Image and semblance of
God, Genesis 1.
and raised by that means above all the creatures of the earth, without having
any regard to the dignity unto the which he had called us, Col. 3.
we have not only hid and darkened it, turning our selves wholly from Justice,
Holiness and Verity, which are the virtues by the which we may resemble him,
for to follow the errors and vanities of the world, the foolish desires and
disordinate lusts of our flesh, brief, for to walk in our own ways, and to
represent in the whole course of our lives, the picture and image of the
devil. After that he had drawn us out of the darkness of ignorance, wherein
we were as it were buried, and raised over us the brightness of his face, by
the preaching of his Gospel, and by the knowledge which he had given us of
his son, that we should follow him, who is the light of the world, John. 1.
Ephe. 5.
and to communicate no more with the works of darkness: But forsaking our
guide, and the way which he had traced us, we have strayed in a thousand, and
a thousand sorts, and like poor blind men having no body to conduct and
direct us but our appetite and foolish fantasies, which are likewise blind,
we have been many times at the very brinke of the ditch, and ready to fall
therein and to be quite lost: If it had not pleased this good God, John. 5.
Heb. 2.
to surmount our malice, by his goodness, and to remember us when we had
quite forgotten him. Moreover he had delivered us from the bondage of the
devil, and of sin, which was a great deal more harder and cruel then that
of Egypt, and of Babylon could be; and had set us free, to the end that we
should stand firm in the liberty which had been so dearly purchased for us,
by the death of his only and well-beloved Son. But how many times have we
looked behind us, as did Lots wife, Genesis 19.
and not only grudged at the leaving of our Egypt, but also taken the way to
return thither, and to remit our selves under the yoke from the which we
were taken? loving better to live shamefully and miserably under the tyranny of
the devil, of the world, and of our flesh, then happily and in honor under the
reign of the Son of God. Again how have we acknowledged this so great, and
altogether incomparable grace which he has done unto us, when he came by
manner of speaking to seek us in the brothers house, when being transported,
and as it were possessed with a spirit of adultery, we ran too and fro, and
did abandon our selves to the devil, our Ruffian, about all the high places
where we meet with his pictures, adultering with him publicly, without being
stayed neither with fear, nor shame, nor the reverence of God, who was the
spectator of all this stinking filthiness: who nevertheless could not hinder
it until he gathered and retired us into his house, for to espouse and
conioyne us unto him by an indissoluble band of friendship, requiring no other
dowry of us, but pudicitie and chastity, and promising to forget al our life
passed, provided that afterward we would keep faith and loyalty with him. Then
considering now how often, and in how many sorts we have broken our marriage,
adultering with the world and the lusts and concupiscences of our flesh, some
making their riches their God, others their belly, and their pleasures, and
others their offices and honors, worshipping our passions and cupidities, which
we have settled in our hearts as upon an Altar, and in the most eminent place of
the Temple of God, which by that means we have polluted and profaned, and by
consequent deserved to die the death, that is to say, to be quiterazed out and
exterminate. And what shame and confusion is if for us, that having been
elected and chosen out of the midst of the world, and of children of wrath
which we were by nature, Ephesians. 2.
made the children of God to this end, to live and die in his service, and to
vow unto him for ever, a love, a fear, an honor and obedience with all our
heart, and with all our strength? and in the mean time, that in our whole
conversation we have showed our selves rebellious, debauched and stiff necked,
rejecting all discipline, stopping as did the serpent our ears, because we
would not be enchanted by the sweet voice of the Gospel, taking again our
stony and uncircumcised hearts, to the end that the promises and ordinances of
God, might be no more ingraued. How often has our Pastor assaied to gather us
together under his wings as the Hen does her chickens, Mat. 23.
and we would not? how often has he knocked at our gates, and we would not
vouchsafe to open? how many times has he stretched forth his Esa. 65.
arm to embrace us, and we have been always rebellious unto him: when he
has sought us, we have fled from him, when he has called us, we have not
answered him, when he has commanded us to follow him, we have fained our
selves weary, when he has beaten us, we have been hardened, like unto the
iron with the knocking of the hammer; when he has cherished us, Simil.
we have flattered our selves, whether he drew us unto him by promises, or
astonished us by his threatenings, Mat. 11.
we have grown obstinate not to believe the one, and to scoff at the other:
Brief, what means soever he has assayed to take us, we have kept our selves
from him like unto cunning beasts; Item we were his vine, wherein he took all
his pleasure, Isay. 5.
and in the which he had spared nothing, to till it well, and to fit it in all
perfection; he had planted it with exquisite plants, cleansed it, and pruned
it, closed and shut it up on every side, for the hope which he had to gather
great store of fruit in the season. But it fell out all otherwise, for in
stead of bringing him good grapes, we have brought forth nothing but veriuyce,
and crabbes, and it has not stayed at us, that we have not been quite cut off
from the flock, and that like unto old and dry bauens we have not been many
times cast into the fire there to be burned and consumed for ever? What has
hindered also, that being barren trees, even in the season and agreeable times,
as speaks the Prophet, Mat. 21.
Jesus Christ finding no fruit in us, did not curse us at the same hour, as he
did the Fig Tree? For with what excuse could we cover our sterility? Were we
not planted by the clear running brooks of the word of God, wherewith we were
continually watered; and nevertheless, we have brought forth nothing but
thorns such as are in hedges? Mat. 3.
Seeing that the axe is laid to the root of the tree, which brings not forth
good fruit, who keeps us from being cut off by the roots, and cast into the
fire there for to be burned everlastingly? We cannot deny but that we have
been as unprofitable straw, and that often times we have built with stubble, 1.
Cor. 3.
upon the precious foundation of us and of the Church; What then has hindered,
that we have not been carried away with the wind, and that the fire has not
consumed us and all our works? Iere. 3.
In time past the Prophets reproched Judah, that she had justified her sister
by the dissolutions unto the which she had yet more abandoned her self then
she. But we may well confess, that we have justified them both, for what sort
of wickedness have we omitted or forgotten to commit? the impieties, the
blasphemies, the profanation of the pure and legitimate service of God, the
contempt of his word: has not injustice, oppression, violence, rebellions,
disobedience, hatred, envy, murder, adultery, detraction, reigned amongst us?
If men make account of the goodness of the earth, Heb. 6.
by the good fruits which it brings forth, Iam. 1.
being well tilled and well watered with rain from heaven, what will men say
to the contrary of that which has every way abundantly received an infinite
number of blessings from above from the father of light, and brings forth
nevertheless nothing but thorns and thistles? What duty have we done, I say
not of children, servants and friends (as we were held) but of the least
creatures that are in the world, the which do all contain themselves under
the obedience of their Creator, without changing the room or place which he
has appointed for them, without being weary of keeping it, and executing his
commandment? Our fathers have seen, and we see after them, that the Heavens,
the Sun, the Moon, the Elements, the Beasts, the Plants, the Trees, have
always kept one course since they were created, and kept a measure in their
paces, and in all their mouings which God had given them, without going any jot
out of their rancks, nor troubling the order which from the beginning was
established in the whole world. But men have always been Annomaux and
Heteroclites, and we are worse then ever; And which is more, we see that for
the most part, men for to heap up the measure of all their other misdeedes,
add impudency unto them, stopping their ears against all admonitions, and
showing in all their behauiours the brazen face of a strumpet. Isa. 3.
Where is now in sinners the shamefastness which was seen in Daniel? Dan. 9.
Where is that earthly face of the poor Publicane, who durst not lift up his
eyes to heaven, Luke 18.
for shame that he had so often offended that good God? Luke 7.
Where are the rivers of tears, which ran down from the poor sinful
woman, in such great abundance that they were sufficient to wash the feet of
Jesus Christ? Where are the eyes converted into fountains, as were those of
Jeremy, Iere. 9.
with lamenting for the sins and miseries of the world? Where is that
bitterness of heart, wherewith S. Peter was seized upon, Luke 22. Act. 2.
as soon as his sin came before his eyes? Where is that compunction and
sorrow which the people showed to have after the admonishing which S. Peter
made them, for that they had so vildly consented to the death of Jesus Christ,
to obey unto the appetite and desire of the high Priests? Where is this grief
and sorrow of heart wherewith David was pressed, when groaning and sighing he
said?

Psalm. 6.
So grievous is my plaint and moan,
That I wax wondrous faint,
All the night long I wash my bed
With tears of my complaint.
Psalm. 51:
Remorse and sorrow do constrain
Me to acknowledge mine excess.
My sins alas do still remain
Before my face without release.
Jonah 3.
Where is that sackcloth and ashes, wherewith the Ninevites did show that their
repentance was good and entire, and with the which without doubt they shall at
the day of judgment condemn the debated and repented maskes, which we see in
Italy and Auignon? Where is there any at this time who with grief and
displeasure that they have for having offended God, do tear their hair and
pluck off their beards, as Isay. 22.
the Prophets required of those in their time whom they did exhort to penitence,
to turn away the wrath of God when they were threatened with it, or to appease
and quench it when they were bereaved by it? Where shall we find any, that
with a soul pierced through with grief and sorrow, with an humble, broken,
and contrite heart, as the Prophet Joel demands it, Joel 2.
with a sorrowful conscience, with an entire and clear displeasure of all
feining hypocrisy, does present himself before the majesty of God, for to
make a true confession of our faults unto him, and in all humility to beseech
and require his mercy to pardon them? By this may we know what is the
hardness of our hearts, the little feeling which we have of our sins, the
little fear that we have to offend God, the little love and reverence that
we bear him, and the little obedience which we render him: And being such,
what faith (O God) can we have in thee? Faith (as says S. Peter) purifies
the heart; Act. 10.
What faith then can those pretend whose hearts are yet full of filthiness and
corruption; who have them big and swollen with ambition, with pride, with
covetousness, with voluptuousness, with impatience, with hatred, with envy,
and other such like carnal and disordinate passions and affections of the
mind? Faith should regenerate and make us new creatures, of earthly it should
make us heavenly, of carnal it should make us spiritual men, of children of
wrath and of darkness, children of grace and of light; Brief, of Devils it
makes Angels. Whosoever then has yet his heart fastened to the earth, and
thinks not at all or very little upon those things that come from above; who
join not with the Spirit to combat against the flesh; Galat. 5.
But being set upon by his concupiscences or desires, presently yields the
place unto them, and makes himself their slave; he that abuses the grace of
God, and in stead of preserving and keeping it, living in his fear and
obedience of his holy will, has put it back by a licencious life, whereto he
abandons himself under a vain confidence, which he has to find it always
ready to excuse and cover all his faults, does not he deceive himself to
think that he is faithful, having no better faith then that of Devils, nor
that can any more assure them at the day of judgment, then does theirs? Item,
does not faith take away from us the judgment and condemnation of God, John 3
^. 5. Romans 8.
as says Jesus Christ, that he that believes comes not to judgment; and S.
Paul, that there is no condemnation for those that are ingrafted by faith into
the body of Jesus Christ? Now those which live according to the flesh, and that
have no fear to do that which God forbids, and to the contrary to omit
that which he has commanded, how can they avoid the sentence of death and
malediction, given and pronounced in the law against all those that transgress
it, seeing withal that they do it wittingly and willingly of set purpose? John
3. Psalm. 44. Romans 3.
If their consciences condemn them, God who is more then their consciences,
and who knows and sownds their hearts to the depth, how can he be able to
absolve them? Item, faith when it is true does clothe us with the justice and
spirit of Jesus Christ, which do hold together and follow each other in such
sort that the one is never found without the other. As then albeit that the
spirit of God cannot reside in us, but it must do his work, that is to say,
but it must illuminate, sanctify, quicken, guide and govern in our
counsels, thoughts, affections, words, and actions; what faith do we
think we have, if we do not show it by a holy and laudable conversation,
Gal. 5. Ephesians. 4.
mortifying and crucifying our flesh with all the hists thereof, putting off
the old man with all his affections, shunning and detesting all sorts of vices,
and applying our selves on the other side to all sorts of virtue, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
abstaining not only from evil, but also from all things that may have any
show of it. And for conclusion continuing this exercise without any
interruption until he end of our life? Mat. 10.
For if any one (as says the Prophet) having done his duty by living well for
a while, Eze. 33.
comes to stray and to decline from the strayte way before they be gotten to
the end; God will have no remembrance of all his precedent justices, and will
not approve one of them when he shall come to hear his account; for he does
not promise salvation and life to those that have begun well; but to those
only that with all alacrity and a heart invincible have continued until the
end. And gives not the crown of prise and immortality, but unto them that
shall run to the end of the race, 1. Cor. 9.
and have duly fought all the days of their life. Simil.
For what good does it to a Merchant that goes to Sea toward the Indies to
lade his ship with some precious commodities, if after he has escaped many
perils, and sailed happily some fourteen or fifteen Months, he comes to
split his ship and to suffer ship-wracke before he arriues at his port? All
those that went out of Egypt under the conduct of Moses, did not enter into
the land of Canaan; for the most part stayed by the way, and were excluded from
the rest which God had promised to their fathers, by reason of their
incredulity and other vices, which the Apostle repeates in the first to the
Corinthians. 1. Cor. 10.
Also we must not hope once to enjoy the happy everlasting life, which God
has promised and kept for his elect, if we do not persevere until the end in
the faith of his word, and the obedience of his holy will; the which is given
to very few. Moreover, faith, when it is true, is it not always accompanied
with a heat and vehemency of Spirit, which brings it forth for to confess
the name of God, to sing his praise publicly, Romans 10.
to preach and announce his Miracles every where; also for to make a public
confession and profession of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, and without any
fear, shame, or dissimulation, to maintain and defend the truth constantly
against all those that resist and will contrary it? But if we will well
examine our selves, and judge truly and without any flattery of all our
actions, we must acknowledge and confess, that amongst the most of us there
is a marvelous slacknesse, to do our duty in this behalf, and that we have
been very cold and timorous, when it has been question to oppose our selves
against the wicked, whom we have heard and seen to blaspheme the name of God,
Jesus Christ, religion and the truth, holding our peace, and suffering that in
our presence the honor of God was not only stained and offended, but trodden
under foot, without opening our mouths to speak one word in the defense
thereof. Ah what zeal have we also showed to redress the Tabernacle of Jacob,
which was quite thrown down? What pity and compassion have we had seeing the
ruins and horrible desolations happened so long since to the poor City of
Sion? Is there any man that can say, that he has employed himself and means
as he ought, to reedifie the Temple of God, and close again the breaches which
the enemy had made on every side of his Church? How many is there of us to
whom it cannot be justly reproached, that he has been too much more curious
in building again and repayring his own house then Gods? Aggee. 1.
For indeed there are very few that have in such recommendation as they ought
the pure and legitimate service of God, for to reestablish it when it is broken
and profaned, and to preserve it when it is whole. And nevertheless although
that we are so cold and negligent to procure that the Order and Estate of the
Church should be put into her first dignity and splendor, and that God may be
there preached, known, and worshipped in spirit and truth, as is required in
his word; there is none but think themselves faithful and Christians, yea of
the most perfect, although that they seek not the kingdom of God and his
justice, Mat. 6.
but after other things, and then only when there remains nothing of his
smallest businesses to be done. If, to be short, the most certain judgment
that can be given of a good tree, is the goodness of the fruit which it
brings forth, we may also judge of faith that it is good when it sets our
conscience at rest, Romans 5.
and that in it we feel neither fear, nor inistrust, nor scruple, nor doubt,
nor sorrow, nor torment, that can trouble or call it in question before God:
but are altogether resolved and assured to be absolved in his judgment, and
justified of all the faults and accusations which the devil may there propose
against us, by the means of the ransom which Jesus Christ has these paid by
his death and his blood for us, Mat. 20. 1. These. 1. Romans 10.
and by that payment wholly satisfied to his justice; Item, when it incites and
stirs us up to praise God continually, whether it be in prosperity, for to
be thankful for it, or in adversity, for to prostrate our selves before him,
and humbly to entreat him to deliver us out of it, or if he dispose
otherwise, at least to assuage and moderate it, and on the other side to be
fortified in such sort, that in conforming our selves wholly to his will, we
may bear it patiently as long as it shall please him. If finally it does
kindle and inflame us with a love of God, Gal. 5.
and of our neighbors, in such sort that we may boil with desire to serve and
honor God, to summon and induce as many as we can to know and glorify him,
and that we have no greater sorrow and dispite then to see him dishonored and
blasphemed. And for our neighbors that we love them as our own flesh, and
members of one body with us, as our brethren, and children of one father which
we and they have in heaven; and that we make a demonstration of the love which
we bear them by all the effects and means that shall be possible unto us,
desiring their good, their joy, their honors, their rest, advancement and
advantage as our own; to assist them in all their necessities, with money,
with counsel, with favor, with labor, with friends, with recommendations,
and without any exceptions, with all that shall be in our power. Now who is he
among us, yea of those that have profited the best, and are the most advanced
in the knowledge and fear of God, that dares to boast to have such a faith,
which were sufficient to combat with the devil and all the gates of hell, and
to render us invincible against all the tentations wherewith we may be
assaulted; Mat. 16.
and even withdraw our thoughts and affections from the earth, and to ravish
and lift them wholly on high above the heavens, in a certain hope of the
immortality and happy life, which God has there promised and prepared for
us? The which hope would make us altogether to forget the world, with all the
glory, pomp, pleasures, riches, and magnificence thereof, and no more esteem
of all those corruptible things then of doung: because of the taste which it
should give us of the sweetness of the heavenly joys, and by the which it
should suddenly blot out, and cool the feeling and remembrance of all other
pleasures, Mat. 17.
as it happened to the three disciples, in whose presence Jesus Christ was
transfigured in the mountain, for they had scarce tasted a little of the happy
life: but in the same instant they lost the remembrance of all the things of
this world, desiring nothing at all, but the continuance only of that estate
and happiness, wherein they found themselves to be. Seeing then that faith,
hope and charity, which are the three principal virtues which ought to shine
in the life and in all the works of a Christian man, are imperfect and weak
in us, and that even in the perfectest that can be found in the world, there be
so many doubts, mistrustes, vain fears, presumption, hatred, envy, choler,
and other like passions and desires, the which like unto stains do blot out
the gloss and beauty of the virtues that are in us; we must when it is
question to present our selves before the face and majesty of our God, with
the sick folks that we desire to comfort and admonish, begin by an humble
confession of our faults; Confession of the sick.
acknowledging first our ingratitudes, and the neglect, which has been in us
to hear and meditate his word, to put it in practice, to profit the gifts and
singular grace, which he has parted unto us; to consider and have always
before our eyes, the end and mark of our vocation, thither for to refer and
address the whole estate of our lives, to walk in his fear, and not to soil
his image which has been restored and painted again in us in our
regeneration; to keep faith and loyalty with him, which we have promised in
the alliance which he has contracted with us, to live and die to his glory, to
offer to him our bodies for holy and living Sacrifice, Romans 12.
and not to conform our selves to this world; to live and walk in spirit,
that we do not accomplish the desires of the flesh; to walk as children of
light, to stand firm in the liberty in the which Christ has set us free, Gal.
5. Romans 6.
and to take heed that we be not brought under the yoke and bondage of sin:
to fight valiantly against the lusts of our flesh, to resist the devil, to
hinder that sin have no domination nor rule over us, so well to rule our life
and all our fashions, that we may not only be free from all crime and sin,
but also from all doubt; to look carefully that our liberty be not occasion
that our flesh goes astray, and that we do not commit any act that may bring
scandal to our neighbors, or that it may in any sort induce our adversaries
to blame the name of God, and of Jesus Christ, and defame the religion we
follow; to seek for nothing but those things only that are from above, Col. 3.
and to have all our heart and our understanding, our thoughts and our
affections, and to make short, all our conversation in heaven, to have always
our lamps burning, and our selves prepared to wait for the coming of the
Lord, and to be ready to follow him, and by his grace to do whatsoever he
shall command us: incessantly to pray and praise God, and to depend upon his
providence, wholly to remit both our selves and our affairs unto him,
altogether to resign our will unto him, and to conclude, to love him with all
our heart, with all our soul, and with all our understanding; and our
neighbor as our self. After you have propounded before the sick all the
faults which he has committed, to astonish him, and by that means to prepare
him to require, and receive the grace of God, you must present before his eyes
what he has justly deserved by the offenses which he has done, to wit, to be
altogether devoured by the wrath of God, whereof he has made a heap,
continuing in his sin, and so long abusing of his patience and benignity.
Romans 2.
Item, to be overthrown with his judgment, the which (as says the Apostle)
is prepared for all that disobey God, and singularly for those servants, who
knowing his will, and being well informed of all that belongs to their duty,
have made no reckoning to acquire themselves of it. Item, that all the curses
contained in the law, and ordained against those that transgress it, fall upon
his head; seeing it has been his hap to deborde himself not only once and
twice by ignorance and frailty, but to violate the holy ordinances of God
wittingly and willingly, almost as many times as he has been invited and
solicited by the devil and his own desires. Item, to be banished and shut out
of the kingdom of heaven; seeing that the flesh according to the which he
has lived, cannot inherit nor possess it; 1. Cor. 15.
for if our first parents have been shamefully hunted out of Paradise, Romans 5.
whither they had been called after their creation, by reason of their
disobedience; what does man now deserve by so many rebellions and iniquities
which he drinks and swallows down every day as if it were water?

Item, to be condemned to everlasting death, and consigned for ever to fire and
torments with the devil and the reprobate, seeing that it is the recompense
and reward of sins and for conclusion, that he has deserved to be buried in
hell, and there in the flame to suffer such torments as does the evil rich
man, Luc. 16.
for having disdained the poor and their afflictions, and having made no
reckoning to succor them at their need, and use such humanity toward them as
he would have desired of others, Simil.
being reduced to like necessity. When the sick shall be thus brought down,
and that in the law as in a looking glass, his judgment and condemnation
shall be represented unto him, and when he shall be seen to be wounded and
pierced with sorrow in his heart, then must be applied to his sore lenitiue
medicines, Simil.
and do as does a mason when he cuts a stone, first they give it great strokes
with the hammer till they get out great flakes; and presently after they polish
and plain it in such sort with the chisell, that the blows are no more
perceived. So it must be that after the sick has been so rudely entreated,
and having by the rigorous threatenings of the law let him down into hell, be
is drawn up again by propounding unto him the sweet and amiable promises of
the Gospel, to the end that by the sweetness of this oil, the biting
sowernesse of the law may be swe^^ned, and that the joy of the good things of
the grace of God, may make him to pass away and forget the sorrow and despair
whereinto the law reduces him; first he must be showed, that the bond which
was against us, Col. 2.2.
and the which lay in the ordinances, and was contrary unto us, has bin
blotted out, abolished, and fastened on the cross of Jesus Christ.

Item, that Jesus Christ has bought us again from the malediction and curse
of the law, when he was made a curse for us; (for it is written, Gal. 3.
cursed is he that hangs on a tree) that the blessing of Abraham should come
upon the the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; to the end that we should receive
the promise of the spirit of faith. That Christ is the end of the law; Romans 9.
and of justice to all believers. And finally that by the perfect obedience
which he has rendered to God, observing all his commandments, without
breaking the^ in any thing; or omitting one only little point of them to the
enduring of the cursed death of the Cross for us, because that such was the
will of his Father; he has procured a general remission and abolition of all
our sin, and an acquitta^ce of all our debts and obligatio^s; the which he has
paid not in gold, silver, or precious stones, Peter. 2.
but with his own blood, which is an incomparable price and ransom; And over
and above he has purchased us a righteousness, the which being allowed us by
the faith and assurance which we have thereof as well by his word and
Sacraments, as his spirit which gives testimony thereof in our hearts, we
ought to take away all fear and apprehension that we may have of our sins, of
death, of the devil, of the rigor, and malediction of the law, and finally of
the wrath and judgment of God. Romans 4.
For to begin at our sins, being clothed with the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, we ought to assure our selves not only that they are covered and hid
from being perceived and discovered before the eyes and face of our God, but
altogether blotted out as it were with a sponge, and disperced as are the
clouds by the Sun and the wind; and although they were as red as vermelion or
scarlet, yet shall they become as white a snow, (as says Isay.) And before him
David. Isa. 1.


Psalm. 51.
If thou with Isope purge this blot,
I shall be cleaner then the glass,
And if thou wash away my spot,
The snow in whiteness shall I pass.
And it makes no matter what manner of sins, not in what number they be, so
they be not sins against the holy Ghost, not yet in what sort and manner they
have been committed, whether by ignorance, weakness, or of set malice; for
the sin cannot so much abound, but the grace of God which is procured us by the
death and justice of Jesus Christ does yet more abound. And although that the
sin being committed against the infinite majesty of God, be also for that
regard reputed infinite, yet that hinders not that the blood of Christ, which
by the eternal spirit has offered him self to God himself without any spot,
does cleanse our consciences from dead works; to serve the living God, Heb. 9.
as writes the Apostle to the Hebrews. For the divinity being unseparably
united to the humanity in the person of Jesus Christ, is cause by his
omnipote^ce, that his death has an infinite virtue to redeem us, and his
justice to sanctify us, and his life to quicken and make us happy; insomuch as
being God, as he is stronger then the devil, also are his works more
powerful to save, then are those of his enemies to destroy and to consume. His
justice has more force to justify us then sin (whereof the devil is
author) has to condemn us, and his purity to wash and make us clean, then
this filthy spirit has by his filthiness to defile us. And his light is more
strong for to illuminate and lighten us, then the darkness of the Prince of
the world to blind us; and his truth to instruct us, then the errors of the
father of lies to abuse us; brief, his life has more virtue to raise us
again and quicken us, then the envy of this murderer and homicide has to
kill and slay us. Whereby we see that the Son of God, (as says St. John) is
not come into the world to any other end, but to destroy the works of the
devil; and that in his blood all our enemies, that is to say, all our sins
have been drowned, no more nor less then in old time Pharao and the enemies of
Gods people, were all disco^fited and drowned in the red sea. It is that strong
one which St. Luke says, surpriseth an other strong one, Luc. 11.
whom he has combated and overcome, and from whom he has taken all the
weapons wherein he trusted; that is to say, sin, death, and the law, leading
even with him captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.
when he ascended into heaven; so that the devil being so disarmed, has no
more means to hurt us, neither by our sins which Jesus Christ has washed away
in his blood, neither by death which he has swallowed up dying, neither by the
law, unto the which he has fully satisfied, accomplishing at, and submitting
himself for us to the curse which in it was ordained for us. And albeit that
he be always our adversary, and that for the hatred that he bears us, and
the desire which he has to hinder us, and let us from attaining to the
felicity from whence he was put away by his pride, he walks like a roaring
Lion round about us, seeking whom he may devour; nevertheless we may resist
him being strong in the faith, 1. Pet. 5.
and abiding ancred in the persuasion which we have of the remission of
sins, which is everlasting, as is the virtue and efficacy of the death of
JESUS CHRIST by the which it was obtained for us: it is the freedom of the
Church, in the which all that are faithful ought to retire themselves to be
in safety, when they are pursued by their own consciences, and the other
Sergeants of the justice of God. Whereunto David also exhorts us.

Let Israel then boldly
In the Lord put his trust, Psalm. 30.

He is the God of mercy,
That his deliver must:
For he it is that must save
Israel from his sin,
And to all such as surely have
Their confidence in him.
And else where.

Psalm. 51.
The heavy heart, the mind oppressed
O Lord thou never do reject,
And to say truth, it is the best,
And of all sacrifice the effect.
And Jesus Christ who is the sovereign medicine of our souls, and who came
into the world but to seek those that were lost, and to heal that which was
sick, and (as says the Prophet) to bear our infirmities; Isa. 53.
can he take more pleasure then to see us coming toward him to be discharged
for our sins? did he ever reject a Publicane or sinner that came to present
himself before him? (as says the Prophet.)

Psalm. 103.
The Lord is kind and merciful
When sinners do him grieve;
The slowest to conceive a wrath,
And readiest to forgive.
We may plainly see it in the examples of the Publicane, of the woman sinner,
of the prodigal, of the good thief, of David, of St. Peter, Mat. 16.
of St. Paul, and of the servant that was indebted ten thousand Talents to
his master, which were acquitted him as soon as he had confessed the debt,
and had requested and prayed his master to have pity on him? Ha, to what end
has the father sent hither his son? why was he anointed by the holy Ghost?
Is it not to declare unto the captives that he came from heaven to pay their
ransom, and to draw them out of captivity, Isa. 61.
and to the prisoners, that he is come to open the prison for them, and to the
indebted, that he is come to acquit them, and to the sick for to heal them?
And the Apostles which he has sent throughout the world, as he was sent of his
Father, what charge had they? was it not to publish the Gospel, that is to
say, the remission of sins to all creatures in the name of Jesus Christ? If
then that their labor be not in vain, and that likewise of the faithful
Ministers which came after them; we must assure our selves of the remission of
our sins. There is yet more, that if they were not pardoned us in believing
him, the Birth, the Death, the Resurrection, the Ascension, the Intercession;
Brief, all the mystery of Jesus Christ, should be as nothing, barren and
fruitless, 1. Cor. 15.
and our faith altogether vain. Item, how could we believe him to be our
Jesus and our Emanuel, Mat. 1.
if he did not save us from our sins, Isa. 59. Heb. 8. Iere. 3.
and carry away by that means the enmities that are between him and us, which
turn away and hinder him that he cannot associate with us? What assurance
would we have more, then that the new alliance which he has contracted with
us, was confirmed and ratified by his death, and the blood which he has
shed, if he had not forgotten all our iniquities, and did not write his
laws in our hearts by his holy Spirit; seeing that they are the promises and
conditions, under the which it has been conceived and yielded? What fruit
would come unto us of his Priesthood, and of the Sacrifice which he has
offered to his Father for our redemption, if we remain in our sins? 1. John
2.
If also it were not purposely for our sins, and not only for ours, but also
for those of the whole world? How could we assure our selves that he is our
Mediator and Aduocat, and under that assurance go to the throne of grace, to
obtain mercy, and to find grace to be aided in time of need? We must not
then doubt the remission of sins; And as says David, Psalm. 103.
God does remove our sins from us,
And our offenses all,
As far as is the Sun rising,
Full distant from his fall.


And how can we doubt of it, seeing we carry it printed and sealed, not only
in our hearts and consciences, but also in our bodies, with the two great
seals of the Chancellor of the Kingdom of heaven, to wit, Baptism and the
Lords Supper? Let then the sick assure themselves, that believing the
remission of his sins, he obtain. It presently; For he deals with us
according to our faith. And S. Ambrose writes, that all that we believe we
obtain; for we cannot believe but what God has told and promised us, who is
so faithful and true in his promises, Romans 3.
that even the unbelief and infidelity of men cannot abolish his truth. And
although that the wicked rejecting and contemning the word and promise of God,
hinder that by their contempt and obstinacy it does not bring forth his effect,
in not showing the virtue which it should have to save them if they did believe
it; nevertheless that cannot prejudice others that receive and obey it, nor
hinder that believing in it, and by faith receiving it into their hearts, but
they shall be quickened; Simil.
even as a man that should close his eyes against the light, and fly from it,
cannot hinder, but he that opens his eyes shall enjoy and be enlightened
with it; For the light and color are the objects of the eye, which being
opened, whole and well disposed, apprehends them presently. Also is the promise
of God the object of the faithful, which causes that man receives it so
soon as it is denounced unto him, and that he has heard it published;
provided that by the spirit of God his heart be before hand prepared; For
otherwise if it should continue in its stony nature, the spiritual seed were
not able to take root therein, nor to fructify no more then the bodily seed
cast upon a stone, for a land untilled. The sick being then thus resolved of
the remission of all their sins, need not in any sort to doubt but that they
are in the grace and favor of God, and that from thence they may infallibly
hope for eternal life; For there is nothing that can exclude us from it, but
sin only, the which being not imputed unto us, but being covered and quite
blotted out, what is it that can hinder or keep back God from us? And if by
faith (as has been said) we remain conjoined and united inseparably with him
who is a fountain of life, Ephesians. 3.
and the scope of all good things, what can we desire but we shall presently
find it in him? Psalm. 56.
What mishap or misery can we fear, being in his favor? If he be with us,
who shall be against us? Then are we assured that the good will that he bears
us, shall be continued for ever, and that there is no creature in the world
that shall be able to turn it from us (as writes S. Paul to the Romans.) I am
assured that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor
Power, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which he
bears us in Christ Jesus our Lord. And a little before this passage. What
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall it be tribulation or anguish,
or persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? All men then
that have been ingrafted once by faith into the body of Jesus Christ, and by
consequent adopted of God, and received into his favor, and into his house as
his child, never departs from thence afterward; But as he is assured of his
election by his vocation and justification, which have followed; Romans 5.
also is he of his glorification, which is the conclusion, and as it were the
crown of his salvation. For the gifts and the vocation of God are without
repentance; which the Apostle writes very plainly to the Romans. Romans 8.
Those that he has predestinate, he has also called, and those that he has
called he has also justified, and those that he has justified he has also
glorified. And although that there are always many vices and infirmities in
us, and that it even happens sometimes unto us to fall very heavily, as it
happened to David, S. Peter, S. Paul, and almost to all the Saints, yea the
perfectest that ever were; never he less there is a point upon the which we
should be always grounded, and which ought greatly to comfort us, and uphold
us against all the assaults and temptations of Satan; which is that which
Saint John says, 1. John 3.
Whosoever is borne of God does not sin: (meaning to death) for the seed of
him remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is of God; which he
declares yet better else where. 1. John 5.
All iniquity, faith he, is sin: but there is some sin which is not to
death; we know that whosoever is borne of God sins not; For by that he
gives sufficiently to understand, that faith and the word of God, which is in
the soul and in the foundation, are never altogether drawn away and
exterminate out of the hearts of the elect, and that by that reason they cannot
commit that sin which S. John calls to death. For although that faith be
sometimes as it were buried in them, having not any moving, nor feeling no more
then a dead thing; nevertheless, it is not altogether quenched, no more then a
fire covered in the ashes, Simil.
although it neither show his light nor heat; nor likewise dead no more then a
tree in winter, when the sap being drawn to the root, brings forth
neither flowers, nor leaves, nor fruit that show any life, which nevertheless
is clasped up within, and hidden in the root. There is the reason for the
which David speaking of the faithful man in the 27. Psalm says, Though that
he fall, Psalm. 37.
yet is he sure
Not utterly to quail,
Because the Lord stretches out his hand
At need, and does not fail.
And eeke his seed I will sustain Psalm. 89.

For ever strong and sure,
So that his seat shall still remain
While heaven and earth endure.
If that his sons forsake my law,
And so begin to swerue,
And of my judgments have none awe
Nor will not them observe,
Or if they do not use aright
My statutes to them made,
And set all my commandments light
And will not keep my trade;
Then with my rod will I begin
Their doings to amend,
And with scourging for their sin,
When that they do offend:
My mercy yet and my goodness,
I will not take him fro,
Nor handle him with craftiness,
And so my truth forgo.
But sure my covenant I will hold,
With all that I have spoke,
No word the which my lips have told,
Shall alter or be broke.
Psalm. 23.
And finally while breath does last,
Thy grace shall me defend,
And in the house of God will I
My life for ever spend.
Psalm. 30.
For why his anger but a space
Does last, and slack again,
But in his favor and his grace
Always does life remain.
Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore,
Shall lodge with us all night,
The Lord to joy will us restore
Before the day be light.
Psalm. 65.
The man is blessed whom thou do choose
Within thy courts to dwell,
Thy house and temple he shall use,
With pleasures that excel.
Psalm. 119.
Of thy goodness still showed to me,
Thou will not Lord I frustrate be.


All these passages and others like out of the Scripture must be alleged to
the sick to strengthen their faith on every side, and to furnish and arm it
strongly against the inflamed darts and arrows of the Devil, to the end that
on which side soever he may shoot them, he may not find any place bare,
where he may reach or wound him; For we must not doubt but then he will use
all his forces, and all his sleights, for to shake our faith and to overcome
us. But the means to defend our selves, is, to keep our selves always in our
fortress, and never to depart from the promises of God, whatsoever he can
allege to the contrary; Let us propound unto him that which I say, says,
that Israel is saved by the Lord, with an eternal salvation, Isay 45.
and that we shall not be confounded nor ashamed from this time forth for
evermore. And elsewhere, Isay 51.
The heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall be worn out
like a garment, and the inhabitants thereof shall likewise be abolished; But
my salvation shall be for ever, and my justice shall never fail. And to the
end that the demonstrations which he has sometimes made us of his anger, do
not beget in our hearts too great a fear, whereof may follow a mistrust of
him, and of the promises of salvation which he has made us, let us hear what
says this Prophet, speaking to the Church in the name of God: Isay 54.
I have forsaken thee for a little while, but I will gather thee again by
great compassion: I have a little as in a moment of indignation hid my face
from thee: But I have had compassion on thee by an everlasting benignity, says
the Lord thy Redeemer; And this shall be as Noah's waters, for as I swear, that
I would no more pass the waters of Noah upon the earth; So have I sworn that
I will no more be angry with thee, and will reprove thee no more. For
although that the mountains be moved, and the little hills shake, my mercy
shall never go from thee, and the alliance of my peace shall not stir, says
the Lord, who has compassion over thee. God in Ose to this purpose says unto
his Church, Ose 2.
that he will espouse her for ever in faith, justice, verity, mercy, and
judgment; declaring thereby unto it, that the alliance that he will contract
with it, shall be firm and inviolable, and for to be such as he shall sound
it in himself, that is to say, in his mercy, verity, and justice, requiring
only that it walk upright before him, and that in all its ways it follow a
roundnesse and integrity, keeping it self as much as it may from deceit and
hypocrisy. Which must be diligently noted; for the Devil for to astonish us,
and to make us to doubt of the effect of the promises of GOD, when we are
ready to appear in judgment, and when being adiourned, our cause is ready to
be called upon; if he see that we stand firm, and that for to answer
thereunto, we are settled upon the word of his Gospel, in the which he
offers us his grace, he yields unto us that God is true in all that he
says, and likewise that he offers us his grace and life by his promise; But
that he is hindered from accomplishing it, and exhibiting that which he has
promised by our indignity and unworthiness, because that having so much
offended him, even since we were illuminated and regenerate by the knowledge
of his truth, and that he has done us so much favor as to receive us into
his family, and to adopt us for his children, we by our ingratitude have made
our selves altogether incapable of these benefits, and unworthy, that he
should fulfill the promises which he has made us. Thereupon to drive back this
temptation, which is the strongest and most dangerous wherewith we can be
assailed; We must first note, that as the only good pleasure of God, has
been the beginning and only motive, by the which he has been induced to
desire to contract an alliance with us, and to offer unto us the promise of
salvation, by the which he declares himself our God, and receives us to be
his people, that also his grace is the only means, that may stir him up to
accomplish it toward us. By the means whereof Saint Paul said, Romans 6.
that the reward of sin is death, but that grace is life; Although that to
dispose well and set down the Antithese, it seems that he ought to have
said, to oppose member against member, That as life is the reward of our
righteousness, also is death of our sins; But to give us to understand, that
life which is the effect of the promise, is gratis as well as is the promise
which offers it unto us, he has wholly attributed it to the grace of God,
without making any mention of our works, nor virtues. Whereunto ought to be
referred that which he alleges in the two and thirtieth Psalm, where David
declares that the beatitude of man consists in that God allows him his
justice without works, saying, Happy are they whose iniquities are remitted,
and whose sins are covered; Happy is the man unto whom God has not imputed
his sin. Seeing then that the beatitudes which God offers us in his
promises are not granted in the contemplation and favor of the merits and
virtues which are in man, but by the only grace of God, thence it follows that
as the price and dignity of our works, cannot purchase us everlasting life,
that also our indignity and unworthiness cannot hinder us from attayning it.
For it is a mere gift of God, which he bestows on whom he pleases,
according to his mercy, and not according to the merit of our justices, the
which are not only imperfect, but also defiled with much filthiness, by reason
that our hearts from whence they proceed, can never be so well cleansed in
this world, but there does still remain much corruption whereby they are
contaminate; Which is the cause that the Prophet prays God so fervently not
to enter into judgment with him.

In judgment with thy servant Lord
Oh enter not at all, Psalm. 143.

For justified be in thy sight,
Not one that lives shall.
And else where.

Psalm. 130.
O Lord our God if thou do weigh
Our sins, and them peruse,
Who shall then escape, and say
I can my self excuse?
And that St. Augustine in his book of Confessions says this good and
memorable sentence; Mishap to all our righteousness, if it be examined and
judged without mercy. But nevertheless that cannot hinder, but God will give
us eternal life as he has promised; provided that we know, feel and
confess our indignity; For there is nothing that makes us capable, and (if it
may be so spoken) worthy of the favors and blessings of our God, but the
knowledge and feeling which we have in our selves to be altogether unworthy
of them. And what worthiness could be noted in the Thief hanged upon the
Cross, at one of the sides of Jesus Christ, who had continued in his theeuery
and wickedness until the extremity of his life, Luke 23.
without ever having known his Savior, until the hour that he was ready to
give up the Ghost? And nevertheless, he had no sooner opened his mouth,
generally to confess and to require the mercy of Jesus Christ, but it was
presently said unto him, Thou shall be this day in Paradise with me; Luke 16.
What worthiness was there in the poor Publicane, who for the great shame and
horror which he had of his life passed, durst not life up his eyes, yet
nevertheless presently when he had acknowledged his pitiful and miserable
estate wherein he was, and prayed God to have pity on him, then al his sins
were forgiven him, and he went home justified? What dignity was found in Saint
Paul, when he went to Damascus transported with rage and fury, to inform
himself according to the commission which he had obtained of the high Priest,
Act. 9.
of all those that did confess the name of Jesus Christ, and to bring them
bound and shackled to Jerusalem, to the end to prosecute against them, and to
cause them to be condemned to death? And nevertheless, although he was so
horrible a blasphemer of Jesus Christ and his Church, and by that means
unworthy, not only to be of the number of the Apostles (as he himself
confesses) but also of the sheep, God forgetting in an instant all these
injuries which had been done to him and to his Church, made an elected and
chosen instrument of him, and a trumpet chosen among all his fellows, for to
publish his Gospel throughout the world. Who will say that he had any regard
to his merit, and to the dignity of his gestures and actions, when he raised
him to such a degree of honor, and has done him as much or more favor then
to any of all his fellows. Seeing that he himself does so highly magnify
grace whereunto he attributes all that he ever thought, said, or did, that
was commendable; It is then the only grace of God that is the foundation and
means of the life which we hope for; as it also is of justice and holiness,
by the which we attain it. Which Jesus Christ plainly teaches us, when
speaking of his sheep, he says that they hear his voice, John 10.
and follow him, and in the mean time that he gives them eternal life;
signifying thereby that it is freely granted unto them, and of mere gift, and
not in contemplation and respect that they have heard his voice, and followed
his steps. Which also cannot be gathered by the words of Moses, in the
twentieth of Exodus, Exodus 20.
where God promises to continue his mercy to a thousand generations toward
those that love him, and keep his commandments; Whereupon we must note, that
he promises no other recompense to his servants for all their services, but to
use mercy toward them and their posterity. As much may we observe in the four
and twentieth Psalm where the Prophet speaking of those that shall go up into
the mountain of the Lord, says, that it shall be a man, Whose hands are
harmless, Psalm. 24.
and whose heart
No spot there does defile,
His soul not set on vanity,
Whose heart has sworn no guile.


And adds afterward.

Him that is such a one, the Lord
Shall place in blessefull plight,
And God his God and Savior,
Shall yield to him his right.
This is the brood of Travelers,
In seeking of his grace,
As Jacob did the Israelites,
In that time of his race.
For to give to understand, that what duty soever we have done in obeying to
God, in washing our hearts from all evil thoughts and affections, and our
hands from all evil works, in humbling, our selves under the hand of God,
and presuming nothing of our selves, nor of our virtues; nevertheless that for
all that, we shall not go up into the mountain of our Lord, but that it shall
be only in favor of the grace which he gives us, and of the mercy that it
pleases him to show toward us. And it is much better (to comfort and assure
us our hope entirely, that it be grounded upon his mercy and truth, which are
firm and immovable, then upon the dignity of our works and virtues, which
are so imperfect. Now when ye shall see the sick well resolved of the
remission of all his sins, and that in his heart there shall no more remain
any fear of them, that does any more trouble his conscience; then you must
proceed farther, and arm him against the horror and apprehension that he
may have of death, in showing unto him out of the word of God, that it has
been done away, and swallowed up by the death of Jesus Christ, who speaking by
the mouth of the Prophet, says to Death, Ose. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
O Death I will be thy death. For seeing that the sting of death is sin, and
the power of sin is the law, Jesus Christ accomplishing the law for us, has
by that means taken away the sting of death; so that it can hurt us no more;
And likewise broken the power of sin, so that it can no more condemn us. And
although the decree and ordinance of God bears, that all men must die, and
that being come out of the dust, they shall return to dust again:
nevertheless to speak properly, the separation of the body and the soul in
the faithful man, ought not to be called death. Also JESUS CHRIST speaking to
his Disciples of Lazarus, Job. 11.
who was dead, told them, that he slept. This manner of speaking is very
usual in the old Testament, to signify the death of the Fathers. St. Paul
uses it also when he writes to the Corinthians and Thessalonians, 1. Cor.
15. 1. Thessa.
of those that shall be departed before the day of the resurrection, which be
calls sleeping. But he speaks yet more magnificently in the Epistle which he
writes to the Philippians, where he calls the departure of souls from
bodies, Phil. 1.
dislodging. Which agrees well with the saying of Jesus Christ, who being
desirous to advertise his Disciples of his approaching death, said unto them,
That the hour drew near, John. 13.
that he was to pass from this world to go to God the Father; calling the
corporal death a passage by the which we must pass out of this vale of
misery, for to enter into the fruition and possession of a Paradise that is to
say, of a place of assured rest, and full of delectation. The which the ancient
Greeks have also taught by the name which they have given to death, calling
it, Thanaton, which is as much to say according to the Tymologie which Temiste
has given of it, that ano eis ton theon; in French is, now up to God, and
Telutin eion ei teletin, consecration: as if he would say that death is like
unto a solemn ceremony, by the which the faithful are altogether consecrated
and dedicated to God, for afterward to apply themselves to no other exercise
then to sing the praises of God and to sanctify his holy name. And for that
regard Jesus Christ did also call it Baptism, Mat. 20.
because that by death we pass as by a port, and through a water to arrive in a
place of rest and pleasure whither we pretend. And if the body which the
Greeks call Soma, to show that it is a sepulcher to the soul, which they call
by a name coming very near to the other, to wit, Sima, where it seems that
during this life it is as it were buried and interred; when it pleases God to
take it away, is it not as if he made it to come out of a tomb, and that he
raised it. What occasion then can men have to fly from bodily death, and to
abhor it so; seeing that separating the soul from the body, it puts the
soul out of prison, and sends it in liberty to heaven, there to be received
into the bosom of Jesus Christ, and to enjoy with him and all the happy
spirits the everlasting consolations which are there promised and reserved for
the elect. And the body on the other side in the earth, as in a bed, there for
to sleep and rest at his ease, without that his slumber be any more
interrupted or troubled, neither by troublesome dreams, nor by cares and
solicitudes, nor by fears, nor by alarmes and violent noyses, nor by any other
occasion whatsoever, and that until the day of the resurrection, in the which
it shall be awaked by the sound of Gods trumpet, and reunitted to the soul,
having lost his mortality, corruption, 2. Cor. 15.
dishonor and weakness in the earth, and bing clothed again with glory,
force, immortality and incorruption. Wherein we may see that it is without
reason that men are so greatly afraid of the bodily death; the which for a
time separates the body from the soul to the great profit of the one and the
other; For the body is by that means out of all danger, not only of sin
and of miseries which it draws along with it, but also of all temptation,
lying and resting in the earth in assured hope of the resurrection and
everlasting life. And although it seem to be altogether deprived of life in
the earrh, because that the soul departing from it, leaves it without any
moving, or feeling, and also that it rots and is reduced to dust; nevertheless
being always accompanied with the spirit and infinite virtue of God who
quickneth all things, it is not altogether separated from life, as says St.
Paul; If the spirit of him that has raised up Jesus Christ from the dead,
dwells in us, he that has raised him up will also quicke^ your mortal bodies,
because his spirit dwells in you. And it is the reason for the which
elsewhere, he being willing to give us a picture of the resurrection to come of
our bodies, does propound it unto us under the figure of a seed put into the
ground, which has life in it self; although that being in a garner it has no
show of any, and that holding it in our hands we can judge no otherwise of it
but that it is a dead thing; nevertheless, when it is put into the earth, where
it might seem that the life which should be in it, should there be quite
stifled and smothered, it shows it self, and comes forth even as out of the
rottenness, from whence we see spings the stalk, which afterward takes
nourishment and growth, which are effects and demonstrations of the life which
was hid therein before it was put into the earth. And albeit that God in the
Scripture calls himself the God Abraham, Mat. 22.
even after his death, and that he is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, from thence it follows that not only the soul of Abraham which he
has redeemed by the death of his Son, is yet living after it is separated
from the body; but that also the body which does participate in this same
redemption, and which is united and incorporated with JESUS CHRIST, for to be
of his members, and which finally has been consecrated and dedicated unto
God, to the end that he should dwell in it as his Temple, is not deprived of
life, 1. Cor. 3.
even at that time when it is rotted in the earth. Because that it is always
accompanied with the grace of God, and comprehended as well as the soul in the
everlasting alliance, which he has made with his people: the which alliance
is a spring and vein of life, not unto the souls only, but unto the bodies
also of all the faithful. And if as says St. John in his revelations, those
are happy that die in the Lord, Revel. 14
and there is no beatitude without life; from thence we must conclude of two
things, the one, either that the beatitude comes not to the body, or if it
does reach to it, that it is not exempt from life lying in the earth. For
although that being all worme-eaten it does not in such estate show any
appearance of life, yet does it always retain as it were a seed thereof, and
budde, which shall appear at the day of the resurrection, when the Spirit of
God pouring his infinite virtue upon our bodies, it shall raise them, and shall
adorn them with glory and excellency, which God has promised to his elect.
And even as in an egg there is a chicken, Simil.
and life hidden, the which is put in evidence when the hen comes to heat
and brood it with her heat; so the immortality and life, to the participation
whereof as well our souls as our bodies have been called from that time that
by faith we have received the Gospel, (which is a word of life, and an
incorruptible seed) shall be as it were disclosed at the latter day by the
power of our God, who will revive us as the heaven, 2. Peter. 3.
the earth and all other creatures, which the^ shall be delivered quite from the
bondage of corruption. Romans 8.
Whereof we are also assured by the Baptism which has been communicated unto
us in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost* for the
water which has been powered on our bodies, and which the Scripture calls the
washing of regeneration, is not to assure us that our souls only are washed
and cleansed in the blood of Jesus Christ, by the remission of our sins, but
also our bodies. And that both together; being covered and clothed with the
justice and innocence of the Son of God, and over and above sanctified by his
Spirit, are presently put in possession of life, and altogether freed and
delivered from the bondage of death, which has no power (as we have said) but
there only where sin reigns, which is the only cause of death. The Lords
Supper, in the which by faith taking the bread and wine which therein are
administered by the M^ster, we are received to the participation of the flesh
and blood of Jesus Christ, and so united and incorporated with him, that for
ever (as says St. John,) he dwells in us, and we in him, Ioh. 6.
does it not also assure us, that being inseparably conioined with life, and
the means of life, we cannot die neither in soul nor in body, by the means
of this union, which is common to both of them? The bodily death then should
not seem so horrible and fearful unto us as it is to many, who are affrighted
with it, Simil.
as are children with a mask and false visage; for if a mother did present her
self before her child in a shape monstrous and hideous to behold, he would be
afraid of it, and crying, would run from it; but as soon as she has lifted
up her mask, and that he knows her again, he will run toward her to
embrace and kiss her. We also to be delivered from this natural fear and
fright which we have of death, we ought to unmask it, and look upon it now in
the form whereunto Jesus Christ by his death has brought it; for eue^ as by
his cross he has discharged us of the curse unto the which we were bound, and
has converted it into a blessing for us; also by his death has he not only
o^^rcome it in us, but also quickened our death: insomuch that now it is a hand
of health unto us, and a port to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and to take
possession of the most happy life which God has promised to his children. That
which makes us so to fear it is, that we behold it in the loking glass of
the law, which represents it unto us a fearful figure to behold, and in guise
of a Sergeant armed with the wrath of God, and all the threatenings and curses
propounded in his law against all those which transgesse it; who comes to do
his exploit, and to adiourne us presently to appear before his judgment
seat, and there to hear a sentence of the last and sovereign Judge, by whom
we may be sent into an everlasting fire, without hope of consolation, nor to
have ever other company, but that of devils to torment us. Which happening, it
is not possible when death presents it self so before our eyes, but we must
have such an apprehension, that it were sufficient altogether to confound and
cast us headlong into the gulf of despair, if it did continue long. But for
to turn it from us, we must do as they that have their sight dimmed and
dazelled, which being too long settled upon a color too glistering, for to get
it again, Simil.
they turn and cast it upon another which is more cheerful, ge^enish, and
delightsome. Also to get our spirits again when we feel them straied from us,
because of the apprehension which the law has given us of death, we ought to
behold the image thereof in the looking glass of the gospel, in the which
Jesus Christ propounds it unto us as fair and more gracious and amiable, Act.
2.
then Moses in his law had showed it us ugly and fearful, without that she
has any more sting to prick us, nor cords, chains, or bands to retain us
under her power. For Jesus Christ rising again, has broken them as Sampson in
times past by a meruellous strength brake (as if it had been a small twined
flaxen thread) the great cords and cables, wherewith the Philistines thought
they had so straightly bound and shakled him, that he could never have escaped
them. And nevertheless, they found themselves deceived, when thinking to have
set upon him with great fury and impetuositie, they saw him break them as
easily, as another man would a towe thread half burnt. So death thinking, by
causing Jesus Christ to die, that he had overcome all, and brought all under
his power, and so assured his Empire, that it should never be shook, found
her self vanquished and beaten down, in such sort that she shall never be
able to rise again* as the Apostle writes to the Corinthians, that death has
been swallowed up of victory, 1. Cor. 15.
to wit, that which it had thought to have obtained, when it caused Jesus
Christ to die. Then death ought not to be fearful for the reasons which we
have deduced, but to be wished for, for those which we shall deduce hereafter.
For first it puts our souls in liberty, and delivers them from the torments,
anguishes, fears, mistrustes, cares and desires, wherewith they are cruelly
tortured whiles they are enclosed in the filthy prisons of our vicious,
mortal and corruptible bodies. And delivers likewise our bodies from
innumerable dangers whereto they are exposed as well by sea and by land, as in
all places where they are to be found. Item, from so many sorts of diseases,
and languishings which do undermine and consume them with insupportable
dolours. Item, from the necessity and pain of labor, unto the which they are
made subject by sin. And finally from a continual care which they have to
enquire and seek after the means to be nourished, clothed, lodged, and
fitted with all things necessary for their entertainment. But all that is
nothing in regard of the good which it does us, putting us out of the danger of
sinning any more, and of being any more tempted of the devil, of the world,
and of our own desires, which cease, not to solicit us to do evil and to
provoke us incessantly to offend God, and by that means to draw upon us all
the curses, where with he threatens in his laws all those that transgress
them, and disobey him. With what heat and vehemency? with what sighs and
gronings did the Apostle desire and demand of God, that he would deliver him
from that pricking which he felt in his flesh? 1. Cor. 11.
from that Angel of Satan that buffeted him? And after that long and
lamentable complaint which he makes of this law, Romans 7.
which he saw in his members against the law of his understanding, and
rendering it captive to the law of sin which was in his members: upon the
conclusion of his discourse, what a loud cry comes he to cast from the
bottom of his heart? Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? whereby a body may know the mourning, which this holy man
made, to see in himself the tyranny of sin, and to feel the violence which
it used toward him, constraining him to do the evil that he would not, and
to forsake the good which he desired to do with all his heart. O then happy
death, who put us out of so cruel and troblesome a bondage. Who shall also
consider what a misery it is to live even in the midst of the Church amongst
barbarous people, and such as the Apostle foretold should come in those latter
times, ^. Tim. 3.
to wit, people loving themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, scandalous,
disobedient to father and mother, unthankful, contemners of God, without
natural affection, backbiters, without temperance, cruel, hating the good,
traitors, rash, puffed up, lovers of their pleasures rather then of God,
having a show of godliness, but denying the form thereof. And to be on the
other side, environed and besieged on every part, by people coniured and
mortal enemies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and of his Church; mad and
ravening dogs and wolves, phrenticke, dispiting God and his graces, curious,
violent, outrageous, profane, blasphemers, having neither faith nor law, nor
fear, nor conscience, that can reprove or retain their malice; who I say
shall regard what an anguish it is to converse in the midst of a nation so
wicked and perverse, and to be constrained to see their abominable impieties
and sacrilege, and hear their horrible blasphemises, which without fear and
shame they disgorge against heaven, against the throne and Majesty of God; and
will not complain of the length of his life, and say with David?

Alas too long I slack
Within the tents so black, Psalm. 120.

Which Cedars are by name,
By whom thy flock elect,
And all of Isaacks sect,
Are put to open shame.
With them that peace did hate,
I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life;
But when my tale was told
Causeless I was controld
By them that would have strife.
Elias seeing that the people of Israel had forsaken God, 1 King. 18.
and had altogether abandoned themselves to Idolatry, and on the other part the
strange cruelties that Achab and Iesabel did use and exercise against the
Prophets, and servants of God; being glutted and weary of his life, having
cast himself into the desert under a bank, prayed God to take him out of this
world, that he might see no more that which he had seen in it. Also it is not
possible that a man of a good heart, seeing the disorders and confusions that
are this day in the world, and that euerywhere (excepted a very few places)
godliness and justice are turned vpside down, faith and the fear of God,
virtue and verity banished and exiled out of the company of the most part of
men; but he must in his heart feel strange griefs: and that for to turn
away the sight of such pitiful spectacles, would not wish his soul quickly to
be dislodged out of this earthly Tabernacle, for to take and have his dwelling
in heaven, where we hope for a permanent City, and a habitation furnished and
assured against all dangers, and that then shall be fully accomplished that
which the Prophet says, Against all dangers from henceforth*
Thy soul he will preserve,
And to thy deeds for evermore
A happy end reserve.


And that which ought to increase this desire, is, that going from hence, we
shall be suddenly transported into heaven, where we shall see God face to face,
and Jesus Christ in his glory; Which is a fight that rauisheth the Angels, and
all the happy Spirits, in such sort that they desire nor seek after any thing
else for their perfect contentment, as says the Prophet, I set the Lord still
in my sight, Psalm. 16.

And trust him over all,
For he does stand on my right hand,
Wherefore I shall not fall.


The Queen of Saba having seen Solomon and understood his great wisdom by
the resolution which he had given upon all the points and questions, 1. Kings
10.
which she had propounded unto him, having moreover diligently considered and
marked the order and great state which he kept in his court; being as it were
ravished, and as it were out of her self, she cried out; O how happy are the
servants of thy house, that may behold thy face every day, and understand the
profound wisdom which distilleth incessantly from thy lips? How much more
happy shall we then be then they, fully enjoying the glorious face of our God?
and all the treasures of his divine patience being opened unto us? If Moses be
esteemed happy, and has bin held for one of the greatest Prophets in the
world, because he saw Gods hinder part only, what shall we be when we shall
see him face to face, and such as he is? Many kings and Prophets in the time of
the Fathers, did fervently desire the coming of Jesus Christ, and would have
thought themselves happy to see God manifested in the flesh, as John Baptist,
Simeon, and the Apostles saw him; what felicity ought we at this day to esteem
it, when by death we are so happy to see him in his glory and majesty, clothed
with his roial robe, sitting on the right hand of God his Father, having
authority and power in heaven and earth, to govern and dispose of all things
according to his good pleasure, and holding al his enemies as a footstool,
under his feet? When he transfigured himself in the mountain, Peter, John,
and James, because they had only seen as it were passing by, a small splendor
of his glory, were suddenly so ravished and transported with it, that
forgetting in an instant all other things, they desired for all happiness, but
that the pleasure which they felt at that hour, might always continue with
them. Then let us now think, if (...) pattern, and as it were a final drop
of the life and glory to come, has had so much power as to ravish the
Disciples and to transport them forth of themselves; what shall become of us,
when according to our hope we shall have the whole power, and shall drink in
that brook, or to speak better, in that Sea of pleasure, and all perfect
contentment, when this sempitern all happiness whereof the Prophet speaks,
shall be powered on our heads? Moreover, shall not this joy redouble when with
Jesus Christ we shall see and behold all this fair and noble company of
Angels, Archangels, Principallities, Powers, Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs, and generally all the Church triumphant of the happy Spirits, who
occupy and exercise themselves in nothing else, but without ceasing to sing the
praises of God, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Revel. 4.
Lord God everlasting, which was, which is, and which shall before ever? Item,
To him that fitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb, Revel. 5.
be all honor praise, glory and power, for ever and ever. In times past it was
a wonderful thing to see the assembly of all the Tribes of the people of
Israel in Jerusalem, 1 Kings 8.
when that Solomon after he had made an end of building the Temple, would
solemnly dedicate it, with an Infinite number of Sacrifices, with perfumes and
sweet incense, with prayers and thanksgiving, and an alacrity of the people of
God, neuerheard off, nor seen before. There were yet since that two other
notable assemblies in Jerusalem, which are much celebrated in the Scripture,
the one under the reign of Ezekias, 2. Chron. 30. 2. Kings 23.
and the other under Josias, when these two good Princes moved with a zeal,
piety, and service of God, which had been miserably corrupted by the Idolatry
and impiety of their Predecessors, did undertake with valiant and heroycall
hearts, to cleanse the holy land of the filthy and stinking whordomes, as well
corporal as spiritual, wherewith it was infected; taking away all the stews
and Idols, in the whole land of Judah, and abolishing all the false services,
that the fathers and hypocrites had invented, and established against the word
and ordinance of God. And besides, to renew the alliance of God, which was
almost altogether buried, and blotted out of the hearts of the people, did call
together all the inhabitants of the country, with the which, after the public
reading of the law, they celebrated the feast of the Passover, with the
greatest solemnity that ever was heard off or seen before. And we must not
doubt but all well minded people, seeing such a company assembled together to
such a good end, did leap for joy, beholding God in the midst of his holy
people, hearing the accords and agreements which were revived between both
parties, and the solemn promises and protestations, which were respectively
made by God, assuring his people of his favor for ever; and of his people,
promising also never to change, but to continue in his alliance for ever,
without ever departing out of his service, nor to make any other reckoning
after but only to honor him, and to celebrate and sanctify his name. Although
that such assemblies of the Church militant, whereof has been seen some
pictures in these latter times, and should yet be seen, if Antichrist and his
adherents did not hinder it, be the goodliest, excellentest, and most to be
wished for thing, that can be seen upon the earth, as says the Prophet, O
God thy house I love most dear Psalm. 26.

To me it does excel,
I have delight and would be near
Whereas thy grace does dwell,


Item else where.

Psalm. 42.
Like as the heart does breathe and bray
The wellspring to obtain,
So does my soul desire always,
With thee Lord to remain.
My soul does thirst and would draw near
The living God of might,
Oh when shall I come and appear
In presence of his sight?
Psalm. 92.
It is a thing both good and meet,
To praise the highest Lord,
And to thy name, o thou most high
To sing with one accord,
To show the kindness of the Lord
Betime ear it be light,
And eke declare his truth abroad,
When it does draw to night.
All these passages, and many other sufficiently show in what estimation he
had the holy assemblies, which he preferred before all other pleasure. And to
say true, all men that know and feel in themselves what the love, the
goodness, gentleness, mercy, clemency, benignity, wisdom, faithfulness,
patience, verity, power, greatness, majesty, justice, liberality, and other
sovereign and infinite virtues of God, is, they can never sufficiently content
themselves with thinking on them, with preaching and celebrating them, with
worshipping and admi^ing them, and summoning not only the Angels and all the
hosts of heaven, but also all the elements, all the plants, and even the
unreasonable creatures, to magnify his name, and to rejoice infinitely, when
they hear him exalted and glorified. Although that nevertheless, the praises
that men living yet in the world, sing unto God, cannot be so holy, nor so well
framed, but there will be much more to be desired; for being always imperfect,
as we are, to what degree of faith or charity soever we have attained; and
besides, having a flesh the which fights incessantly against the spirit, and
holds it back and hinders it, when it would lift it self up to God, it is
impossible that we should hear the word of God with such zeal and attention
as might be required, nor likewise that we should make our confessions,
prayers, and thansgiuings, with such humility as we ought. So it is yet, that
when we hear the singing of Psalms, spiritual Hymns, Canticles and Songs,
to echo and sound in the midst of the assembly out of the mouths of the
faithful, although they be infirm, weak, poor, and miserable sinners, we
do not let to be ravished and transported out of our selves, with the great
joy that we feel in our hearts; what may we then think of the pleasure which we
hope to receive in heaven, when that our souls separated from our bodies,
being then mounted, shall hear that sweet music and harmony of Angels and
other happy Spirits, singing with one accord the praises of God, with such a
melodious sound, that the contentment and joy which they shall conceive
thereby, shall make them in an instant to forget not only all displeasure, but
also all other pleasure? Like as a Tubbe of water is no more seen so soon as
it is cast into the Sea, nor the brightness of the Stars when the Sun
begins to shine, and to cast his beams upon the earth. Moreover, when we die
in the faith of our Lord, we are even at the same instant most happy, that is
to say, that then we have no more desires, but such as are holy, and which at
the self same hour of our death are fully glutted and satisfied; Which is not
a small felicity, that we having no more flesh to contrary the spirit, nor
rebellious appetites to reason, nor law in our members disagreeing to the law
of God; but that all tumults and troubles ceasing in our hearts, we may have a
soul altogether spiritual, calm, peaceable, living wholly to God, and which
may be so fastened and united unto him, that neither by temptations nor any
occasion it can be distracted neither from his love and service, nor from the
beholding of his face. Is there any thing more pleasant to behold then a well
governed city, where all the citizens and inhabitants are of one mind, and
straightly bound together by a true and firm amity, that give no way to
contentions, annoyances, debates, quarrels, partialities, divisions, tumults,
and seditions, but hold together and live all in an amiable concord? Is there
likewise any thing more to be wished for, then to see a house well ordered,
where the Father and Mother of a family, with the children and servants, walk
altogether in the fear and obedience of God, contain themselves within their
bounds without exceeding, nor yet forsaking the rule and measure which God has
given in his law? St. Paul in many places of the Scripture propounds unto us
the sweet harmony which is between all the members of man's body, Romans 12. 1.
Cor. 12.
and the mutual communication which is between them, of their faculties and
powers, without being envious of the dignity the one of the other, or that the
other contemnes his fellow for his baseness; being desirous by this comparison
to teach the Church, the fraternity and just proportion, which ought to be in
the members thereof, for the good and conservation of every one in particular,
and of all the body in general; which is the goodliest thing and most
agreeable that is to be seen, if it might be seen amongst men. It is also a
very pleasant thing to hear a good lute well tuned, when it is touched by a
skillful player; But yet there is nothing more pleasant, then a soul well
tuned in all her faculties, when the understanding thinks no more upon any
thing but God, and our will loves, desires nor aspires after any thing but
him, and finally our memory has no other remembrance but of him, as it
happens unto it, when having forsaken the body, it is received in Paradise;
For then it is all filled with God, 1. Cor. 15.
who is in her all things afterward (as says the Apostle) that is to say, all
her thoughts, all her love and desires, all her delights, all her remembrance:
Brief, all her good, her part, her wishing and contentment is in God. Seeing
then that by death we attain to a good, which we cannot find in this world,
in what state soever we are, and what commodities soever we have; for there
is no King, nor Prince, nor Plowman, nor Merchant, nor Advocate, who living in
this world, does not often complain, and who has not great occasions to
complain, many things happening to all of them contrary to their liking,
desire, and hope: are not we then much beholding to death, when in a moment it
makes us to enjoy the sovereign good, which consists in the perfect rest of
our minds, and in the satisfaction of all our desires; the which indeed vain
men in vain seek for in the transitory things of this world? There is yet an
other point which ought to make us to embrace death willingly when our hour is
come, which is, that it puts us in possession of all the good things which
Jesus Christ has purchased for us. For whiles we live in this world we are
saved (as says S. Paul) but by hope only; But when by death we depart out of
it, then we shall enjoy the everlasting life, and that so great good, which the
eye, the ear, the understanding, and the heart of man, cannot conceive nor
apprehend the greatness of it. It was a great pleasure to the children of
Israel when after so long and hard a bondage in the which they had bin detained
in Egypt, after so many crosses and evil encounters which they had had in the
deserts of Arabia the space of forty years, they saw that they were arrived at
the river of Jordan, and that they wanting nothing but the passage thereof, to
enter into the possession of the land which God had promised to their Fathers,
and which they had so long looked for. A young man also that has been a long
time under the keeping and protection of a rigorous and inhumane protector,
that has used him hardly, and has suffered him to endure very much, without
administering those things that were necessary unto him, has not he great
matter of rejoicing, seeing the time approach, in the which he is to be
emancipate, and to go out of his keeping, to be at liberty, and to enjoy his
goods and pleasure, and that without any more controulement? The young children
of good house, that are with a King, or in the house of a Prince and great
Lord, under the hand and conduct of a severe and sharp Rider or Tutor, who
nourishes and entertaineth them under a good and rigorous discipline, are so
glad when they are discharged of being Page, and that they go out of the fear
and bondage in the which they have been long and stricktly detayned. The young
Maidens likewise, that have been very shortly curbed, in their Father and
Mothers house during the time of their childhood and youth, leap for joy,
when there is speech of marrying them, and rejoice yet more when they are
affianced; but the scope of their pleasure is when they are espoused, and given
into the hands of a husband that loves them, and is agreeable unto them, for by
this means they are wholly satisfied. We also that here below by the preaching
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the faith which we have added to his
promises, have as it were affianced or betrothed him, what occasion shall we
have to rejoice, when our souls departing from their bodies, shall fly up
into heaven, to marry him, and to celebrate the nuptial feast with an alacrity
and contentment that shall never end, nor be interrupted nor troubled, neither
by death nor by sickness, nor by any other accidents that may ever happen unto
us? It shall be then, that our spouse coming to meet us, shall say that which
is written in the book of Canticles; Come hither my love, enter into the
closet of thy friend, that thou and I may peaceably and without fear enjoy our
loves. Thy winter is passed, and so are likewise the Rain, the Snow, the
Hail, the Cold and Frost, and all this sharp and cruel season which thou
have been feign to endure till now with much pain; but the spring wherein
thou do now enter, shall last thee for ever, and likewise all the pleasures
that accompany it. Enter then my love into the joy and rest of thy Lord; then
shall it be that the saying of the Prophet shall be accomplished.

Psalm. 126.
Full true it is
That they which sow in tears in deed,
A time will come
When they shall reap in mirth and joy.
They went and wept,
In bearing of their precious seed,
For that their foes
Full oftentimes did them annoy.
But their return,
With joy they shall sure see,
Their sheaues home bring,
And not impaired be.
And that being out of custody and wardship, and taken from under the hands and
discipline of our Tutors, we shall be set in full liberty and possession of
the heritage, which God our good Father has promised, and destinated unto us
when he adopted us for his children, that is to say, of eternal life, and of
the Kingdom of heaven: which is a good that here may well be hoped for; but
for to speak of it or think it, it is impossible, what tongue or eloquence
soever should be employed therein, for the greatness of it passes all humane
capacity. Now having fortified the sick against the fear that he may have of
death, he must also be assured against the fear of the Devil, who holds the
Empire of death. Hebr. 2.
For it is then as at a last assault, that he uses all his endeavors, and
that he prepares all his engines against us, to assay to carry us away; but
being in the safe keeping of our Pastor, who is vigilant and watchful to keep
us, and stronger to defend us, then can be the Wolf and the Lion to assault
us, we ought not to fear: for who can snatch us out of his hands, John 10.
seeing that he and his father (who is greater then all) are but one in
essence, in power, glory, and majesty? We then are assured that as there is
no subtlety that can surprise or beguile his wisdom, that also there is no
force sufficient to combat and resist his power. Let us then keep our selves
under the shadow of his wings, and assure our selves that he will keep us
well and surely, and will hinder that the Devils nor other creatures shall be
able to hurt nor offend us, as says the Prophet.

Psalm. 91.
He that within the secret place
Of God most high does dwell,
In shadow of the mightiest grace,
At rest shall keep him well.
Thou art my hope and my strong hold,
I to the Lord will say,
My God is he in him will I
My whole affiance stay.
And after he has spoken of some evils from the which he does assure the
faithful, that they cannot come near them; at last he comes to the Devils,
ancient and mortal enemies to mankind, and speaks of them in this manner.

Upon the Lion thou shall go,
The Adder fell and long,
And tread upon the Lion young
With Dragons stout and strong.
For he that trusts unto me
I will dispatch him quite,
And him defend, because that he
Does know my name aright.
Where we see the victory which he promises us over the Devils. And the
example of the Apostles, Luke 9.
unto whom Jesus Christ had made them subject, insomuch that they were
constrained to acknowledge the power which had been given them over them, in
obeying to the commandments which they made them in his name, ought well to
assure us, that going forth to combat against them, provided that we be
furnished with the same weapons that they had, to wit, faith and the word of
God, we cannot fail but carry away the victory over them, and by faith to
quench all their fiery darts: Ephesians. 6.
your adversary the Devil (says S. Peter) like a roaring Lion walks about
seeking whom he may devour, 1. Peter. 5.
whom resist steadfast in the faith; And S. John, you are strong, 1. John 2.
and the word of God dwells in you, and you have overcome the wicked. And
does not Jesus Christ say, speaking of faith, Mat. 16.
that the gates of hell, that is to say, all the counsel, the subtleties, the
sleights, means and power of the Devil, shall have no power against it; and
as little have they against the word. Which we see plainly in the example of
Jesus Christ; Mat. 4.
for when he came to assail him, and having tried by all means he could, to
cause him to fall into a mistrust of God, he could never attaint him with all
his fencing, because he found him covered, and so well armed on every part with
the word, that he was feign to leave the field and victory, and to return with
shame. If we also be well armed with it, we need not fear that he can offend
us, or doubt but that using such weapons, we shall be victorious both against
him, and against all our enemies. As says St. Paul The weapons of one warfare
are not carnal, 2. Cor. 10.
but mighty through God, to the overthrowing of strong holds, destroying the
counsels, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.
Whosoever then would fear the devil, Luc. 11. John. 12. 1. John. 3. Revel. 12.
being furnished with faith and the word of God, should thereby show, that he
does not yet well know what the force of the one and the other is, nor what is
the strength of the Captain that conducts us, and under whose banner we
fight: for has not he bruised the head of the Serpent? has not he cast forth
the strong out of his tower, and pillaged all his weapons? Is it not he that
has cast forth the Prince of this world, and who has destroyed all the works
of the devil? Is it not this great Captain Michael, who has already got the
victory against the Dragon and his Angels, and still pursues them until such
time as they be quite exterminate? Now the better to keep our selves from
him, we must note that the two principal crafts which he tries against us,
to make us fall, are, if he sees us to be virtuous, to eleuate us into a
vain presumption of our selves, of our works and virtues. But if to the
contrary he sees that we are vicious, and that during our life we have been
debauched and dissolute; then he propones and sets that before our eyes, and
does even amplify and aggrauate as much as he can the enormitie of our sins,
to the end to precipitate us into a despair of the grace of God. They are the
two cords (says St. Augustine) wherewith this tormentor of mankind is used
to strangle men. But we have before showed how we must cast off these two
temptations. And as for our Justice, that it is so filthy and so imperfect,
that we must make no more account of it before God, then of old rags and
durtie linen. And on the other part, that our vices cannot be so great, but
the grace and mercy of God surmounts them; nor so filthy, but the justice and
blood of Jesus Christ is sufficient to wash and make them clean: nor finally
so damnable, but in confessing then with humility and displeasure, God as soon
shows himself faithful, and just to pardon, 1. John. 1.
and quite forget them. It remains now to assure the sick against the fear
that he may have of the judgment of God. For when we see our selves as it were
adiourned by sickness, there personally to appear shortly, if we are not
altogether stupid, we will call to mind that which is said in the Scripture, to
wit, That it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Item, that there is no favor, nor acception of persons, Romans 2.
that is to say, respect to the greatness, nobility, riches, beauty,
knowledge, kindred, alliance nor other such like, which are regarded amongst
men, and often times eauseth to make them strong, and decline in their judgments
from the strait way of justice; Which happens not in the judgment of God, who
being impassible and unchangeable, there is nothing that can alter his will. By
the means whereof all his judgments are measured by the rule, and pronounced
according to the rigor of the law. Item, that all our thoughts, affections,
words, works, and generally all the course of our life from the beginning to
the end, is there unfolded and sifted out to the last. That the books and
registers are there produced, wherein are noted all the faults that ever we
did commit in heart, or in thought, with all their circumstances. Item that
judgment without mercy shall be done unto those that have not showed mercy. And
to be short, that no virtue is there received, nor any justice allowed, that is
not perfect, and accomplished in all points. When I say, we shall come to set
all those things before us, touching this judgment so fearful, the which we
can neither shun nor turn away from us; and that on the other side there
presents before our eyes the vices, the corruptions, the imperfections that are
in us, and the infinite number of sins that we have committed, against the
first and second table, that is to say, against God and man; it is not possible
but we must stand astonished, and altogether amazed, seeing likewise that we
have parties and accusers, that pursue us with all extremity, to wit, the
devil, the law, and our own consciences, which produce against us a thousand
and a thousand informations, requiring that we be damned, considering the
quality of the crimes whereof we are convicted. All which things we cannot
prevent, nor otherwise escape the rigor and judgment of God, but first in
confessing our debts; and afterward having recourse unto the death of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to acquit us of it. For it is not so with the judgment of
God, as with that of men, amongst whom the criminal is condemned as soon as
by his mouth he avouches the offense: but to the contrary, the confession of
our faults, is one of the means by the which we obtain remission, and are
absolved and justified before God, as faith St. John, If we confess our sins,
1. John. 1.
he is faithful and just to pardon our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity. And David, Psalm. 32.
I did therefore confess my faults,
And all my sins discover,
Then thou O Lord did me forgive,
And all my sins passover.


After the confession and acknowledgement of our sins, we must go to Jesus
Christ, the just, who is our advocate toward the father, and the atonement
for our sins, and rely wholly upon him touching the handling of our cause. For
having put it into his hands, we are assured to get it. And that when we shall
appear at the judgment seat of God, we shall not be condemned, what
accusation or crime soever be alleged or produced against us by our
adversaries. He (says he) that believes and trusts in me, John. 3.
comes not into judgment. And elsewhere, to comfort his disciples, he
exhorts them to look for the day of judgment, and when they see it come
near, to lift up their heads on high, Luc. 21.
and to rejoice, because their full and perfect redemption is reserved to that
day. And St. Paul confirms it in the Epistle to the Romans, with a marvelous
ornament and magnificence of words. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? Romans 8.
It is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ which died,
yea rather which is raised again, which is also on the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us: whereupon we must conclude that which he says in
the beginning of the chapter, That then there is now no condemnation for those
that are in Jesus Christ, that is to say, that walk not according to the
flesh, but according to the spirit; and that as Jesus Christ their head cannot
be saved, but with them that are his members; also cannot they be damned, but
he must be also with them, by reason of the inseparable union that is between
the head and the members. Moreover seeing that Jesus Christ dying for us, has
suffered the pain and curse that was due unto us by our sins, and by
consequence satisfied to the justice of God, we must not fear, that he should
again demand of us the payment of these debts that are already acquitted. For
it should be against all order of justice, not only divine, but also humane,
to demand to be paid one only debt twice. Having then remitted both our
selves and all our causes into the hands of our Savior and Advocate Jesus
Christ, let us never fear to sink under the judgment of God, where the Son
is always before the face of his Father making intercession for us, Romans 8.
Heb. 9.
and bearing us upon his shoulders, and in his bosom, as in times past the
high Priest bare the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, to present them unto
God as often as they entered into the Sanctuary, with a plate of gold upon his
forehead, wherein was ingraued these words, The holy one of the Lord: To the
end (as says Moses) to render them agreeable before the Lord. Which was a
figure, of the which Jesus Christ our great High Priest, and everlasting Priest
according to the order of Melchisedecke, did exhibit and represent the truth
upon the Cross, when offering himself to God a sacrifice for us, he
sanctified us, and made us agreeable to God for ever. We must not then fear
that being in the grace and favor of God, as we are, and having an advocate
toward him, in whom he takes all his pleasure, he can of will ever condemn
us, when we shall appear before him in judgment; and likewise being
clothed, with these goodly long roabes whereof is spoken in the Revelation,
the which because they are dyed and cleansed in the blood of the Lamb, shall
bear our justification with them. After the sick has been so assured
against the fear which he may have of his sins, of death, of the devil,
and judgment of God; if you see that he is in any sort sorry to leave the
world, and that the honors, riches, pleasures, ease, rest, and the love that
he may yet bear to weak and corruptible things, do hold him as it were
pestered, and do hinder his will from departing and going willingly whither
God does call him: Then you must first show him in general, that the world is
altogether laid and soaked in wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Ioh. 2.
that it passes away with all the lusts thereof, that it knows not God,
that we are no more of the world, that God has taken us out of it, to the end
we be not wrapped up with it in one and the fame condemnation; that we cannot
love the world, but we must be enemies to God; that the devil is the Prince of
the world, and by consequent, that we cannot love the word, nor all the things
of the world, but we must be subjects and slaves to the Prince of darkness:
that we cannot be faithful nor members of Jesus Christ, but the world must be
crucified to us, Gal. 5.
and we to the world: that by the example of the Apostle, we ought no more to
esteem the world with all the glory, and excess thereof, then doung or a
withered flower: that being here as passengers and strangers, we outght not
there to settle our dwelling, as in a permanent City and lodging, but to lodge
as in an Inn, and to be always ready to pack and be gone betimes, that we
may rid way, until such time we attain to the place where we pretend to
soiourne for ever; that is to say, in heaven, whither we should be already
wholly transported in heart, in thought, in desire, and in all our affection,
and there to have all our conversation, as says the Apostle. Phil. 3.
For being risen again with JESUS CHRIST, and united with him inseparably,
although that in body we are kept off, and separated, yet ought we to be
conjoined and present with him in our minds, and in our souls, and wholly to
forget the world and the earth, that we may no more think upon, nor seek
after any thing but only those that are from above. Should not our heart be
where our treasure is? and where is our treasure but in heaven, where JESUS
CHRIST is in glory? who has all our life hidden in him, Col. 3.
and all the treasures, not only of the science and wisdom of God: but also
of all the gifts, graces, honors, riches, and blessings, which God his Father
has communicated unto him, to impart unto his Church here beneath through
hope, and there above by possession, when our souls going out of the filthy,
stinking, and obscure prisons of our bodies, shall (like unto that of poor
Lazarus) be by the Angels conveyed into Abraham's bosom, there to rest and to
rejoice for ever, as it is written, The children of thy servants Lord, Psalm.
102.

Continually endure,
And in thy sight their happy seed,
For ever shall stand sure.


Although then that it be so that we do nothing but languish in the world,
like poor men that live in exile with barbarous and inhumane people, ought not
we to be glad, when God calls us to establish us in our country, or with our
brethren, that is to say, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all
the happy spirits, that we may together enjoy in peace, the glory, honor,
rest, and all that great and perfect felicity, which he has promised and
prepared in his Kingdom for all his elect. It is marvel that men, and even
the faithful, that are instructed not only by the word of God, but also by so
many experiences which they see every day, that all the brightness and glory
of the world are but vanities and illusions and dreams that pass, do
nevertheless suffer themselves to be so bewitched by flatteries and
wantonness, that at last they become altogether senseless beasts, like the
companions of Ulysses by the charms and enchantments of Circes. For must not
their judgment be much corrupted, and altogether perverted, to grieve at their
departure out of this world to go up into heaven; and to prefer changeable,
uncertain, transitory and corruptible things, which cause infinite pains to
follow and purchase them, and as many cares to keep them, and yet more sorrow
and grief when they are lost, before the goods which God promises in his
Kingdom, which are certain, unchangeable, incorruptible, everlasting, and
assured, and which can bring nothing to those that enjoy them, but a true,
entire and perfect contentment: Wherein (as did our first parents) for an Apple
we forsake a Paradise, not earthly, but heavenly, that is to say, all the
delights and greatest pleasures that can be imagined; for a mess of pottage,
we sell our birthright aod goods appertayning thereunto, as did Esau; we make
more account of the garlike and onions of Egypt, then the holy Land with all
the plenty and blessings thereof. Brief, we had rather (as did the prodigal
child.) live amongst hogs, upon chafe and wash, then be nourished and
sustained in our fathers house with the bread of Angels; and finally, that
after the example of Lots wife, we mourn for the loss of the infamous
pleasures of our Sodom, with the which we had rather perish, then by forsaking
them to be saved: the which bewayling, we may say with the Prophet.

O folk unwise and people rude, Psalm. 94.

Some knowledge now discern,
Ye fools among the multitude,
At length begin to learn.
For what makes you so much to esteem the world and that which is therein,
but a damnable desire, the which blindes us in such sort that it makes us often
times to take the light for darkness, and to the contrary, darkness for
light, the bitter for the sweet, and the sweet for the bitter? To the end
then that we be not deceived in our judgments, we must ground them not upon
the outward appearance; nor upon the common error of men, which being
sensual, do not approve nor reject the things that are present before them,
but according as they are pleasant, or contrary to their sense and appetite.
But we must judge all things as says the Apostle, by the word of God, which
is an infallible rule to discern the true from the false. And not in our
judgments to follow our reason or carnal prudence, which is enemy to GOD,
and justifies ordinarily that which he condemns, and to the contrary
condemns that which he justifies.

Now let us then see what the word of God teaches us touching the world and
the things that are of the world: Love not the world (says Saint John,) nor
the things that are of the world; for if any man love the world, the charity
of the Father is not in him; for that which is in the world, to wit, the
desires of the flesh, the desires of the eyes, and the ouerweaning of life, is
not of God, but of the world. There is then that which the holy Apostle
teaches us of the world, that we must not love it, if we will that God love
us. And Solomon when he speaks of it, says, that after he had long and
diligently considered all the state of this world, the variety and
inconstancy of men's minds, the diversity of studies, whereunto they apply
themselves, the mutabilitie and sudden changing of their counsels, the little
judgment that they have to praise or revile, to extol or disprayse; to love
or hate, to pursue or disdain the things which are set before them; he has
observed not only by reason, but also by experience, that the desires of most
men are but folly and vanity, the which they worship, being induced thereunto
by their appetites; the which because they are blind, and do not suffer
themselves to be led by any good reason, are easily transported every where,
where their pleasure and the devil drives them; whereof comes that some
pursue ambitiously the honors and greatness of the world, and that for to
attain thereunto they violate all rights and laws, forget all piety and
humanity, mingle and confound all things, cherish and favor the wicked with
whom they league themselves, hate and reject the good and virtuous, make war
against the country wherein they were borne, nourished and brought up, take
the liberty from it if they can, and by a cruel tyranny which they use
therein, bring it to a miserable bondage, as did Julius Caesar, and before and
after him many others; does not that evidently show that there is nothing truer
then that which Jesus Christ said of such ambitious men: to wit, that that
which is great and much esteemed of men, Luke 16.
is for the most part abominable before God? And how should they be agreeable,
seeing the most part believe neither in him not in Jesus Christ? as it is
written in St. John, John 5.
How can you believe seeing you receive glory the one of the other, and seek
not after the glory which comes from God alone? And elsewhere, the Pharisees
and chief men of Jerusalem, condemning themselves, said; John 9.
Is there any one of all the Princes that have believed in him, to wit, Jesus
Christ? Mat. 11.
And in St. Matthew, O Father Lord of heaven and earth, I give thee thanks that
thou have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and have
revealed them to the little ones. We ought not then to grieve to forsake the
honors and greatness of this world, which ordinarily makes us to forget God
and our selves, and which turn us from the study and exercise of virtue, which
induce us to seek our own glory rather then Gods, which makes us to disdain
our neighbors, and to forget that we are but dust and ashes, and which
finally brings us to worship the Devil, and make us insensible as says the
Prophet.

Thus man to honor God has called, Psalm. 49.

Yet does he not consider,
But like brute beast so does he live,
Which turn to dust and powder.
And a little before where he yet speaks more expressly of the foolish
purposes and imaginations of the ambitious.

Their care is to build houses fair,
And so determine sure,
To make their name right great on earth,
For ever to endure.
Yet shall no man always enjoy,
High honor, wealth and rest,
But shall at length taste of deaths cup,
As well as the brute beast.
Now as we ought not to grieve to forsake the honors and great estates of the
world, for the reasons above declared; also ought we not to be sorry for the
riches and temporal goods, when going out of this life we are constrained to
leave them. For to speak properly, they are not the right goods of the
children of God, nor the inheritance which their father keeps, and that Jesus
Christ has purchasest for them; for his Kingdom, which is the good which is
promised us, is not of this world, but heavenly; Also the force, the estate,
the riches, the honors, the pleasures, the counsel, the peace, and all the
felicity of that Kingdom is divine and spiritual. JESUS CHRIST who is the
King, what temporal goods did he possess or purchase, being in the world,
where he had not only so much as the little birds or the foxes, that is to say,
a neast, a cave, or a little hole to rest his head in? And the Apostles, who
are as Princes of the Kingdom, what revenues, what great possessions had they
in the world? St. Peter said, speaking to the lame man that lay at the gate of
the temple asking alms, Act. 3.
I have neither gold nor silver, but that which I have I give it unto thee, In
the name of Jesus the Nazarite arise and walk. And S. Paul, 2. Cor. 6.
we are poor and needy, and nevertheless we enrich many; as having nothing
and possessing all things. We may see by this, that the goods wherewith God
does here enrich his children, are not the earthly and corruptible goods that
are subject to Thieves, to the rust and to the moth: but spiritual, certain
and permanent goods, which cost nothing neither to buy nor to keep them; for
God of his gracious goodness has given them unto us, and preserues them for
us. And there is none that can take them from us but him self, which he never
does, but when he is compelled, either by our ingratitude, or because that we
abuse them, turning them to an other end, then that for the which he did
enlarge them unto us. The goods then which we ought to esteem and seek after,
are the heavenly goods, as the grace of God, our adoption, faith, the word of
the Gospel, hope, charity, patience, humility, the peace and rest of our
consciences, and singularly the justice of Jesus Christ, which is the fountain
from the which spring and distill upon us all the graces, favors, and blessings
of our God; because that by it, and by the communication which is made unto us
by it, we are reconciled and reunited unto him, continued and entertained in
his favor, whereby we conceive a certain and infallible hope of life
everlasting, which is the fullness and height of all good, and of all the true
felicity that we can desire. It is there then where we ought always to aspire,
and whither all the thoughts of our minds, and all the desires of our hearts
should tend; For it is our sovereign good, and the scope of our beatitude, and
not these transitory things, which make them never the better that possess
them; but are many times cause that they wax worse, if they observe them well,
as says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 6.
and to swell with vain presumption, and to be haughty and proud, and to set
their hope upon the uncertainty of riches, to keep a rank by themselves, and
to be very little conversant, to be insolent and outrageous, as says David.

Psalm. 73.
Therefore presumption does embrace
Their necks as does a chain,
And are even wrapped as in a roabe,
With rapine and disdain.
And speaking of the trust which ordinarily they set upon their riches, says
elsewhere.

Psalm. 49.
-- As for them that riches have,
Wherein their trust is most,
And they which of their treasure great
Themselves do brag and boast.
Then mocking them he adds: There is not one of them that can
His brothers death redeem,
Or that can give a price to pay
Sufficient for him.


Item, in an other place where he speaks of both together, to wit, of the
injustice, violence, and oppression which the rich and mighty of this world use
to the poor, and of their vain hopes.

The sons of men deceitful are
On balance but a slight, Psalm. 62.

With things most vain do them compare,
For they can keep no weight.
Trust not in wrong, robbery or stealth,
Let vain delights be gone,
Though goods well got flow in with wealth,
Set not your hearts thereon.
It is the reason for the which Jesus Christ calls richesse, riches of
iniquity, Luke 16.
not but that they are creatures of God, and good, when men can use them well,
and apply them as God has commanded; But because almost all men abuse them,
causing them to serve to their disordinate desires. Also says St. Paul, 1.
Tim. 6.
the Devil makes use of them as of snares and ginnes, to entrap and entangle
them, and to cause them to fall into many foolish and noisome desires which
bring them to perdition and destruction, and even sometimes causes them to
depart from the faith: as every day we see it happens to many Apostataes,
who being reproved for reuolting and going from the Church, have no other
answer to excuse and color their Apostasy, but that they will not leese their
goods; loving rather to perish cursedly in keeping them as goods for a short
time, then to be saved for ever in forsaking them. Wherein they show themselves
to be far from following the counsel of Jesus Christ, and to be of his
Disciples, unto whom he counsels, that if their hand or foot cause them to
stumble, Mat. 19.
that they cut it off and cast it behind them, because it is better for them
to go into the Kingdom of heaven lame, then to be sent into torments with two
legs and two arms. And of the eye likewise, which is the part of the body
that we hold dearest; if it offend us, that we ought to pull it out and cast
it from us. For (says he) it were better to enter into life with one eye, then
to have two, and to be cast into torments. What ought we then to do with
temporal goods, when we feel that by them we are detayned or distracted
from following JESUS CHRIST chearefully? were it not more expedient and
healthful for us, with a good courage to break these snares that hold us so
entangled, and to escape, then to remain caught and intrapt, and to fall into
the hands of the fowler? Crates the Theban, feeling that the goods which he
did possess drew him from the study of Philosophy, and that the care which
he had to administer them, did not suffer him to practice it with such leisure
and liberty of mind as he desired, took them and cast them into the Sea;
saying very well, that he had rather to drown them, then they should drown
him. And if a poor Pagane has done this through a desire that he had to
learn the knowledge of moral and pollitike virtues, to the end to frame and
rule the course of his life well, what should we do that are Christians,
instructed by the word and Spirit of GOD, that have the promises, and so
certain a hope of everlasting life and the Kingdom of heaven, that we ought
not in any wise to doubt, but that we shall also one day have the possession
of it? Let us then leave the vvorldly goods to vvorldly men, and to those that
have no other hope, not other Paradise but upon the earth. If we have any; 1.
Cor. 7.
let us possess it as if we had it not, and let us take no more of it then we
must needs for our use, that is to say, for our bare nourishment and
clothing; which Jesus Christ teaches in his form of prayer which he gave to
his Disciples, where he teaches them to demand nothing else but their daily
bread; Condemning thereby the delicates, the lickorishnesse and wantonness,
the sumptuousness, the excess, and all the vain superfluities of this world.
For the world as it is corrupted and excessive in all things, does not content
it self with superfluous things only; but the children of God ought to content
themselves with things necessary, and think that they are very rich, when they
have crusts or barley bread, or little fishes broyled as had Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, a little cake baked upon the harth, as Elias had; Locusts, as
John Baptist had to nourish him, and to cloth him, a course coat shagged with
Cammels hair. Howsoever, they must possess the riches, and not suffer
themselves to be possessed by it, let them rule it, and let them not suffer
themselves to be ruled of it. Conclusion, whether God gives them any, or
whether he takes any from them, they must be as ready to leave it as to take
it, and to bless the name of God as well for the one as for the other, as did
patient Job. The third concupiscence and the most dangerous, is the
concupiscence of the flesh, the which Solomon pursues at large, in
Ecclesiastes, to show that it is the chiefest and most general of all
vanities; For there are few folks in the world, or perhaps none, but seek
after the contentment and pleasure of the flesh. Some delight in building of
houses and stately Palaces, for to perpetuate the memory of their names, as
says the Prophet, Their care is to build houses fair, Psalm. 49.

And so determine sure.
To make their name right great on earth;
For ever to endure.
Yet shall no man always enjoy,
High honor, wealth and rest,
But shall at length taste of deaths cup.
As well as the brute beast.


Others take pleasure in having fair gardens, fair orchards, fair plats,
fair allies well covered, to be cool and in the shadow; Others apparel
themselves richly, and spend almost the whole day in combing and curling their
hair, in setting of their stuffes, in looking in a glass, in perfuming of
them selves. Others desire to have rich and sumptuous household stuff, for to
adorn and deck up their Hals and Chambers, good Tapestry, fair Pictures,
Bedsteds, Couerings, Chains of gold, and the richest imbroderings that can be
found, Iuory casements, and great store of gold and silver plate. Others desire
to have their tables well covered with the rarest and most exquisite meats
that can be found, and lickorish Cooks answerable to dress and season them.
Others take pleasure in being in merry company, there to laugh, rejoice, dance
and revel, and to do other things which cannot be spoken nor written with
modesty. And what is all this in sum? is it any thing else but the marks,
monuments and trophies of the luxury, dissolution and vanity of Christians? As
it was spoken in times past of the golden Image which Phryna a famous Cortizan
of Athens, caused to be erected in the midst of their City, with this fair
inscription under it, This is the trophie of the spoils of the dissolute and
infamous lasciviousness of the Greeks, that was done in one only City of
the Grecians, for to reprove the lascivious life of the Citizens.

But this day amongst Christians, there is never a house in the Cities and
Towns, nor any Villages in the Country, but you may see the Scutchins of the
world set up, and of that filthy spirit that reigns therein; and even in those
days which GOD has reserved to himself, to the end that in them all the
world should employ themselves to serve and to praise him, and they altogether
should think of nothing else, but of sanctifying and celebrating his most holy
name. But men are so far from doing that, that of the seven days in the
week there is never a one wherein GOD is so much profaned and blasphemed, as
he is on those days; which now a days seems to be appointed to give
pastime to the Devil, to our flesh, for dancing, feasting, and all other merry
pastimes, which the one and the other desire. Who is he then that can with
reason be sorry for such pleasures when they leave them? the which bring
nothing else but shame and dishonor, spoil and loss of goods, infinite
diseases to body and soul, a stupidity and dullness; ruins and desolations of
Countries, Kingdoms, and houses, a contempt of virtue and of all honesty, a
hatred of all true religion and of God himself, whom these swine fly from,
and have in such horror, that they would gladly never hear talk of him; Which
moreover do not only effeminate us, but make us in the end like unto beasts,
and they stay not long to bring us to death, when we continue in them. Let us
then look that by their flatteries and fair countenance, they do not seduce
us. Their apparent beauty which appears outward, is alluring, and deceiues
those that do not beware of the poison that is hidden underneath. Like unto
the Bird and the Fish that are taken with the hook, Simil.
being drawn thereunto and deceived by the bait that couers it. Let us then
behold them behind and not before, as Aristotle did wisely admonish; for
pleasures before seem fair like unto Syrenes; but if men look upon them
behind, they draw after them a long Serpents tail so ugly, that the sight of
it only is fearful. Ha, who were able to recount the deluge of evils and
miseries that have befallen us by that little pleasure which our first Parents
had in eating the fruit that was forbidden them? Which was cause that God, who
is so patient and so stow to wrath, did send that great deluge of waters upon
the earth, by the which he blotted out and raced every living soul from off
the face of the earth, reserving none alive but only Noah and his wife, and
the living creatures which he gathered into the Arc with him. The occasion of
so horrible and fearful a judgment of God, was it not the filthy whordomes
that reigned in those days amongst men, who took indifferently all the women
and maids they pleased, without having any regard to the order and honesty
which GOD had commanded in instituting marriage at the beginning of the world?
What was likewise the cause of the total subversion and ruin of Sodom and
the Towns round about, but their infamous adulteries, and the filthy pleasures
that they took in their banquets and gluttony? Wherefore also did God anger
himself so sharply against his people in the deserts, where at one time he
slew three and twenty thousand, and at an other a great number; was it not by
reason of the whoredoms which they committed with the Madianitides? And the
quails which they had demanded to satisfy their gluttony, whereof GOD would
perpetuate, the memory, commanding that the place; where they had received so
great a wound, should be afterward called the Sepulcres; of concupiscence?
What did happen afterward in Hemors house and Town, by reason of the
whoredom which his son Sichem had committed with Dina, Jacobs only
Daughter? And in David's for having abused the wife of his servant Vriah? And
Salomons his son who was so wise, and had received of GOD so many honors and
favors, and so much glory, richesse, and power, and besides all that so many
fair and excellent promises of GOD, that he might justly call himself, of
all the Kings and Princes of the earth the Pearl? And nevertheless the
delights and pleasures of the world, could manage him so well, that they took
away his good understanding, even in his old age when he should have had most
prudence, and his judgment most settled and stayed. And they made him not only
to forget GOD, and the obligation which he had toward him; But also to
sacrifice unto Idols, like a man out of his wits, and that to satisfy to the
Women and strange Concubines wherewith he had acquainted himself, against the
express commandment of GOD; whereupon afterward followed many evils unto his
house, and to his posterity. Achabs house was it not ruinated and destroyed
even to the root, by reason of the whoredoms as well corporal as spiritual
that reigned therein? What was the cause of so many piteous tragedies, that
have been written of the ruins, miseries and desolations happened in the
house of Priam, a King renowned in riches, greatness, and glory, amongst all
the greatest and mightiest Princes of Asia; was it not the foolish love
between Helen and Paris? The occasion likewise of those which happened in the
Court of great Agamemnon, after he was returned from Troy with victory, and
laden with glory and bounty, was it not the impudency of his wife
Clitemnestra, and of Aegistus, her adulterer? The spoils which were made in
Ionia in the time of Cyrus, and the great calamities and miseries that fell
over all the Country, which was the fairest and most fruitful that was in all
Asia, did they not also proceed of this occasion, as Herodotus recites? Ah,
who is able to repea^e all the evils, which this cursed concupiscence of the
flesh has brought, and still brings daily with it? Surely, Plato named it
very well, a bait of all mishaps and miseries. And Adrian the Emperor figured
it properly, Simil.
comparing it to a Pill that is gilded on the top, to be swallowed the more
easily; But when men come to digest it, then they feel the bitterness of it.
There is only this difference, that the pills purge and empty all ill humors
out of the body, to make it healthful; But pleasures to the contrary heap on
more and multiply them, and do wholly corrupt all good dispositions as well of
body as of soul. When they are turned from us, either by sickness, poverty,
age, or otherwise, we ought no less to rejoice then if we were escaped from
the hands of some cruel and furious Tyrants: for there is no tyranny more
cruel, then that of our pleasures and cupidities (as says Cicero,) by reason
that others extend but only to the goods and body; but this reaches to the
soul and conscience, which it tortures and torments in a strange fashion.
Whosoever then desires a liberty and peace in his mind, and to have a joyful
and peaceable heart, which is the most precious good that we can seek or
find in this world, he must give over all the pleasures of this world, and
rejoice when they go from him, as they do at death. These things must be
propounded to the sick that find themselves too much addicted to the
deceitful pleasures of this world; and on the other side represent those unto
them that stay and are already prepared for them in heaven, the which are so
great that the odor and taste only which by the spirit of God the Apostles
and Martyrs have had of them, has made them to forget the world with all the
delights thereof, before they were departed out of it. What shall it then be,
when being dead, we shall drink by great draftes at the flood of these
pleasures? when we shall openly behold the face of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ? when we shall be set at his Table with the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaak,
and Jacob? when we shall hear the sweet music of Angels, singing
incessantly, To the holy, holy, holy great God of battles be praise, glory,
and honor for ever when God shall wipe all tears from the eyes of his
children, that he will cause them to enter into the possession of his rest and
of his joy? That he will cause them to sit by (...) upon the seats that were
long since set up and prepared for them, that they may altogether judge the
world and the devils: and finally that in steed of the Sun and the Moon,
He will be a perpetual light unto them, and will power upon them a
sempiternal pleasure. This pleasure shall be as says JESUS CHRIST, a
permanent and everlasting pleasure, and not like unto the worldly pleasures
which vanish away with the time, and loose their savor, how great and
agreeable soever they be in their beginning: which we see in men every day by
experience, who long for the things which they desire with a feruencie and
vehemency, and when they have obtained that which they demanded, and have
enjoyed it for a time at their pleasure, then this great heat begins to
cool and diminish, and in the end, is withered and decayed quite. And likewise
it happens often, that after we have enjoyed that which we desired with such
affection, we disdain it afterward, with as great a dislike; whereof we have
in the Scripture a notable example in Ammon David's son, and his sister Thamar.

But the true pleasures which the happy souls enjoy in the kingdom of
heaven, are of another nature. For in satisfying us, they leave us always an
appetite, and in glutting us, they leave us hungry; they quench our thirst,
and yet we are always dry, insomuch that in contenting and satisfying our
appetites, they leave us a desire to remain always in that estate, which
makes that we are never weary. They are then the true pleasures which we
ought always to desire and seek after, and not the worldly pleasures that are
all itchie and scabbie. Simil.
For as those that are scabbie take pleasure, and feel some ease whiles they
do scratch their scabbes, the which nevertheless lasts but a little, being
presently followed with a pain that smarteth afterward: Also the voluptuous
men have never any pleasure but it is intermingled with a thousand sorrows.
Simil.
And their pleasure is like unto that which those feel that are tickled, the
which has I cannot tell what kind of pain and toil, which makes him to
forget and hate it.

There is yet a grief that may much torment the sick, and which must be taken
away; to wit, for their wives and children, from the presence and company of
whom they fear to be separated by death. Now the consolation which ought to
be given them, and the remedy which ought to be applied thereunto, is to
allege unto them the promises which God makes to widows, that he takes them
into his protection, and promises to have a particular care over them, and to
defend and maintain them against those that shall oppress them, and to do a
horrible vengeance for the outrages and injuries that shall be done unto them.

Item, it must be alleged unto them, that although they be forsaken of their
mortal husband whom they had espoused; notwithstanding that there remains
another immortal for them, to wit, Jesus Christ, who will never forsake them,
no more then all the rest of the faithful, who altogether rely upon him, and
that leaving them in the keeping of such an executor they can want nothing; you
must also show them that going out of this world, it is as if they and their
wives, undertook a journey together, whither the one goes first, and the
other follows soon after. And finally, that as in the beginning of their
marriage, it has not grieved him to forsake father and mother to cleave to his
wife; that now also it should not be grievous to him to leave his wife for to
return to God, who ought to be dearer to us then fathers, mothers, wives,
children, or any thing else. As for the children, you must set before them that
fair promise, which God made to them and to their children, and which he has
sealed and ratified in the Baptism of the one and the other; to wit, that he
will be their God, and to their seed after them: for that ought to assure
them, that the same favors that God has done for them, shall be continued to
their posterity, as he promises expressly in Exodus, that he will show mercy
to a thousand generations in those that love him, and fear him, and are
curious in keeping of his commandments. What then can those children want,
who being imitators of the faith and godliness of their fathers, are assured
by the promise of God, to be always environed and covered with his grace and
goodness, which grace is the spring head from whence all happiness and
prosperity flows upon us? Moses says, that man lives not by bread only,
Deuteronomy. 6.
but of every word proceeding from the mouth of God; which is not to be
referred to the nourishment only, but to all the other commodities of man's
life. The fathers that shall leave this word with their children, ought not to
be in care for the nourishment, nor the apparel, nor all the entertainment of
their children; for they are certain by the word of God, that in seeking his
kingdom and his justice, he will accommodate them with all things necessary
for this present life: for being their Pastor as he has been to their fathers,
can he ever forget them, or leave the care that he has of his sheep? David
says, speaking of the providence of God, and exhorting every one to rely upon
it as he did, Psalm. 23.
The Lord is only my support,
And he that does me feed,
How can I then lack any thing
Whereof I stand in need?


Item else where, where he compares the condition of the wicked with that of
the good, he speaks thus of the good: Psalm. 37.
They shall not be discouraged
When some are hard bested,
When other shall be hungerbit,
They shall be clad and fed.
For whosoever wicked is
And enemy to the Lord,
Shall quail, yea melt even as lambs grease
Or smoke that flies abroad.


And going on.

Behold the wicked (...) much,
And never pays again, Psalm. 37.

Whereas the just by liberal gifts
Makes many glad and feign.
For they whom God does bless shall have
The land for heritage,
And they whom he does curse likewise,
Shall perish in his rage.
And a little after.

I have been young, but now am old, Psalm. 37.

Yet did I neue see
The just man left, nor yet his seed
To beg for misery*
But gives always most liberally,
And lends whereas is need:
His children and posterity
Receive of God their meede.
Let him then that is sick leave his children in Gods keeping. For he cannot
give them a better nor a more faithful executor; and you must not fear,
provided that they contain themselves in his obedience, and that they walk in
his fear, and that they go always before him with a roundnes and simplicity
of heart, that any mishap befall them. Now hitherto we have treated and spoken
of the things which are fitting to be propounded to the sick, as well to
instruct the, as to comfort and exhort them to do their duty; and also the
means that they must follow, to arm themselves against the temptations,
wherewith they may be assailed in their sicknesses It remains to make the
sum of all these discourses, to the end the Reader may comprehend, and note
briefly all that is therein handled, and serve himself therewith in the
comforting of those that are sick, as he shall find to be expedient for
them.

Eccles. 7.
Solomon says that it is better to go into the house of mourning then into
the house of banqueting, because that there is the end of all men, and the
living puts that in his heart: To teach that the principal study and exercise
whereto man ought to apply himself during this life, is the meditation of the
frailty, misery, brevity, inconstancy, and uncertainty thereof. And to
present his end before him, it is death which always follows us step by
step, and we know not the hour nor the day when it must call us like unto an
husher before our Judge, to give him an account of all our life. It is then
good that we have always our memory present, and keeping our selves ready,
and that holding our lamps burning and lightened in our hands, we be not
surprised with the sudden and unexpected coming of our spouse, but ready to
receive him, when he shall come, and to enter into his rest with him. But
because the love of this life, and the sweetness and delights of this world,
do often full us asleep, and turn from us the remembrance of these things,
to awake us, we cannot do better then to frequent the sick folks houses, and
hospitals, not only there to behold on every side, the Images and examples of
the corruption and mortality of our poor nature, to the end to humble our
selves, and to contain our selves modestly: But also to exercise our charity
toward those that languish and are affected, in comforting them.

The which then to do, we must first show them, that all sickness comes from
God, and he sends it, sometimes to chastise and to bridle us, sometimes to
prove and exercise our virtue; giving us by that means matter and argument to
show the affiance and trust that we have in him, to require his mercy by
prayers, and sighings, to acknowledge and confess our faults and offenses with
grief and displeasure; and to bring the sick to this point, to cause him to
make a true and humble confession of his sin.

Secondly we must propound unto him, that it is the spring and principal cause
of sicknesses as well corporal as spiritual, and for to heal them, they must
take away the causes which engendered them; that is to say, our sins, whereof
we cannot be otherwise delivered, but by the remission and pardon that God
gives us of them by his grace; provided (as says St. John) that we confess
them unto him, 1. John. 1.
and be assured that Jesus Christ is our advocate and mediator toward him, by
the means of his justice wherewith he covers and blots them out, in such sort
that they come not in judgment.

And because that the love which we bear naturally does blind us, and is cause
that we never think our selves so vicious, and imperfect as we are, we must
(to take away this veil from before the eyes of the sick) lay before him the
law of God, as a looking glass, wherein he may behold his whole life, and to
give him to understand how by that, not only our actions, but also our whole
nature is condemned.

And for proof and confirmation thereof allege generally unto him, that we
are all conceived in sin, and borne the children of wrath, that we are but
flesh and all vanity, that we are sold under sin, that in us there is no
goodness, that even all our justice is but old rags; and for conclusion
that we are nothing at all, but dust and putrefaction. After that, we must make
unto him a brief discourse upon all the commandments of God, and show unto
him by little and little, that whenever he shall examine himself, he shall
find that there is not one of them, but he has very often transgressed, and
beginning at the first table put him in mind.

1 That he has not done his duty in seeking after God, and endeavoring to know
him.

That he has not loved him with all his heart, with all his strength, and with
all his understanding.

That he has not always put his whole trust in him.

That he has often doubted of his promises, and has mistrusted his help.

That he has rather relied upon the arms of the flesh, and humane means
which he had, then upon the succor and help of God.

That he has not waited for all his prosperity and advancement from his only
favor and blessing.

That he has not always called upon him in his affairs, with assurance and
certain hope to be understood, and to obtain.

That he has not always feared and reverenced him, as did appertain to his
high and sovereign Majesty.

That he has not always given him thanks, and blessed his name for all
things, and at all times, as well in adversity as in prosperity.

2 Afterward, that thinking upon God, he has presented him unto himself
sometimes under a humane and corporal figure.

That he has not apprehended him like unto a Spirit being immense, infinite,
invisible, immortal, impassible, unchangeable, sovereign in might, goodness,
mercy, justice and verity, like unto a protector of all virtue and perfection,
and a spring of all life and light, fountain of all fullness and good, the
scope of beatitude and felicity, beginning and end of all things, who is, and
by his only word causes all creatures to subsist.

That he has not served and worshipped him in spirit and truth, as he
requires and commands us in his law.

That he has been more curious of ceremonies and exterior demonstrations of
piety, then of piety it self, and to make the show of a Christian then to be
one indeed.

And finally, that he has not always thought that the true and legitimate
service of God, consists only in the obedience of his holy will.

3 That speaking of God, it has not been with such respect and reverence of
his Majesty as did appertain; that he has not studied to sanctify,
celebrate and glorify his name as he ought.

That by his wicked life and conversation, he has been cause that he has been
blasphemed by the ignorant and infidels.

That he has not heard, read and meditated the word of God, with such desire,
fear and zeal as was required, to do honor unto the Lord who spoke, and in
whose name it was denounced unto him.

That he has not always spoken of the works of God, nor in them acknowledged
the greatness of his power, wisdom, and goodness, with such praise,
admiration, and astonishment as they deserve by their amplitude and
magnificence.

That being at the Lords table at all times when the communion has been
celebrated in the Church, it has not been with such humility and devotion, nor
such conte^plation of the mystery there set before him, nor such elevation of
his heart upwards, where Jesus Christ is set at the right hand of God his
father, as he ought to have done.

4 That in the days appointed to abstain and rest from profane and bodily
work, to the end wholly to be applied to the sanctification only of the name
of God, he has not altogether given himself to the meditation and exercises
of spiritual things, thinking upon, nor seeking after nothing, but only those
that are above.

That he has often been more curious of his temporal affairs, then to seek
the kingdom of God and his justice, preferring by that means this transitory
and corruptible life, before the happy and everlasting life, and the care of
his body before that which he should have had of his soul: and the service of
the world, and of his flesh before the service of God, which he ought to have
honored above all things.

That for small and light occasions he has dispensed with himself not being
at the place of conuocations and Ecclesiastical assemblies, there to make a
public confession and protestation of his faith, to show his devotion, and the
fear that he has of God, to edify the company by his example, and to publish
to every one without shame, without fear, and without any dissimulation and
hypocrisy, the religion that he means to follow and hold, and in the which
he is resolved to live and die.

That he has not employed himself to instruct and catechize his wife, his
children, his servants, and all his family, as he is bound, calling them to
morning and evening prayer, exhorting them to read and meditate the word of
God, and to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Canticles to his praise, and to confer
amongst them of all holy things, and not to hold any speech but that only
that may advance and make them them to grow more and more in the knowledge and
fear of God.

That after the spiritual exercises to the which men ought principally to give
themselves in the days of rest, as to hear the exhortations with fear and
reverence, and in all humility to assist at the public confessions, prayers,
and thankesgiuings that are made and given to God in the whole assembly, he
has not reserved himself the rest of the day to visit the prisoners, to
comfort the sick, to enquire after the poor, and to seek them out to assist
them.

After having thus briefly discoursed to the sick the faults which he may
have committed against the commandments of the first Table, then must you
pass from thence to the second, and give him to understand:

5 That first he has not borne to his superiors such honor and reverence,
nor showed such nor so ready obedience, nor finally been so fearful to
offend them as God commands him in his law. And if he have done any duty
toward them, that it rather has been to be rid of them, or for fear of
punishment, if he should have done otherwise, then for respect that he bears
them in his conscience, or desire that he had in that to obey God.

That he has not always so well prayed to God for their health and
prosperity, and to direct them with his holy Spirit in their counsels, and to
give them the grace to govern themselves by his word in all their actions, and
generally to bless and direct them in all their ways, as he was bound
thereunto by the express commandment of God.

That he has not had such an opinion and esteem of his Pastors, that have the
charge of his soul, and to administer the spiritual food and nourriture;
that he has not respected their authority, hearkened to their voice, received
their admonitions, obeyed the doctrine which they did preach, and willingly
yielded to the soft yoke and charge of Jesus Christ, which they imposed upon
him in his name.

That he has not often spoken of them nor of their fashions and demeanures in
such honor as might be required. And if in his presence any would blase or
prate of them, that he has not opposed himself against them, and has not
forbidden them as he ought.

6 Item, that he has not loved his neighbors as himself, desiring and
wishing as much good to them as to themselves.

That he has hated them when he has thought to have received some damage by
them, wishing all ill hap and death unto them.

That he has desired and sought the means to be revenged of his enemies,
making no reckoning of the defense which God makes against it, reserving the
pursuit and vengeance to himself of all the wrong done to his children and
servants.

That he has not been pitiful to the poor, nor done his duty in
administering of his goods unto them, to nourish and clothe them, lodge and fit
them with things necessary to the comforting and entertayning of their poor
life, and to the easing of so many miseries and tribulations, wherewith they
are environed on every side.

That he has not visited his poor brethren being sick, nor afforded them
bodily and spiritual comfort.

That he has not opposed himself against the wicked and malicious men, that
did oppress them, and has not employed his power and his means to defend
them, from the violence and outrage that is done unto them.

That he has not rejoiced at the prosperity of his neighbors; but has been
jealous and envious of their felicity, when he has seen that God did bless
them, and did advance them to some higher degree then he.

7 That he has not possessed his vessel, that is to say, his body, in honor
and sanctification as he ought, nor considered that it was a Temple that God
by his spirit had dedicated to himself, and that he ought for this regard to
keep it from all filthiness and pollution.

That he has not turned his eyes from false beholdings so carefully as he
ought, but in steed of retaining and keeping them in, has suffered them to
stray and run after all their concupiscences.

That he has not subdued his flesh unto such servitude as he ought, to make
it subject or obedient to the spirit in all points.

That he has nourished and entreated himself too delicately, and has not
always used sobriety and abstinence, sufficient to repress the passions, and
to cool the heat of his concupiscence.

That by discourse, letters, gifts, smiles, looks, dances, gestures and
shameful motions, he has tempted the chastity and honor of the wife,
daughter, and servant of his neighbor.

That in the fashion of his apparel he has had more regard, and taken more
pleasure to adorn the outward man, then the interior, and to please the
world, then to edify the Church with an outward apparent modesty in his
behavior.

That he has not been curious enough to keep the chastity of his ears and
of his tongue, neither to hear nor speak word or speech, that were dissolute
or dishonest.

8 That he has been covetous to enrich himself by unlawful and indirect
means.

That in his dealings and business with his neighbors, he has not always
walked straightly, roundly, justly, sincerely, and uprightly, as God commands
to keep and entertain the society that he will have kept amongst men.

That he has observed the times of famine and dearth, to sell his goods and
merchandises at the highest rate, and by that means to make his gain upon the
public miseries and calamities.

That the surplus of the goods that God had given him for the entertainment of
him and his family, being due to the poor, he has reserved and laid up in
his chests, sellers, and garners, robbing and defrauding by that means, those
to whom it was justly due.

That not considering, that piety with contentment (as says the Apostle) is a
great revenue, and that for that reason it ought to suffice to have apparel,
nourishment, and that which is necessary for us, he thought he was not rich,
if beside that he had not many superfluous things.

That he has not been liberal, nor quickly given some of his goods to
whomsoever demanded any, considering and believing that it is a happier thing
to give then to take.

That he has not paid the laborers their wages presently without deferring
till the next day.

9 That he has not loved the truth in his words and deeds, saying and
speaking nothing foolishly and slightly; nor showing a gravity and sincerity in
all his speeches, works, fashions, and countenances, that might be worthy of a
true man in deed.

That in him there has been much hypocrisy, coloring and disguising,
whether it were to exalt and magnify his virtues, or to palliate and excuse
his vices with some false pretense.

That he has not been so courageous, nor so constant to confess and defend
the truth against the blasphemers and enemies thereof, and to the contrary to
combat against errors and lies as he ought.

That through envy and malice he has detracted and spoken evil of his
neighbors, and falsely to accuse their actions, which might have been excused,
and by his exceptions used means to obscure the brightness and the glory of
their virtues.

That he has taken pleasure to hear flatterers, and these that indeauoured
to make him believe that he was more virtuous and less vicious, then his
conscience it self in secret did witness unto him.

10 That in fine to close up his confession, you must show unto him, that all
his nature, as also the nature of all men upon the earth is vicious, and that
of it self it cannot bring forth nothing but bad fruits, no more then a bad
tree; to wit all evil thoughts, all disordinate affections, all noisome and
dishonest speeches, and all works contrary to the will of God; leaving and
omitting on the other side, all that which is conformable and commanded by him.

Now after having showed him his faults to make him the better to feel them,
and thereby to conceive the more displeasure for them, they must be
exaggerated unto him by the circumstances of the person, of the place, and of
the time that he did them.

And when you see him humbled and beaten down with the feeling of them, you
must raise him again and comfort him, in showing him the remission of his
sins, and for to assure him thereof entirely.

You must deduce and discourse particularly the reasons contained in the
Treatise, and going on take away the fear that he may have of Death, of the
Devil, and of the Judgment of God, and finally the grief for the world, and
those things which he leaves therein, by the hope and desire which ought to
be laid before him of the near enjoying of heavenly and incorruptible goods;
and that done, to kneel down and pray to GOD for him and all that are in the
company in this manner.

Prayer.
O GOD and Father of all consolation, who have promised to hear the prayers
and grant the requests of all those that call upon thee in verity, and not to
reject any one that presents and prostrates themselves before thee with a
sorrowful soul and a contrite heart, subdued and dejected with the
remembrance and feeling of his sins, we beseech thee altogether that in the
name and for the love of thy son Jesus Christ our only Savior and Mediator,
thou would please to stretch forth thy mercy over all us that are here
assembled in thy name, and singularly upon our brother whom thou have pleased
to visit and afflict with sickness, and by it to cover, forget, remit, and
quite blot out all his faults whereby he may have offended thee in all his
life. And we pray thee to do him yet this favor, to seal in his heart by thy
holy Spirit the remission which thou give him of all his sins; to the end
he may feel peace in his conscience, and that with joy and full assurance, he
may prepare himself to appear before thee when it shall please thee to call
him out of this world; Assuring himself that there is no condemnation neither
for him, nor for all those that by a true faith are ancred, united, and
incorporated into thy son JESUS CHRIST; That his Sins, Death, the Devil,
nor any creature can separate him from thy love, nor cast him out of thy favor;
and that thy throne, is not a throne of rigor and justice, but a haven of
health, a shelter and saueguard for all the faithful. Do him this good (good
God) to fortify and strengthen him in the faith of all these things; in such
sort that he may cover himself with them as with a Target, and may by that
means be strengthened and made invincible against all the temptations
wherewith he may be assailed, and that leaving and casting behind him all
other trust, he may make no reckoning, nor rely upon any thing else, but upon
the only justice, obedience, and sacrifice of thy son, to assure himself
against thy judgment. We beseech thee moreover to give him the grace, with
all his heart to pardon his neighbors all the faults by the which they may
have offended him; To the end that being conjoined and united in true charity
to all the members of the body of thy Church, he may be so likewise with the
head, and with thee Lord. Finally, we beseech thee that it would please thee
to give us the grace so well to behold in the person and sickness of our
brother, how uncertain and short the course of our life is, that we may look
about us betimes, and that withdrawing our hearts from the vanities of this
world, we may employ that little time that we have here to live, to learn
thy wisdom, that is to say, firmly to believe and to trust to thy promises,
quickly to obey to that which thou command, and carefully to shun and
avoid that which thou forbiddest.

FINIS.
COMFORT FOR THOSE THAT ARE SICK (DRAWN OVT OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES) TO
PREPARE them to die.

MORE, A short Catechism, which is not only to instruct the Sick, but also to
refresh his memory with the great mystery of our Redemption.

MATTHEW 24. The negligent servant that makes not himself ready, shall be
surprised and hewn in pieces, and have his portion with the Hypocrites; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Death is the end, and beginning of life.

PRINTED 1611.

Ecclesiasticus 18. Take physic before sickness, and examine thy self
before judgment, and thou shall find pardon in the presence of God.

Revelation 3. If thou do not watch, I will come unto thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know at what hour I will come unto thee.

Revelation 16. Happy is he that watches, and keeps his garments, to the
end that he walk not naked, and that his shame be not seen.

Matthew 24. Luke 12. Be ready, for the son of man will come in an hour
that you think not.


To the faithful Reader, Health.
FRiendly Reader, take in good part this present comfort, the which I have here
written for the good and profit of every one that has the fear of God, to
make use of it at his need, when it shall please the Lord to call him; But be
advertised (that thou may use it well) that these three letters B.S.N. the
first signifies, brother to a man, the second sister to a woman, and the
third, that you must name the party by their proper name. For it ought not to
be honored with names of worldly honor and dignity, but to oppose it self
against Satan in the name of the Lord, it ought to be named by the proper name
which it received at the holy Sacrament of Baptism. Which doing thou shall
obey unto God, whom I beseech to be favorable unto thee, at the day of his
coming. (*)

COMFORT FOR THOSE THAT ARE SICK, DRAWN OVT OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES FOR to
prepare them to die.
B.S.N. HE that is of God hearkeneth to the word of God, John 8.
and does not only hearken unto it, but keeps it and puts it in execution;
for all things shall have an end, Mat. 7. Hebr. 1. Isa. 40.
and wax old as does a garment, but the word of God dureth for ever. Now
seeing it is so, that by a man sin came into the world, Romans 5.
and by sin death, and consequently all afflictions and adversities thereon
depending, with just occasion the life of man is but a continual warfare upon
earth; Romans 7.
so that the flesh fights against the spirit, and the spirit against the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, which are the enemies of our souls. But
following the counsel of the Apostle, to obtain victory in this spiritual
battle, we must constantly resist by faith; 1. Peter 5.
For the victory that surmounts the world, is our faith; 1. John 5.
The which is a certain and a firm knowledge of the love of God toward us,
Hebr. 11.
according as by his Gospel he declares himself to be our Father and
Savior, by the means of JESUS CHRIST. Having then such a firm faith for your
principal foundation; Acknowledge and confess without feyning before the
majesty of God, that you are a poor and miserable sinner, Psalm. 51.
conceived and borne in iniquity and corruption, inclined to do evil,
unprofitable to all good, and that through your vice you have without ceasing
transgressed the holy Commandments of God; Luke 17.
which doing, you have purchased by his just judgment, ruin and perdition
upon you. Nevertheless, you are displeased with your self that you have
offended him, and do condemn both you and your vices with true repentance,
desiring that the grace of God may succor you in your calamity; Pray then in
such a firm faith, Psalm. 51.
if you cannot with your mouth, say it with your heart; That God our benign
father, and full of mercy, enter not in judgment, Psalm. 142.
nor in account with you, but that it would please him to have pity on you in
the name of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, and that he would blot out all
your spots and vices by the merit of the death and passion of the same Jesus
Christ; in whose name present unto him his holy prayer, the which he has
taught us, saying with all your heart:

Our Father which art in heaven, Matthew. 6.
hallowed be thy name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us, And lead us not into temptation, But
deliver us from evil, For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.

B. S. N. Acknowledge with all your heart, your unrighteousness, have a
displeasure for your sins, repent incessantly, and the kingdom of God will
draw near unto you. Matthew. 3.
Acknowledge that there is no righteousness, nor innocence, nor any good
works from you, nor in you; Titus. 3.
but that like unto a child of wrath, conceived and borne in the sin of old
Adam, you merit everlasting death and damnation. Nevertheless that neither
that, nor all the sins in the world, Ephe. 2. Psalm. 51. Romans 8.
although you should have committed them, do not make you afraid. For JESUS
CHRIST true Son of the everlasting God, is become man, conceived of the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, to sanctify and cleanse you; Romans 1. Luc. 1.
Mat. 1.
he has suffered under Pontius Pilate many afflictions, injuries and
outrages, yielding himself to bondage, Phil. 2. Act 3. Mat. 27.
to set you at full liberty. JESUS CHRIST was crucified as accursed upon the
Cross, to deliver you from the everlasting curse: JESUS CHRIST died and shed
his most precious blood, Isa. 13. Revel. 1. Heb. 9.
to wash you, to redeem you, to deliver you wholly from death, from hell, and
from the power of Satan. 1. Pet. 1. Romans 6. Act. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
Jesus Christ was buried in a Sepulcher, to bury all your sins, the which
he has borne and blotted out. Jesus Christ descended into hell, suffering an
extreme agony, for to deliver you from all the pains and dolours of death.
Marc. 16.
Jesus Christ is risen again from the dead, to make you rise in your proper
body, 1. Cor. 15.
and glorious immortality. Act. 1.
Jesus Christ ascended into heaven, to make you ascend thither after him. Col 3.
Jesus Christ fitteth at the right hand of God his Father Almighty, being your
advocate and intercessour toward him, 1. John. 2. Heb. 7. Mat. 25. Psalm. 61.
Romans 8.
and the atonement of all your sins; we wait for his coming to judge the
quick and the dead, to render unto every one according to his works. But to
the faithful that believe in him, Mat. 25.
he will not impute their sins; but having justified them through his grace,
will make them to reign with him for ever in his heavenly throne.

B. S. N. Such is the great mystery of our redemption, the which by the means
of the holy Ghost, you must firmly believe has been done for your salvation.
And doubt not but by the merits of Jesus Christ, the head of his Church, you
are one member incorporated therein; Ephesians. 1.
giving him thanks in all humility, that he has given you the grace to live
in the communion of his faithful ones, having nourished you with his word, with
his body, and with his blood: Mat. 4. 1 Cor. 11.
acknowledging as well assured, the great mercy of God in the remission of all
your sins, Romans 5. 1. Cor. 15.
the which is shown you through Jesus Christ, who shall cause you to rise
again at the latter day to reign with him in euersting life, Marc. 16.
the which he has promised to all those that believe in him, being baptized in
his name.

Then B. S. N. seeing you have this faith, doubt not but to receive the promise
of faith; for God is true, he is no liar like unto men. Romans 3. Mat. 24.
Heaven and earth shall pass; but the word of God shall endure for ever; Isa.
40.
God is your Father and Creator, you are his Creature, and the workmanship of
his hands; Genesis 1.
he did not make you to destroy you; for he is the Savior of all men, 1. Tim.
2.
and desires not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live. Wherefore
I pronounce unto you in the name of God, Mat. 9. Marc. 2.
that by his great goodness and mercy, he has given you a pardon and full
remission of all your sins, Luc. 5. Titus. 3.
through the only merit of his son JESUS CHRIST our Lord, in the shedding
of his most precious blood; Tim. 1. Act. 4. Revel. 1. 1. John. 2.
for he is the propitiation, not only for your sins, but for the sins of
the whole world.

Mat. 17.
B. S. N. Jesus Christ says with his own mouth, that all things are possible
to him that believes: Believe then without doubting at all, Romans 1. Phil. 2.
1. Pet. 1.
that Jesus Christ putting on our flesh, made himself perfect man, whereby he
died for you, having borne all your sins in his body to abolish and blot
them out. Present unto God the precious death of his Son Jesus Christ, and by
the merit of that death and passion ask him forgiveness, and mercy, saying,
from the bottom of your heart in all humility and repentance.

LOrd God Almighty, be merciful to me poor miserable sinner, for the love
of thy Son JESUS CHRIST my Lord and Savior, Romans 3. John. 14.
and through the merit of his death and passion, that it may please thee to
receive my soul, Mat. 26.
the which I recommend into thy hands.

B. S. N. Put your firm confidence in God; for seeing he is with you, Romans 8.
no man will be against you: Jesus Christ, who is the imaculate Lamb, has
overcome all for you, Isa. 61. Heb. 7.8.9.
he has offered himself once for you, and by that only oblation has quite
done away all your sins; he has done away your folly, unrighteousness,
abomination, and obligation; with this good Lord JESUS CHRIST, God the Father
has given you all things.

B. S. N. Strengthen your self in JESUS CHRIST, Romans 8.
who calls and inuiteth you by his Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, to
address your self directly unto him: saying. All that are thirsty, Isa. 55.
Mat. 11.
come to the great fountain; Isa. 55. Mat. 11.
Come to me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

B. S. N. Believe steadfastly that JESUS CHRIST has discharged you of all your
sins, 1. John 5.
and has reconciled you to God his Father; unto whom in all humility and
repentance, say from the bottom of your heart.

Romans 3. John 14.
LOrd God Almighty, be merciful unto me poor miserable sinner, for the love
of thy Son JESUS CHRIST my Lord and Savior; and by the merit of his death
and passion, Mat. 26. Psa. 30.
that it would please thee to receive my soul the which I commend into thy
hands.

B.S.N. Be in hope; for, for a certain he will receive your soul as his
own for the love of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, Mark 16. Deuteronomy. 18. Psalm.
2. Isa. 53. Genes. 3. and 22. Mat. 9.
who is the Savior and Redeemer of all those that believe in him. Moses and
all the Prophets have testified, that all people shall receive salvation and
blessing through Jesus Christ. The Apostles and Evangelists testify that Jesus
Christ is not come to call the just, John 10. Luke 22.
but sinners to repentance, and to give his soul for the redemption of many;
for he has shed his blood for the remission of sins. Believe then and
doubt not at all, for JESUS CHRIST has made the purgation of all your sins,
Heb. 1.
having promised that all those that believe in him, and in his Father that
sent him, shall have eternal life, John. 5.
and shall not come to judgment, but shall pass from death to life.

Got to then. B. S. N. Take courage in Jesus Christ, for he has loved you,
Isa. 53. Revel. 1.
and washed you from all your sins in his blood; Romans 5.
have this firm faith to fight valiantly against the adversary; have no other
buckler to defend you, but that precious blood of Jesus Christ, who by virtue
of his death and passion, has reconciled you to God his Father; unto whom from
the bottom of your heart, in all humility and repentance, present this prayer.

LOrd God Almighty, be merciful unto me poor miserable sinner; Romans 3. John.
14.
for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior; and by the merit
of his death and passion, that it may please thee to receive my soul, the
which I recommend into thy hands. Math. 26. Psalm. 30.


B. S. N. Have this hope and steadfast says, that this good God full of mercy,
will receive your soul as his, into his hands, for the love of his Son
Jesus Christ: John. 10. Act. 4.
for there is no other name under Heaven given to men, whereby we must be
saved, and there is no salvation in any other but in JESUS CHRIST. Then arm
your self well with Jesus Christ. For he has done all for you, he has
accomplished the law for you; Romans 8. Romans 10.
he has overcome all for you.

Go to then, B. S. N. Rejoice in God, be always steadfast in this lively says,
follow and imitate the holy Patriarchs, Heb. 11.
Prophets, and Apostles, who are all saved in this faith, who do all assure
you, that the adversary cannot in any wise hurt you; for your cause is gotten
through JESUS CHRIST, John. 5. 1. John. 2.
who is your Judge and your advocate likewise: wherefore say always in this
firm faith, Although I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet
would I dread none evil, Psalm. 22.
for thou Lord God art with me. B. S. N. Also be never weary with saying
from the bottom of your heart in all humility and repentance,

LORD God Almighty, be merciful unto me poor miserable sinner, for the
love of thy Son JESUS CHRIST my Lord and Savior, Romans 9. John. 14.
and by the merit of his death and passion, may it please thee to receive my
soul, Mat. 26. Psalm. 36.
the which I recommend into thy hands. So be it.

A singular Prayer for a body greatly afflicted with sickness, who is more
likely to die then to live.
With a little Catechism made expressly to instruct the sick, and to make him
by faith behold the mystery of our redemption.
ECCLESIASTICVS. 18. Before sickness take Physic, and before judgment,
examine thy self, and in the presence of God thou shall find propitiation.


NOw the Lord does admonish us to pray continually, Mat. 26.
principally when we are touched with his correction; Wherefore all such
parents and faithful friends as visit the sick body; ought not only to
visit and solicit the body, Mat. 6.
but also seek after, and desire the spiritual Physic for their souls.
Which ought to be done by good prayers, confession of sins, and Christian
exhortations, according to the word of God, Mat. 4.
without the which man cannot live. And to that end that all things may be done
in good order, and with zeal, first, it shall be convenient to fall down
before the Majesty of God, and pray unto him, beginning, Our help is in the
name of the Lord, who has made both heaven and earth.

Then present unto him the general confession of sins, and consequently this
present prayer, as follows.

LOrd God Almighty, and father of mercy, we here assembled in the name of thy
well-beloved Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 18. John. 14.
in his favor have been so bold as to present our selves before thee, to call
upon thy holy name, having our only refuge to thy sovereign goodness, the
which we do not only desire to feel and taste in our selves, but also in the
necessity of thy poor creature, being afflicted with sickness in body,
James. 5.
affliction and calamity of mind. We know Lord, that thou have justly visited
and chastised him with thy rod, 1. Cor. 11.
to make him to understand thy fatherly affection. But thy great mercies, the
which thou have used toward our fathers, Psalm. 78.
are not quenched and consumed. For thou art the great God everlasting, Mat.
26. Psalm. 102.
propitious and merciful, that never alterest. Thy holy word teaches us
plainly that the whole earth is full of thy mercies, the which do much
surmount this judgment: wherefore Lord appease thy wrath toward thy creature.
Have pity and compassion on him for the love of thy Son JESUS CHRIST our
Lord; Look not upon his sins, John. 14. Heb. 7. and 9
but look upon the face of thy Christ, who has sufficiently satisfied thee
for him, in offering unto thee the great Sacrifice of his body on the Cross.
We beseech thee, then, O God most benign and full of mercy, to make him to
feel thy grace, which thou did never refuse to thy children.

And because thou art our eternal Father, Mat. 6.
knowing well what is expedient and necessay for our salvation, we do not
pray thee to prolong his life, or to abridge it. For we rely upon thy holy
will, unto the which only we desire to please. Romans 11.
Thou art wise without counsel to dispose of thy creature according to thy
good pleasure. If it please thee to call him, who is it that can resist; Romans
8. John. 11.
If thou please to restore him to health again, who is it that can reprove
thee? For all things are in thy hands, and nothing is done without thy will
and holy providence. Nevertheless Lord, if by thy favor thou do prolong
his days, Psalm. 22.
thy rod shall serve for a chastisement unto him, to amend and convert him unto
thee, and we with him will render thee thanks and praise. But if thy will be
settled, to make him pass into a better life, we beseech thee in the favor of
thy Son Jesus, to forget all his faults and sins, the which it was thy will
to have blotted out, Revel. 1.
and washed in the shedding of his precious blood.

May it please thee by the merit of the death and passion of thy Son, to
receive his soul into thy hands, Mat. 16. Psalm. 20.
when it shall please thee to call him out of this world. Lord God do not
despise the work of thy hands, Psalm. 137. Psalm. 129. Psalm. 51.
for behold thy poor creature almost consumed, who calls upon thee out of
the bottom of his sorrows, presenting unto thee his sorrowful and penitent
soul, with his humbled heart, which we beseech thee to accept in good part,
for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, John. 14.
in whose name thou have promised to grant our requests. Wherefore, Lord, we
beseech thee to receive us into thy holy keeping; illuminating our hearts and
understandings to address our selves toward thee, and to call upon thy holy
name, Mat. 6.
as thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord has taught us to pray unto thee for all
our necessaries, saying, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Finally, O God most benign Father and full of mercy, that it may please
thee, always to sustain us by thy grace and virtue, to the end, that through
the infirmity of our flesh, we do not fall. And because that of our selves
we are so weak that we were not able to remain steadfast, one minute of
time, may it please thee to fortify us by thy holy Spirit, and to arm us with
thy graces, that we may constantly persevere in faith; without the which it is
not possible for to please thee. Heb. 11.


May it please thee then to confirm us from day to day in it, whereof we will
make a confession with heart and mouth saying.

I believe in God the Father, etc. The prayers ended, you may look how the
sick body does, and inquire of his health, with friendly words and
Christianlike speeches. And if you perceive that he declineth, and that no
sign of health does appear; a little after you may choose a fit time to speak
to the said sick body, and ask him whether he has a good mind to talk of
God, and to hearken to his word, whiles he is yet in his good sense; that if
he be of God, John. 8.
you may begin this little Catechism that follows.

A SHORT CATECHISM, which is not only to instruct the Sick, but also to
refresh their memories, with the great mystery of our redemption; Eccles. 18.
the which well to understand and keep in his latter days, he ought to make
Confession of his faith before the assistants of the faithful, whereof one of
them, in the absence of the Minister, ought to examine him as follows.
THE MINISTER.
B.S.N. EVery man that knows himself well, and is not ignorant of his
condition and quality; surely he ought to confess, that notwithstanding that
he is created after the Image and likeness of God, Genes. 1.
nevertheless that he is conceived and borne in the sin of old Adam, Psalm.
51. Ephesians. 2. Romans 5.
whereby he is made a poor miserable sinner, ignorant, inconstant, and full of
iniquity, and consequently subject to all miseries, afflictions, adversities,
and finally to death; All which sin has caused: which because God would not
leave unpunished, he afflicts us daily, and to speak better, he chastises us
in this world, to the end not to damn us with the world; wherefore,

1. Cor. 11. Psalm. 31.
B.S.N. Be patient in your sickness, and you shall possess your soul in
spiritual joy; Acknowledge your sin, and accuse your self before the
Majesty of God, upon whom you must look by faith, making confession thereof
with heart and mouth, before all the assistants; for it is written, Romans 10.
that men believe in heart to righteousness, and with their mouth confess to
salvation. Hearken then unto the questions which now I shall demand you, and
answer faithfully according to the understanding that you have received of the
Lord; which if you cannot by reason of the weakness and hinderance of your
sickness, Mat. 10.
I will answer for you, and it shall suffice for you to give us your heart,
and constancy of faith, in the which you must live and die.

Now I ask you, wherefore and to what end you were created in this world?
Genes. 2.


The Sick. To know God.

The Minister. Was it necessary for you to know God?

Psalm. 16. and 17.
The Sick. Yes surely; for seeing he is my sovereign good, without the
knowledge of him, I had been more wretched then the brute beasts.

The Minister. Seeing you know God, you know well that he is the mighty, the
wisdom, and the infinite good, Genes. 1. John 1. Luke 1. 1. John 5. Genes. 18.
one God in three persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; It is the only God
that Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob worshipped, in spirit and truth: It is the
only everlasting God, who has created heaven and earth, and all things
therein. The knowledge that you have of God is it not such?

The Sick. Yes.

The Minister. But such a simple knowledge of God, were it able to conduct you
to eternal life?

The Sick. Very hardly: for everlasting life, John 17.
is to confess and knowledge one only God, and him whom he has sent, his
everlasting Son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

The Minister. Wherefore is it necessary for you to know and confess the Lord
Jesus Christ.

The Sick. Because that I must recover in JESUS CHRIST, Romans 5. Psalm. 51. Luke
24. Psalm. 21. Romans 11.
that which I have lost in my self, through the sin of the old Adam,
whereunto I was conceived and borne; Therefore, it has been needful for my
salvation, that JESUS CHRIST true God and true Man, having put on our flesh,
should give me by his grace all that I had lost in Adam.

The Minister. It is very well said. That is the reason why Jesus Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost, Mat. 1.
Luke 1.
and borne of the Virgin Mary, to purge and sanctify you; For clean contrary
to him, Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 51.
you were conceived and borne in sin, and of sinful parents. Wherefore do
you not confess, that without Jesus Christ you had remained a wretched and
miserable sinner, Romans 8.
in everlasting death?

The Sick. Yea certainly, but I believe and confess, Romans 6.
that this good Jesus Christ, has reconciled me to God his Father.

The Minister. But how did he reconcile you to God his Father?

Mat. 26. Heb. 7. and 9.
The Sick. By his Death and Passion, and the shedding of his most precious
blood: for to deliver me out of al everlasting pain, this good Jesus Christ
has suffered under Pontius Pilate for me, many afflictions, injuries, and
tribulations: Act. 3. Mat. 27.
It is Jesus Christ, who has been crucified for me, as accursed, upon the
Cross, to deliver me from the everlasting curse, unto the which Adam had
bound me. This my Savior JESUS Christ was truly buried, to bury al my sins
with him, to the end they be not imputed to me before God. It is my Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, Romans 6.
who descended into hell, Act. 2. 1. Peter 2.
suffering an extreme temporal anguish for to deliver me from the everlasting.

The Minister. All that you have now confessed of Jesus Christ, was it
sufficient to save you?

The Sick. No, according as the holy Scriptures ought to be accomplished in
all things; Isa. 53. Mat. 26.
For what had it profited me that Jesus Christ was borne, crucified, dead,
buried, and descended into hell for me only, without rising again? Wherefore,
Mark 16. 1. Cor. 15.
I believe and confess, that my Lord, my head and Savior Jesus Christ, is
risen again from the dead, to cause me to rise again with him, as one of his
little members, in everlasting life.

The Minister. Consequently, it is written that he ascended into heaven, Act.
1.
being now set at the right hand of God his Father; But what does this
Ascension profit you?

The Sick. My Lord, my head, and my Savior Jesus Christ, is gone up into
heaven, to make me ascend after him; Colos. 3. 1. John 2. Romans 8.
For where the head is, there are the members also. And I believe that being
set at the right hand of God his Father, he is my Advocate, Romans 8.
Intercessor, and only Mediator toward him, assuring me very well, that no man
can hinder me, John 5.
seeing Jesus Christ is my Advocate, Mat. 25.
and Judge also; wherefore I have no occasion to fear his judgment, when he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead; For I believe and confess with a
steadfast faith, that there is no judgment nor condemnation for those that are
faithful members in Jesus Christ. Romans 8.


The Minister. Who has given you the grace to know and understand all these
things?

The Sick. It is by the grace of the holy Spirit, 1. John 5.
one only God with the Father and the Son, by the means whereof we receive
all the goods and gifts, which are offered unto us in Jesus Christ.

The Minister. Seeing you have already confessed that you are a member of Jesus
Christ, it follows then that you are also incorporated in his Church, the
which he has caused you to believe to be Holy, Catholic, and Universal.

The Sick. I verily believe the holy universal Church, Ephesians. 5.
washed and cleansed in the precious blood of JESUS CHRIST; for the which I
give him thanks, with all humility, that he has given me the grace to be
one of the small members of his Church, and being baptized in his name, has
caused me to live in the communion, unity, and charity thereof; having
instructed me with his holy word, Mat. 4. 1. Cor. 11.
and nourished me with his very body, made me drink of his precious blood,
in hope of eternal life.

The Minister. Now seeing you are so well grounded upon the lively Rock which
is JESUS CHRIST, 1. Cor. 10.
in knowing your self aright, you must acknowledge and confess the principal
good which you have received of this good JESUS CHRIST.

The Sick. It is very reasonable; For I will not be unthankful to remember
the goods and gifts that I have received of God; wherefore I confess that I
miserable sinner, Psalm. 51.
have incessantly offended the goodness and justice of God, having
transgressed his holy Commandments, Luke 17.
in which doing I have deserved everlasting death and damnation; Nevertheless,
appealing to the mercy of GOD, I have asked forgiveness, and do believe and
confess, without doubting any whit, that full and entire remission of all my
sins is given me, Act. 4. Revel. 1.
by the only merit of the death and passion of my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Mat 26. Hebr. 1.
by the shedding of his precious blood, in the which I assure my self to be
sufficiently and entirely washed and purged; which is the greatest good and
contentment that I could ever receive; And such is my faith, Mat. 10.
in the which I will live and die, by the grace of the holy Ghost.

The Minister. Seeing you have received such a great good from God, by the
means of his Son Jesus Christ, it is also fitting that you should do his
commandment: for even as he does pardon you, and makes a remission of all
your sins; Mat. 11.
likewise you must also pardon with all your heart all those that may have
offended you. Mat. 15.
Otherwise you shall not walk according to God.

The Sick. In that I have known the faith of Jesus Christ, to be alone holy
and perfect, Mat. 19.
commanding us to love our neighbors, friends and enemies, as our selves;
wherefore I beseech all those to whom I may have offended, Luke 23.
either in thought, word, or deed, to pardon me with as good a heart, as I
forgive all those that have offended me; desiring to do them pleasure and
service, as to my good Brethren and Friends.

The Minister. Then seeing it is ordained of God that all men must die, Hebr.
9. Genes. 3.
we cannot resist his ordinance; but we ought always to conform our selves
to his holy will; Wherefore Brother, you must not find it strange, if I say
that to you which the good Prophet Isay said to King Ezekias, speaking from the
Lord, Isay 38.
Dispose of thy house, for thou shall die, and shall not live. This good
counsel, ought to stir you up to fit your self spiritually in your
conscience; That is, first to convert your self to God, and to bewail your
sins, Jsay 55.
as did that good King, desiring his mercy, asking him forgiveness, and saying
always in your heart, Lord God, be propitious and merciful unto me poor
miserable sinner, for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior;
Afterward you must not forget your house and family, the which you ought so
well to order and dispose of, by a good will or last Testament, that afterward
it may be in peace and tranquillity. But to make you better to understand the
disposing of your house, you ought to give every man his own, without
deceiving any man. You must leave your wife, your heir, your children and
friends in good friendship and charity, to the end that after your decease, 1.
John 2.
they may have no occasion of discord; That done you must forget all the
troubles and sorrows of the world, which passes away with the lust thereof;
But who so does the will of God, Mat. 26.
endures for ever. Touching your children, you ought to be only a natural
father for a time; but God is their spiritual Father for ever, having them in
his holy keeping and protection, to conserve, preserve and nourish them, from
all evil, provided that they will walk in his ways. Moreover, seeing you are
a Christian, regenerated by the holy Sacrament of Baptism, you know long
since, that we have not here a permanent City, Hebr. 13.
for we weight for a better which is everlasting; Wherefore I pray you in the
name of God, not to vex your self with any sorrow for this world; For here
we are all but strangers, Psalm. 38.
as were our Fathers; When then God shall appoint that you must dislodge and
go before us, will you not conform your self to his holy will and ordinance?
Also if he find it expedient for your salvation, to prolong your life, Isay
38.
as he did to good Ezekias; will you not be contented with what soever it
shall please him to do with you? Yes surely, for he is Lord and Master, you
are but his servant: He is your Creator, you are his creature, and the
workmanship of his hands. By that means then he will dispose of you at his
will, unto the which only you ought to conform and humble your self, saying
unto him with all your heart,

LOrd God, thou know my necessity, if it please thee to prolong my life,
thy will be done; If also it please thee to call me unto thee, thy will be
done; for thy creature Lord, has no other will but thine.

Now Brother, comfort your self in God, whom if he has appointed to call
you, your calling shall be happy, for you must believe and hope with a
steadfast faith, that he will cause you to rise again in your own body, 1.
Cor. 5.
in immortality and glory, for to make you reign with him in everlasting
life, the which is purchased for, and given unto you, in the virtue of the
precious blood of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; Revel. 1.
In whose name the Lord GOD bless, and preserve you, and make his face to
shine upon you, and be propitious unto you. The Lord turn his favorable
countenance toward you, and maintain you in good prosperity, so be it.

THat done, if you see the sick body to wax worse, and to draw near to his
death, as desirous to tend to his appointed end, presently in his mortal
agony, you must not fail to repeat before him with a loud voice the
Christian Comfort, which is here before set down; Which doing God will give
him the grace to die well and faithfully. Amen.

L. S. V.

FINIS.
A TREATISE TO TAKE AWAY THE FEAR OF DEATH, AND CAUSE IT TO BE DESIRED OF the
faithful man.

WITH A SHORT DECLARATION OF THE RESVRRECTION OF THE DEAD; AND with certain
Prayers and Meditations.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bankeworth. 1611.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, the first of these Treatises being come forth of his Country
of Aniou, to be communicated to other nations, at the last it fell into my
hands. And seeing that diverse did greatly desire it, as well for the vtility as
for the breuity thereof; I was also willing that it should be communicated to
those of our nation, adding unto it an other little Treatise of the
Resurrection of the dead, and some good Prayers and Meditations, fitting to
this matter, that we might all learn betimes to die well; which is the lesson
which therein as learnedly as briefly is taught us. Wherefore if I find that
my intention be agreeable, I will endeavor to go on from good to better to
serve to the public good: Farewell this 21. of March 1583.

A TREATISE TO TAKE AWAY THE FEAR OF DEATH, AND CAUSE IT TO BE desired of the
faithful man.
PLATO said, that the Philosophy wherein man (living in this world) should
principally exercise himself, is the meditation of death; that is to say, of
her conditions, frail, diseased, and mortal; of the diverse accidents of this
humane life, and of her hour so uncertain and unknown; to the end that
considering these things, he might withdraw his affection and trust from this
world, that he might despise it, and all temporal things, wherein he sees and
discouers so much inconstancy, and such sudden and frequent mutations or
changes: and that by such a despising of uncertain and casual things, he
should stir up himself unto a contemplation of those that are divine, and
heavenly; And forsaking that which is here perishing and transitory (unto
worldly men) he should choose his part in heaven, and should stay himself at
that which is permanent and eternal. For the like reason, Philip the father of
Alexander the great, a man of good understanding, and of very great
consideration, to the end that in the midst of his great prosperity, he
should not forget himself in his duty, gave order that one of his Gentlemen
should eeuery day at his awaking come and speak these words unto him; King,
have in remembrance that thou art a mortal man.

Jesus Christ also our Savior and Master, tending to the same end, does
exhort us to watch, and to lay up treasures in heaven, and not on earth, where
all things are uncertain and changeable. We see by that, that during our
life, we cannot do better then to think upon death, and our body being upon
the earth, to accustom our selves to have always our spirit and heart in
heaven. Now because that the remembrance of death is a fearful thing to many,
I have bethought my self, to pass away my griefs, and to recreate my self
from my other studies, and also to give you a testimony of the Obligation which
I think I have toward you, as well for the good which you have done unto me,
as for the friendship which you bear me, to write unto you, and to present
this small Treatise, wherein I have briefly touched certain points, wherewith
the faithful may arm themselves against death: which he ought to do in
time, and prepare himself to receive it with assurance, at such time as it
shall please God to send it; for that which does astonish many, is that the
coming thereof is sudden unto them, and that they are surprised unlooked
for. We see by experience, in a frontier town, that when it is well
victualled, and provided of all things necessary, for to withstand a long
siege, those within are a great deal the more assured and bold; whereas if it
were unprovided, they would stand amazed and tremble with fear, if they should
chance to see the approaching of the siege. It is easy to judge by that, of
what importance it is to have prevented a danger, and to be prepared for it.

Then to provide and arm the faithful man against death, we must note that
there are two sorts of it: the one is temporal of the body, which Christians
ought to desire; the other is eternal, of body and soul which they ought not
to fear, perfeuering in the faith of our Lord.

That it is so, all fear presupposes evil and danger; we do not fear that
which is good, but long after, desire and pursue it, and when it offers it
self, we receive it joyfully: But an evil, we apprehend and fear, we fly
from it, and when it happens unto us, we sorrow, and do complain. If then it
does appear by good and evident proofs, that the faithful man is not in
danger of this second death, may we not then conclude, that if we fear it, it
is foolish and without occasion? And surely if we had judgment, and never so
little faith, it were sufficient presently to take away the fear of it from us.

For first, the proper nature of faith is to animate and quicken our heart, so
soon as it is received in us. The just, says the Prophet, shall live by
faith. Now even so as the body, whiles the soul is in it, lives, and dies
not, until such time as it be separated from it; no more does the faithful
man, perseuering in the faith which has been inspired and put into his heart
by the grace of God. Although (says David) I should walk in the midst of
the shadow of death, I will not fear; for thou art with me O Lord. What was
the cause of this assurance? was it not faith? wherewith we ought no more to
fear death, then we do sickness when we are in perfect health, well
disposed, and in good liking; or poverty, when we have plenty and abundance of
all good things.

Secondly, by faith we have remission, and an abolition of all the faults which
we have done; why do we then fear death? There is no death where there is no
sin; by sin death came into the world, says St. Paul: and else where; The
reward of sin is death; sin causes God to be angry with us, and that in
his anger he condemns us to death. Now all seeds does bring forth, every one
according to their sort and quality. The wheat brings forth wheat, and the
Rye, Rye, and we must not hope for any fruit, if there be not seed before hand.

That being true, and witnessed in a thousand places of the Scripture, that
unto a Christian all his sins and debts are quitted him by the grace and
mercy of God, that they are forgotten, that they are covered, that they are not
imputed, and that they are remitted and pardoned, that they are cast as far
from us, as the East from the West; Provided that there be no more seed
thereof, we need not look for any fruit: That is to say, if there be no more
sin, there is no more anger of God, nor of death, and by consequent that also
there ought to be no more fear.

Thirdly, by faith: we have the word, and the promises of God, whereupon it is
grounded: Among others this; Who so believes shall not die, but is passed from
death to life. Now this promise can no more fail, then he that gave it us. It
is eternal. And all that God says, is as sure and permanent, as heaven, or
earth; For this cause when we look into them, we ought in them to consider
the virtue and power of this word, by the which they were once created, and
ever since preserved and maintained in that estate wherein now we see them, and
to infer thereupon: that being of the same power and efficacy in all other
things, nothing is impossible nor uncertain of all that which God does say and
promise unto us. And therefore, as St. James says, Receiving his holy word by
faith in our hearts, and the promises which he has made us, to give us
eternal life, we ought to assure our selves of it, and take away all fear
and apprehension of death. What was the cause of the ruin of us and our
forefathers? was it not because they did decline from the word of God to follow
their own fancies and the counsel of Satan? If then to the contrary we will
cleave to it, without leaning any jot neither to the right hand nor to the
left, we shall live by it, and in it. Hearken unto me, says God (speaking by
Esaias) and your soul shall live. And Zachary in his Canticle; He has given
us a science of salvation. And Saint Peter speaking to JESUS CHRIST, Thy words
are words of eternal life. If God, the Prophets and Apostles, do assure us
that the word of God, received by a true faith in our hearts, does there
quicken, keeping and retaining it, what occasion have we then to fear death?

Moreover by faith we dwell in JESUS CHRIST, and have him dwelling in us, who
having life in himself as his father, does quicken us, and all those unto whom
he does communicate himself, Wherefore then being his members, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones; brief, being one with him shall we fear death?
Has not he power over it, and not only for himself, but also for us? He,
says St. Cyprian, who has once overcome death for us, will always overcome
it in us. Has not he beat down, dispossessed, chased and spoiled Satan, the
Prince and Lord of death? has not he accomplished the law? and by this
perfect obedience, which he has borne to God his Father, appeased his anger,
satisfied his will, and abolished the malediction of the law, which is nothing
else but death? Did not he die to make it die? when he rose again, has not
he broken and dissipated all the torments, plucked down the gates of Hell, and
triumphed over her and all her power? Say not henceforth says St. Paul, who
shall go up into heaven, or who shall descend into the depthes, for to bring
life unto us? for JESUS CHRIST is dead, and risen again from the dead, for to
deliver us from death; and risen again to restore us to life; He is our
Pastor; And for this reason we ought not to fear, that any creature should
snatch us by violence out of his hands, or can hinder him from giving us
eternal life. He is our Advocate, we ought not then to fear to be overthrown
in judgment; nor that by sentence we should be condemned to death: He is our
Mediator, we need not to fear the wrath of God: He is our light, we need
not to fear the darkness: He is our shadow and our cloud, we ought not then
to fear the heat of the fire eternal, no more then did the children of
Israel the heat of the Sun in the Wilderness, being hidden under the
pillar. Let us then for these reasons forsake and cast behind us all fear of
death; the which having had no power nor advantage over the head, shall have no
power over his members.

Item, By faith we have with Jesus Christ God his Father, and are allied and
joined together with him, as he says by his Prophet, I will marry thee if thou will promise me thy faith: and Jesus Christ in St. John; He that loves me
will keep my word, and I and my Father will come and dwell in him: for this
reason we are also called his Temples, because we are consecrated and dedicated
unto him by his holy spirit, that he should dwell in us. Now seeing God is
with us, we have the original, the fountain, the cause, the beginning and the
author of life; we have the great Jehovah; of whom all things depend, by whom
all things are and move: in whom the Angels, Archangels, Principalities, the
heavens and all the elements consist; we have him that is the true Zeus, from
whom al creatures, visible and invisible take their life and their being, by
the participations which they have with him: We have him who is the true
Promitefz, most perfect and sovereign worke-man of all things, who by his
breath does quicken and make them to live: We have ton Theon, that is to say,
he who discoursing all things, by his power infinite does preserve them: We
have, to make short AEL, that is to say, he who only can satisfy, and by his
presence cause that of life and of all other good things we shall have, and
think we have enough: Shall we then fear death in such company? If as S.
Augustine says, God is the soul of our soul, we cannot die but by being
separated from him; the which David does confirm in one of his Psalms,
saying, Those shall perish O Lord, who do depart and go from thee; which being
considered, let us strive only to keep him with us by faith and obedience,
and besides, let us take away all the fear which we may have of death.

Again, by faith we have the spirit of God: you are not carnal, says S.
Paul, writing to the Romans, but are spiritual; for who has not the spirit
of God are none of his. And elsewhere speaking to the Galathians; Have you not
the spirit of God by faith? Now this spirit is the spirit of life; if God
withdrawes it from his creatures they die, they perish, and come suddenly to
naught: to the contrary, when he pleases to send and power it upon them, he
raises and restores them in an instant; even as we see a Hen brooding of her
eggs, by a secret virtue does disclose and bring them to life, albeit that
before they were without soul or feeling. Even so does the spirit of God, al
creatures by his divine power: He gives testimony and does assure us in our
hearts that we are the children of God, to the end that from him as from our
father, by a certain and assured hope we should wait and look for life: He
is as a pledge unto us for fear left we should doubt. Having such earnest of
life, having testimony from him, who being the spirit of truth cannot lie nor
abuse, having him himself who is the preserver of all creatures; shall we
fear death? It is as much as who should fear the darkness at none-day, the
spirit of him who has raised again Jesus Christ, and who has vp-held him
because he should not be overcome of death, being in us will quicken us also,
says Saint Paul and will preserve us from it; let us then put away all fear of
it.

Faith also causes that God does adopt and repute us for his children: you are
all children of God by faith, says S. Paul: and S. John, he has given power
to al those that shall receive him, and believe in his name, to be made the
children of God; then being children, we are the heirs and co-heires with
Jesus Christ; and we are by the means of this adoption certain once to come
unto life, unto the rest, and unto the glory wherein we shall reign eternally
with his Father. Moreover, being children of God, we are of his household, and
it is not in his house where death dwells, it is in hell in the devils house;
in heaven and the place where God abides, there is an unspeakable light, so
great a beatitude and happiness, that in the contemplation thereof, David
crying out, said, O that they are happy that do inhabit and dwell in thy
house! And elsewhere; In this consists all my good, Lord that I may be near
unto thee. Again, being children we are at liberty, free from sin, free from
death, free from the condemnation and rigor of the law, freed from the service
and force of the devil: what do we fear being then children of God, and
consequently brothers of Jesus Christ? Is it possible that he can ever deny or
abandon his flesh and blood, or suffer them to die, having power to save them?
Conclusion. Being the children of God our Father, he loves us with a love
unfeigned and fatherly. And if, as says S. Paul, during the time that we were
his enemies, he had such a care over us, that not sparing his only begotten
Son, he has delivered him over to death to preserve us from it, and to
reconcile us unto himself, now that we are his friends and in his favor,
will he not save us? Who is that man, who considering these reasons, will not
presently assure himself, and do away all fear which he had of death? That
which also ought to assure us against death, and take away all fear which we
have of her, and the dishonor of the tribulation, of the horror and anguish
prepared for the reprobate and damned, is our calling: that God of his grace
has vouchsafed to withdraw us out of the darkness wherein we were, and to
illumine us by his holy spirit, teaching us by his holy word, wherein we ought
to trust, and wherein lies our salvation; and so what we ought to do to
please and obey him, to the end that walking in his law and serving him in all
justice and holiness, we might after we have a little suffered in this world,
be faithfully glorified with him in the end: for that which God begins he
will accomplish; and when he has determined to call any one to him and to save
him, he never changes his counsel, neither does repent himself of the good
that he will do unto him. He is unchangeable, and so steadfast in his purpose
and determination, that that which he once wills and ordaines, he does execute
without being turned from it. If then we feel in our selves that God has
given us the grace to hear, to believe, and to love his word, and to fly from
and reject all that which is contrary to it, and to have an affection to
observe that which he commands us, and a dislike, if happily by infirmity or
otherwise, we chance to commit any thing against his law: let us not doubt but
we are regenerate, elected, and predestined to eternal life, and
consequently out of danger of death. Let us then take away all fear, and let
us say with Saint Paul, What shall separate us from the love and charity of
God? what shall make us to think, that he has not a will to save us? It shall
not be pain, affliction, hunger, persecution, nor any adversity, nor death,
nor any creature whatsoever shall make us to doubt that he does not love us,
in the favor of Jesus Christ; and that having chosen; called and justified us
in him, but that finally he will also glorify us by him.

The Sacraments which JESUS CHRIST has left us for the confirmation of our
faith ought likewise to assure and strengthen us against the fear of death.

First, Baptism by the which we are buried and die with Christ, that we may
rise again with him; in the which we are washed from all our sins, and
clothed with his innocence, to the end that presenting our selves to the
Father, so adorned and covered with the robe of our elder brother, we may
receive his holy blessing, and be saved from the great deluge, wherein all the
infidels perish, as Noe was in his time by the Arc. Having then the promises
of God, as we have said before, and over and above his sign, by the which he
is bound to render that life to us, which we have lost by our sin; wherefore do
we fear death, do we think that he will revoke or that he will deny and
disauow his sign?

Secondly, the Lords Supper, where we take the bread and the wine, for to be
received into the Communion and participation of the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by consequent into the fruits of them: that is, to have part
in his obedience, in his justice, in his satisfaction and redemption, in the
Testament and new alliance, and generally in all the promises of God, the which
by his death have been ratified. It remains now to conclude our purpose, and
to infer upon the precedent things, that if we fear death, it is for want of
considering them, or if we do consider them, it is for want of believing
them; for there is no man so timorous, being firmly persuaded of that which is
spoken, but will take away all fear of death, and will say with David; I shall
not die but always live, to declare perpetually the works of the Lord, and
praise him. And who will not scorn at it with S. Paul, and insult upon it,
saying, O death where is thy victory? where is thy sting? where is thy
strength? where is the terror and fear which men had of thee? Jesus Christ
our Savior perceiving the time of his death draw near, said, that in short
time he should pass from this world to go to his Father, calling death a
passage; which should greatly comfort us. We have almost all this opinion
rooted in us, and it is that which does so discourage us, that it is a
dangerous passage and uneasy. Now for to take it from us, and to stir up our
hearts, he would needs pass it before us, and as it were sound the depth, to
the end that we seeing that he did not stick at it, should take courage: as
also we see before and after him, the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and other
holy personages have done it; who having passed it without any apprehension of
danger, and being escaped safe and well, do now rejoice with God, that they
are gotten to the land and to the port where they did aspire. Shall we then be
such cowards, shall we be so faint-hearted, and of such render and effeminate
courage, as to fear to go by a place so frequent, and a way so great and
beaten, that men go it, as said some of the Ancients, blindfolded Likewise we
see that not one alone of those that trusted in God, calling upon his aid,
that put themselves to pass it, did ever miscarry: when the children of
Israel did fear at the passage of the red Sea, Moses did show unto them,
that if they would trust in God, they should see his glory and power; which
they did see, passing safely through the midst of the danger, whereas their
enemies did remain: so shall all the faithful through the straights of death,
provided that they commend themselves to God, and do only set their trust
upon him. They being in the deserts, although they were bitten by the Serpents,
yet were they preserved from the danger in looking upon him, that Moses had
caused to be erected; although also that the cursed and envious serpent has
tainted us with his venom, yet shall we not die if by faith we look upon
Jesus Christ crucified. Let death come, let it take us, let it bind us, yet
shall we break the bonds as easily as did Samson those of the Philistines his
enemies; let it swallow and devour us as the Whale did Jonas, yet shall it be
feign to disgorge and cast us up again, if in the midst of the depth we do
remember God and call upon him. Let it bury us as it once did Jesus Christ, yet
shall we rise again as he did, and it shall be impossible for this Tyrant to
retain us under his power. After having showed how we should arm our selves
against the apprehensions of eternal death, let us also show that we ought not
only nor to fear the temporal, but also desire it; and when it pleases God
to send it unto us, to thank him for it, to rejoice at it, to embrace it, and
to sing for joy; whether it be that we behold the misery, the mishappes and
evils of this life, from which it does deliver us; or else the joy and
contentment of eternal life, whereto it does bring us.

As for the pouerties, miseries, incertitudes, fragilities, accidents and
mutabilities of this life, not only the Scripture, but also diverse wise and
great Philosophers does show them unto us: And there is one amongst them, who
declaring the original of the Greek phrase signifying life, says (...),
which is, that life has been so called of the Greeks, because of the
violence, of the assaults, excess, pains, and outrages which therein we
suffer, which are innumerable both in body and soul.

Our bodies are subject to cold, to heat, to hunger, to thirst, to time, to
age, and to so many diseases, that there is no part but has his particular
infirmity: the feet are subject unto the goutes, the belly unto gripings, the
sides to pleurisies, the stomach to rawnesse, the lights to the cough, the head
to a thousand diseases; we need but a Spider or other little worm to kill us,
we need but a hair or a crumme to strangle us: in sum, the flesh with all
it strength, is nothing else but grass; Is it to day green and pleasant? let
but the Sith pass, it will cut down a thousand leaves at once, which in an
hour will be dry and withered. The Greeks do call the body of man in their
language, Soma and Demas, whereof the one is taken from a phrase which
signifies to bind, and the other comes near to that which signifies
Sepulcher, for to show unto us in what estate and disposition soever he be, he
does represent rather death unto us then life, and servitude then liberty. As
for the soul, it is first subject to all the evils and diseases of the body:
for it is impossible if that be ill, but that for the conjunction and amity
which is between them, it must endure and feel pain. Moreover, she has her
own, as ignorance, sin, mistrust, suspicion, jealousy, hatred, envy, love,
lust, ambition and passions, the which as tormentors, do hale her the one one
way, the other another, as if they would pull it to pieces. I leave a million
of importunities which she has, and which man takes to attain to his
purposes, to live in rest and at ease, to be in honor, to maintain his
alliances and friendships, to beware of his enemies, to increase his house, to
maintain and keep it in it greatness, the which do torment us oft-times in
such sort, that we can neither eat nor sleep at ease.

And we must not think that there is any estate exempt from this misery; begin
at the highest Prince or Emperor that ever was in the world, and so
discoursing descend to the poorest beggar that ever the earth did bear, and
you shall not find one content, neither the Artificer nor the Merchant, nor
the Advocate, nor the Gentleman, nor the Duke, nor the King; enter into their
closets, there you shall often find them, as said Menander, laid upon their
beds with a mournful voice, and pitiful, crying, Alas, alas. Valerius
speaks of a King, unto whom the Scepter and Diadem were offered; before he
put it on his head, he took it in his hands, then having looked long upon it,
he cries out, O Diadem, if one knew the miseries and encumbrances which thou
do bring there is no man that finding thee upon the ground, would once take
thee up; showing by that exclamation that the life of Kings is less happy then
that of private persons. Tiberius Caesar, under whom Christ was crucified, and
who commanded that he should be worshipped as a God also as Tertullian records
it after the death of Augustus his predecessor, who by will had left him
heir, as well of his goods as of the Empire; which being offered him by the
Senate, according to custom, doubted a great while whether he might accept of
it, by reason of the fear that he had of the weight of this charge, and of
the pain that he was to suffer in the undergoing of it. Dioclesian after he
had held the Empire some twenty years, left it of his own accord, and chose
for the rest of his time to live a peaceable and domestical life; wherein after
the great agitations and storms of trouble which he had had during the time of
his government, he found the rest to be so sweet and pleasing, and his mind
so contented and freed, that many times amongst his familiars he did witness,
that the time had never seemed so good to him, nor his sunshine days so
pleasant; showing by these words how he did abhor the imperial life,
although that few Emperors before or after him had had such honors in
victories, and other prosperities as he had.

These examples do sufficiently show, that the life of Kings is not so happy,
as some men sometimes esteem them, more by error then by reason; and they are
so far from being at quiet and without trouble, that by reason of the great
care and trouble that they have; the ancient Greeks surnamed them anacas, dia
to anacos echin, says Plutarke, in expounding the words: which is as much
according to his exposition, as who should say, careful. By how much a tree is
planted and seated in higher place, by so much the more is it subject to the
wind; also are the great men more then the commons, to diverse fortunes and
accidents; the thunderbolts and the tempests fall ordinarily in high places,
so do the great and pitiful misfortunes upon men of state and renown.

And if in this world the estates which we esteem most of are subject to so
many mishaps, what may we think of others, which we our selves by reason of
the discommodities which are joined unto them do fly from the esteem
unhappy? So we see that there is not any estate, that of it self does make a
body happy or contented; and as in estates, besides the common miseries, every
one has his own particular, also have all the ages of man, evils which are
proper unto them.

In his childhood he is full of infirmities, without virtue, without
understanding, without the use of reason and speech, and without wit, and he
must be fifteen years old, before he is capable to know only what estate is
fittest for him; wherein oftentimes he deceiues himself, choosing that whereunto
he is least fit.

Is he come into his youth? he is rash, aduenturous, foolish passionate,
voluptuous, prodigal, drunkard, gamester, quarrelsome; whereby it happens often,
that in this age he falls into great inconveniences and dangers, to be
imprisoned, to be hanged, to lose his goods, and even to bring his parents with
sorrow to the grave.

When this great heat by little and little begins to cool and diminish, and
that he waxes a perfect man, then he must labor night and day for to
entertain his house, nourish his children, and provide for them for time to
come: he is besieged, now with desire and coueteousnesse, then with fear lest
his children should remain unprovided for, lest they should behave themselves
ill, and lest they should do some dishonor to their house.

The age of virtue and perfection declining, behold in our sight, old age comes
creeping on, in the which man is sickly, unwieldy, cold and forsaken; and as
among the seasons of the year, the last is Winter, and the most troublesome,
so amongst all the ages of man is the old age.

That which I have said is not the hundredth part of all the evils whereunto the
sick man is subject, and nevertheless that little which we have spoken of
it, is sufficient to show that in all estates, and in all ages it is miserable,
and as said Menander, life and misery are two twins; for they are borne, and
grow, they are nourished and live always together, the which nature teaches
us in two things. First, in that the little children coming into the world,
they always cry, as presaging the evil which they are to endure if they live
long; Secondly, in that coming forth of their mothers belly, they are all
bathed in blood, and are more like unto a dead man, whose throat had been
lately cut by murderers, then to any thing else. Two ancient Philosophers,
considering these things said, the one, That God did love those which he takes
out of this world in their childhood: the other, That it were good never to be
borne, or else to die presently. Surely it is a wonderful thing, and which
shows well that we have want of understanding, that although life were never
so ugly and disfig^^ed, and that in all her parts there were neither grace
nor beauty that could commend it, we nevertheless should be so in love with
it, that we always desire to keep it and never to change. But we are much
abused; for it is more uncertain then it is miserable: for to show us the
uncertainty of it, the Ancients called it a shadow, and a dream, which are
the two things in the world, the most vain and least settled in our estate.
Pythagoras being once demanded what humane life was, spoke never a word; for
his custom was to answer and instruct more by signs then by words; but went
into a chamber, and came forth again presently: signifying, that the life of
man is but an entering in, and going out. And JESUS CHRIST exhorting us to
watch, grounds himself upon nothing else but upon the inconstancy and
uncertainty of this life: Watch, says he, for you know not at what hour the
Lord will come. And who is that man in how good disposition and happiness
soever he be, that can promise himself to continue in it but a day? Those in
Samaria doubted of nothing, when in an instant they were destroyed by the
ruins of the Tower of Syloe. In the time of the flood they did build, and made
marriages and banquets, when suddenly contrary to the expectation and opinion
of all the world, the rain fell in clear weather, which rain did ouerflow
the whole earth. The rich man, whereof mention is made in the twelfth of LVKE,
though he was very secure; who having so much wealth that he knew not where
or whord it, made acount to give himself to pleasure, and to live after that
time at his ease; when, while he was standing upon these terms, behold the
Sericant of GOD comes and arrests him to appear the same day, to give up an
account unto him, of all the precious things and goods which he had left, and
which he had gathered with such great labor.

But it is labor lost to go about to prove a thing so manifest, and which we
experiment and see daily: For in this world there is nothing more ordinary nor
more frequent then that which Ovid says that the life of man, and all humane
things are hanged, and do hold but by a little thread.

Let us behold then, seeing on the one side the great evils whereof it is full,
and on the other side the inconstancy of the good which it has; if we have
great occasion to desire of God, that he would prolong it unto us; or to
complain or discontent our selves at death, when it takes it away from us?
We have understood the evils from the which death does deliver us, Let us now
come to consider the good which it brings unto us, from thence we shall yet
better know, that we ought not only not to fear, shune, and avoid it, but
also desire it with all affection; For one of the goods only which we enjoy by
deaths means, is greater then all those which we can have in the world,
living in it for ever.

By it first we rest, as says St. John in his Apocalypse. And after that we
have endured and are almost consumed with innumerable troubles and labors,
dying, our spirit goes into heaven, and our body into the earth as into a
bed, there for to rest and refresh it self. The poor artificers are so glad
when evening draws near, and that it is almost night, that they may be paid
for their labor, and go home to rest themselves; or when after they have
labored the six days in the week, that Sunday comes, when they hope to
recreate themselves, and recover the force and vigor as well of their bodies
as of their minds: we ought not to be less joyful, when the time of our
death draws near, which we ought to weight for, and desire as a holy day;
in the which we hope to rest, and by the pleasure, which therein we take,
presently forget all the sorrows and troubles which we have had in this
world. The end of all that we do, and of that which we purpose, is it not our
rest? Why do we gather goods with a thousand troubles, and as many dangers?
why do we study? why do we fight? why do we labor? why do we all other
things? Is it not by that means to come to ease, and to a rest, which we
pretend and seek as a sovereign good? What is the principal reward which God
does promise to his people, and to all those that serve him faithfully, is it
not a perpetual rest, whereinto he himself is entered since the creation of
the world? When we do pray unto him that his kingdom come, is it not to the
end that we should be in peace and rest? Finally, what do we hope for at his
hands, is it not that? Then the rest which God has promised us, which we
demand of him, which we wait for, brief, which we do purpose as the end and
conclusion of all that we do and undertake, is given us by no other means but
by death. Some seek for it in their goods, which they love, supposing there to
find it; others in study, others in voluptuousness and worldly pleasures: but
all that is but an abuse. For it is found but in death, which we ought more to
love for this reason, then the world does his pleasure, the covetous man his
treasure, the scholar his books, or the ambitious his humors; by reason that
in one hour it puts into our hands, and gives us the enjoying of goods,
which they cannot find by great labor all their life time, in the aforesaid
things. Afterward, death causes that by it we are content, satisfied and very
happy. Happy are those which depart in the faith of our Lord, says S. John. Then
is this blessedness the sovereign good whereunto we aspire, and which we cannot
find in this world, where we are never content. If we have goods we desire
knowledge, if we have knowledge we desire honors, if we have honors we
desire health, if we have health we desire to be young; briefly, we always
want something which we seek after, and when we cannot get it, that is a cause
of grudging and coffeehouse. Then shall we be fully satisfied, as says
David, when by death we are come to the Kingdom of God, and his glory has
appeared unto us.

In it are all things; it is the sovereign good which in it does comprehend
all other: therefore when we shall have it, our appetite and desire shall rest
in it; we shall rest there without going any further, without demanding or
seeking for any thing else. Then shall be accomplished that which IESSVS CHRIST
has promised to all his faithful, who, believing in him with an entire faith,
and such a one as God requires in his word, will raise up in their hearts a
spring of water of life, springing to life eternal. We shall no more fear any
thing, being no more in danger; we shall desire nothing, having all in our
possession; we shall hope for nothing, for all promises shall be accomplished;
we shall no more ask any thing, for we shall have no more need; God shall
be all in all. If we will be rich, we shall then have him that does enrich
all those that call upon his holy name. If we will be wise, we shall have the
heavenly wisdom; if we will be mighty, we shall have the Almighty; if we
desire to be good, we shall have the only excellent good: if we will be fair,
we shall have the great Architect, and perfect workman of all things: If we
will be healthful and live long, we shall have the eternal.

All our senses shall be ravished with the greatness of the pleasures which
they shall have and feel. Our eyes, seeing the great, sumptuous and
magnificent Palace of our God, seeing the perfect and soueraign beauty of his
bright shining face: seeing the Sun of justice, the fountain of water of life,
the tree of life, the Paradise, that is to say, the pleasant garden of our God,
his fair and noble company of Angels, of Apostles, Patriarchs, Martyrs, and
of all the blessed spirits. And if the only sight of Jesus Christ transfigured
in the mountain, was of such great power, that S. Peter, all other things
forgotten, in an instant, was thereby transported out of himself, and desired
so to remain perpetually; what may we think of the joy and pleasure that he
receives, who sees JESUS CHRIST glorified, and with him his Father, his holy
Spirit, and all the abouesaid assembly? Eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, heart has never conceived, the good, the pleasure, the rest, and the
contentment, prepared for those which God has elected to salvation.

Our ears shall likewise be ravished, hearing the discourses and Sermons of
the incomprehensible wisdom of our God; Again the good music, the sweet
and pleasant accords of the Angels and Saints reigning with him, which sing
without ceasing, To the holy, holy, holy God of battles, be honor and glory
for ever and ever. Solomon upon the earth ravished the people, and made them
astonished at the great wisdom and knowledge that was in him. So did JESUS
CHRIST also when he preached. What can he then now do in heaven, where all the
great treasures of his divine eloquence are unfolded and laid open? When
Aeschines had repeated to the Rhodians the Oration of Demosthenes, for the
which he was banished, seeing that they marvelled at it, What would you have
done said he, if you had heard him pronounce it? We also that are so ravished
only with the reading of the holy Scriptures, when we shall hear Jesus
Christ pronounce them, and with open mouth discourse continually with us; shall
we not stand stock still before him? In the like ecstasy as was S. Paul being
ravished into the third heavens; shall we not have our eyes settled with
continual looking upon our Master, and our ears always attentive to hearken
unto him? Plato gave God thanks for three things; for that he was a man, for
that he was a Grecian, for that he had been so happy as to hear Socrates. And
shall not we give him thanks for that we are Christians, for that we are
heavenly, and for that by the means of death we hope once to have faculty to
hear the wisdom of God?

We have said, what we shall see and hear: what shall we taste? we shall be
set at the table of our Lord, where we shall have abundance of all good things,
It shall be all covered with meats that he has fattened, and reserved a long
while since, for that banquet, we shall there be fed with the bread of Angels;
we shall be made to drink in brooks of pleasure, we shall be glutted and filled
with all good things, we shall be always at Nuptials, and in an instant we
shall forget all the delights of the earth, having tasted those of heaven; as
did the companions of Ulysses all other meats, when they had eaten Lotos so
celebrated by Homer. It is an other manner of Manna then that of the children
Israel, for they waxed weary of it, and were sorry in the desert, that they had
lost the quails and fleshpots of Egypt. But we in heaven, at the first taste
of the meats which there shall be served us, shall loose then all the
lickorishnesse of this world. We have here eaten of the fruits of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, against the command of the Physician:
VVhereupon followed the sickness of all, and death to those that were not
succored and warranted by Jesus Christ; But in the kingdom of God, and of
Paradise, we shall eat of the fruit of the tree of life, which shall always
keep us young and fresh; and which more is, will make us incorruptible and
immortal. There is that which we shall taste; What shall we smell? A hall of
perfumes, the garments of the bride and the bridegroom, perfumed with all
odoriferous and fragrant things. It shall be then that the Church shall
triumph, and that the vine being blossomed, shall give such a pleasant odor
that the whole heavens shall be filled with it.

There shall be no stink, for there shall be no corruption; we shall there
plainly smell the sweetness of the Sacrifice, which Jesus Christ made for us
on earth, so great and pleasant, that the Father for the pleasure which he
took to smell it, was reconciled with the world, and his anger toward us has
been appeased. What a pleasant Sacrifice, and precious Incense is also the
praises of the Saints, who with one accord do glorify God, and sanctify his
holy name? Moreover what an odor gives that fair flower sprung from the root
and sap of Iesse, now that it is in it force and strength? To conclude, we
cannot miss there to smell good odours; for our Winter shall then be past, and
we shall be in a perpetual springtime? wherein all things shall grow and flourish
for the delectation and pleasures of the Church. For to satisfy our desire,
and content the lust of our selves, we shall touch no more, neither shall we be
touched of any thing that may hurt us. We shall be gathered up by JESUS CHRIST
our Lord and Savior, who will come at the entrance to receive us, saying, Come
hither faithful servant, thou have served me faithfully in the world, while
thou have been in the world: enter now into the joy and rest of thy Lord. He
will kiss and embrace us, and will keep us near to his person, without
suffering us to depart or go far from it.

Now if the greatest good, and that unto the which all others are referred, be
this felicity, which does consist in a possession and enjoying of all good, to
the contentment of our will, and of all our senses, with what a desire should
we wait for death, by the which we attain it?

Moreover death does deliver us out of all dangers; In this world night and
day, within and without we are always in fear of peril. Our life is a cruel
and bloody war, we have a great many enemies that kill us continually, and
do assay by all means to destroy us: the devils watch for us, and cease not
compassing about like devouring Lions, and ravening Wolves, to see whether they
cannot surprise us, and carry us away; the world sometimes by enticings and
allurements, sometime by threats and violence, endeavors to try and turn us
out of the right way. Our flesh on an other side, does flatter and tickle us,
and the better to undermine us, with great cunning does propound and lay before
us, things wherein we have most delight. It weepeth also sometimes, to stir
us up to pity it, all to the intent to win us, and cause us in all points
to yield unto it, and that it may master us.

Now if we consider our infirmity, our stupiditie and negligence, the little
wariness and watchfulness that is in us, we may judge in what danger we
live. It is impossible that we should live in this world among so many that are
infected, and that with so great a contagion, without falling often into
sickness. Is it possible that we should so often grapple with such strong and
mighty enemies, without being sometimes staggered and overthrown? Is it
possible that we should go in such durty and muddy ways, without being
durtied? We see it in good Saints of old time, who could not govern themselves
so well, but the serpent who always dogs us at the heels, has reached them
with his venom; but that they have fallen in diverse faults, some in
incredulity, others in Idolatry, others in adultery, others in excess and
drunkenness, others in murders: there is none of them but had his fall, yea
sometimes so great and heavy, that they had been altogether bruised, if God
had not vpheld them with his hand. Ought not we then follow the example of St.
Paul, and as he did, cry: Who shall deliver us from these dangers wherein we
live, whiles our soul is in this miserable and mortal body? Let us confess
that it is our gain and profit for to die, that by death we may be fully
delivered from all mortal things.

Again, death puts us in full possession of all the promises of God, and of
those goods which Jesus Christ has purchased for us, and that we hope for of
him. He in dying has freed us, and purchased our liberty, and nevertheless
we see our selves still in great servitude.

We are Kings, Lords, Judges, heirs of God, coheires with Jesus Christ the
Prince of heaven and earth, yet it seems not so, whiles we live in this world:
for there we are beaten and used like servants, like children under age, we
have as yet no use nor managing of our goods. Kings and great Lords though we
be, we are often in such necessity, that we have neither bread to eat, nor
water to drink, nor wool to cover us. Moreover JESUS CHRIST has purchased
for us the grace of God, a perfect Justice, life eternal, an immortal
incorruption, glory and virtue to our bodies, and to our souls an assured
peace and quietness, a joy and a contentment: but this good has not yet been
delivered unto us; for often times we experiment the wrath and judgment of
God: We feel the concupiscences and vicious desires of our flesh.

In our bodies there is corruption, mortality and weakness, and in our spirit,
troubles, anguish, and as it were a studious and intestine war between our
good and bad desires, which fight the one against the other; and because these
evils are more grievous, so are the abouesaid goods more great, and more to be
desired. If then, although they be already purchased for us, and that they be
ours, we nevertheless cannot come to the possession of them but by death, are
not we for this reason much bound unto it? Ought not we to love and desire it?
The children of Israel being arrived at the river of Iordane, seeing on the
other side thereof the fruitful land which God had promised them, and that
being passed, they should begin to enjoy it and to rest, had they not great
cause to rejoice, and to pass the river with great alacrity? And why not we,
when we shall come nere unto death, that is to say to the passage, beyond the
which is our country, our house, or City, our friends, and kinsfolks, our rest,
our joy, and our pleasure? The child who during the time of his minority has
always lived in fear and base servitude, does he not rejoice when he sees
the day coming wherein he does hope to have liberty, and quietly to enjoy his
goods? So ought every faithful man, seeing the day of his death draw near, in
the which he shall be put in possession of all the goods which God has given
him, and the gift wholly resigned.

When a man that has undertaken some long and tedious journey, having
traveled many days, and being wearied on the way, sees the gate of the town
whither he goes, does he not rejoice, and as it were leap for joy? Does he not
give God thanks going into the town, that it has pleased him to conduct and
bring him safely thither? Now ever since we were borne, we have always been
in this world as strangers, we have done nothing else but travel in this low
place, as in great desert, we have here wearied o^^elues; then seeing death
near unto us, that is to say, the gate whereby we must enter into the
kingdom of our God, and the stairs whereby we must ascend unto his holy
mountain, have we not occasion to consolate our selves, and to leap for joy,
considering that we are almost arrived at the place, where we hope to rest
perpetually: If poor Adam being driven out of the earthly Paradise, after he
had tasted of the miseries whereinto he had precipitate himself by his sin,
had been called thither again, and set in his first estate, what occasion
should he have had to rejoice? And we also, who after so many and diverse
afflictions, are called out by God, by the means of death, into no earthly but
heavenly Paradise, not Adams, but Gods, where there is no sin, where there is
no Serpent, where there is no forbidding, brief, where there is no fear nor
shame. When Noah after the flood, and falling of the waters which had broken
and torn all, began to see the firm, land he did rejoice, and for joy
sacrificed to God for a thanksgiving; although it was accursed and brought
forth thorns and thistles as before. What more great occasion shall we have,
when after the great floods, and desolations which we have seen in this
world, (...) shall begin to see and salute the land of the living, the
blessed land, the land that was promised to the good, the land flowing with
Milk and Honey, and all sweet and sauory things? When Joseph after he had a
long time been prisoner in great calamity, suddenly without thinking
thereone, was raised to such dignity, that he was next the King in Egypt,
making laws and ordinances, for to dispose the State and Kingdom; had not he
matter of consolation?

We have no less, but much more, when after our prisons, captiuities,
seruitudes, banishmentes, and so many other afflictions which we suffer in
this world, we by death are in a moment lifted up from the dunghill into
heaven, there to reign with JESUS CHRIST, and to be partakers of his glory,
of his honor, of his faith, of his rest, and of his table.

Was it not a great joy to the Jews, who had been captive three score years
in Babylon, amongst the Idolaters in great misery, deprived of the use and
commodity of spiritual things, as to assemble together to praise God, and to
hear his word, and to do other things appertayning to the office of a
Christian; weeping sometimes when they were by themselves, and hanging up their
Harpes and Instruments, through grief that they could not serve God according
to their desires, nor sing his praises among the strangers; for to have the
Kings letters to return into their country, build their Temple? and there
according to their ancient manner, in all liberty, serve, praise and worship
their God; It is less to us, when after a long and redious captivity that we
have endured in this world, conuersing with Idolaters, unbelievers,
blasphemers, despisers of God and of his word, we are delivered, and have our
pasport to go into this celestial Jerusalem, and into the holy Temple of our
God, there for to praise him perpetually, and in beholding his goodness, to
glorify and sanctify his holy name.

Death is also to be desired by reason that with our sorrows it also ends our
mourning; we in this world are always sad, heavy, and malancoly. In it we
weep, we sigh, and always wear the black weed. But when by death we go
forth of it, to go into the house of our Bridegroom, we put off and leave
the mourning weed for to take our goodly and sumptuous abiliments.

With goodly Robes, rich and imbrodered,
Before the Kings she shall in state be led,
Says our divine Poet Esaias: and everlasting joy shall be powered on those which
have been the faithful sereants of God, and then shall be accomplished that
which has been promised them; You that do weep in this world are happy, for
you shall laugh: there shall be no more grief, nor complaining, nor tears;
for God at our coming into his kingdom will wipe them away from our eyes, we
shall be comforted, and we shall rest in Abraham's bosom, as did Lazarus, there
shall be no other question but of singing and saying every one to our souls,
Go to praise God in all things, oh my soul,
And all my parts without let or controlle,
Praise his most good, holy and blessed name.


Say to the Harp and other instruments, Go to, awake that you may now be set
up again in the estate to serve God, and praise him for his goodness: say to
all the Church, Give unto God praise and renown,
For he is loving and kind,
And which is more, his gracious love
Shall dure world without end.
Say to all creattures bless the Lord in all his works, praise and exalt his
name. Bless God ye Angels of heaven, Sun, Moon, Fire, Air, Water, Earth,
Trees, and Beasts. A maid that has long time been betrothed, desires that the
day of her marriage were come, and when it is come she rejoices, seeing that
she shall soon be brought to her husbands house to dwell perpetually with
him; we ought also to comfort our selves, when the time draws near that our
Lord must come; and we ought to attend him waking as did the five wife
Virgins, that so soon as he shall be come, we may go in to the wedding
with him, and that the gate be not shut against us, as it was against the
five foolish, becaue they were fallen asleep.

An other reason why death is to be wished for, is that it causes us to see
our friend and Savior JESUS CHRIST, of whom we have as yet seen but the
picture. The Prophets and Apostles have described him unto us so fair, of such
a comely stature, so courteous, so virtuous, so loyal, so eloquent, so lovely,
so noble, so rich, so loving of us, that for our salvation he did abandon his
own life, which ought more to move us then any other thing. Where is that
maid, who having heard of so many perfections to be in her friend, would not
burn, and be altogether transported with desire and affection to see him? If
our King, or some Prince of renown, comes into our country, we desire to see
him, because of the report which we have heard of his virtue and valor. If
Hercules, Alexander the great, Caesar Cato, of whom we so much commend the
ancient pictures, were now in this world, we would through curiosity go a
hundred miles to see them; with what an affection then should we aspire to that
day, in the which we shall face to face see and behold that so mighty Prince,
who with an invincible force has broken the head of all our enemies; who like
unto a valiant Joshua, in despite of them has brought us through the dangers,
and conducted us into the land which God had promised us? What a pleasure shall
it be to us to see him glorious, in order and in triumphant array, and round
about him the goodly trophies of his great victories set up? It is said that
when Alexander had overcome Darius King of the Persians, entering into the place
where he made his residence, He sits down in his throne, and that presently a
Greek Gentleman of his company began to weep for joy in speaking these words.
O happy day in the which we see our King victorious against the Barbarians, and
their pride trodde^ under foot. O that all Grecia had now the sight and the
pleasure of this spectacle. Think what joy, it will be also to every faithful
man, to see Jesus Christ in his royal seat, holding under his feet all his
enemies and ours, but specially the serpent whose head is already broken, and
now he does nothing else but wagge his tail, waiting his final end, which
shall be at the day of judgment. May Kings and Princes did with great
affection desire to see him when he was on earth accustomed like a servant.

Simeon because he saw him so, did so rejoice, and was so satisfied, that he
feared no more to die: ought not we more to desire to see him in heaven in a
kingly robe, with company, greatness, majesty and pomp, and in the state of
a Lotd. The Queen of Saba, who being induced by the rumor which was spread
over all the earth of the great Court of King Salamon, came running thither,
from the farthest part of the South, to see him, and to hear his wisdom;
after she had diligently considered his great and marvelous wisdom, the
order, the splendor, and state of his house, stood all astonished, and with
great admiration said; O how happy are the servants of thy house, who may see
thy face every day, and hear thy divine speeches; let us say also, O thrice
and four times happy are the faithful, who dying go directly to heaven, to
be hold the face of Jesus Christ, who is much more then Solomon; For the only
contemplation of it, makes man content in every point, in taking from us the
memory and feeling of all other pleasures, causes that we cannot nor will not
turn our eyes and thoughts from it. Now death does not only cause us to see
Jesus Christ, but makes us with him to behold the Angels, the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs, which have been singular in graces and
virtues. And if any man that has a heart toward God, desires to see the Church
well ordered in this world, and prefers it to all that can be given him,
albeit the order of is never so great, but that there will be many things more
to be desired; with what vehemence and heat should he wish to see it in
heaven, without spot or wrinkle, shining like the Sun, clothed in robes as
white as Snow, set forth in nuptial order?

The last reason for the which we ought to desire death, is, that by it our
spirit being parted from the body, which does clog it, is more at liberty and
more capable to look into the mysteries of God. We live all in this world with
a natural desire to know; therefore is it that for our contentment, we seek
always to hear and see some novelties; then is it not possible that here
beneath we should come to any great knowledge, chiefly of the truth, as well
because that of it self it is obscure and hard to know, as for the cares,
perturbations, afflictions, passions, etc. wherewith our mind is entangled and
hindered, whiles it is in our bodies, which are unto it as dust in a man's eye,
which does hinder it from discerning any thing understandingly. It is the
reason wherefore God said to Moses, that whiles we live we cannot see it
clearly; for the which also S. Paul says, That we know but in part, and S.
John, That we see the mysteries of our God, but as it were in a glass, or
through a window: but when our soul shall be parted from this body, and the
veil taken away which blinds her eyes, then shall it behold and see God face
to face, then shall it have the perfect knowledge of him and of Jesus Christ his
Son, and in it eternal life. We shall behold that which now we worship; for we
shall enter into the Sanctuary of our Lord, and there shall look on him without
ceasing, the propitiation and the Cherubins: nothing neither of the law nor the
Gospel shall be any more unknown or hid from us. God will show unto us as unto
his friends and familiars, all the riches of his house; he will talk friendly
with us, and will impart all unto vr. An ancient man turning from merchandise,
and being entered into the hall where Demetrius Phalereus read; when he had hard
him a little while, begins to complain, and said, O unhappy man that I am, have
the good of this world bin cause that I have bin so long deprived of such good
things as these? Let us also say, O miserable life, will thou dure much longer,
will thou not shortly let us go whither we aspire, which is the school of our
God? Must we lose so many days? Happy death will thou not hasten to bring us
thither? We see by these reasons what occasion we have to fear, fly from, and
complain of death, which is a rest and sleep most delightful above all other;
for there is no noise nor dreams to trouble or interrupt it: it is a wholesome
medicine, which being swallowed, does heal us of all diseases, and takes al
pain from us. Which Socrates considering, after he had drunk the poison by the
commandment of the Athenians, who had unjustly condemned him to die, when the
venom was dispersed in his members, and his friend Crito a little before he gave
up the ghost, had asked him, if he would command him nothing: no, said he, but
that thou offer sacrifices to Aesculapius the god of physic, to give him
thanks: for I never took a medicine of such great force, nor which wrought
better. It is a great shame that these Pagans in their ignorance and infidelity
seem to be better instructed and more virtuous then we are* for we fear
death and fly from it, as an evil thing, and they hold and esteem it as an
incomparable good. Epaminondas at the hour of his death perceiving his friends
about his bed weeping, comforted them, saying, Rejoice O my friends, for your
friend Epaminondas is going to begin to live. Is death then an evil, which
has nothing else of that which we esteem death, but the name and reputation,
for indeed it is a life? Also is this life a good, which has but the name of
it, for in effect it is a very death? both the one and the other, as says
Saint John Chrysostom, is masked and have both false faces. Life which is so
evil favored has the fair, which makes it to be beloved; death which is so
fair has the ugly, which makes it to be feared and hated. When it presents
it self unto us so masked, at the first it seems fearful; but if we put up
the mask we shall find it underneath so fair and beautiful, that presently
we shall be inflamed with the love of it. Let us then take away this vain
fear of death; let us believe that which is true, that it is the greatest good
that can happen unto vt. That which anciently Apollo answered to Pindar, being
questioned what thing he did esteem the most healthful and profitable to
man, To die, answered he. It is said of Cleobis and Biton, that God would
recompense them for their piety, and obedience, and respect which they had
borne toward their mother. Now having given them leave to demand what they
would, they referred themselves to his judgment, as knowing best what is most
profitable and necessary for us then our selves: What came of it? the same day
they died. Whereby did appear that there is nothing more profitable unto man,
then death, by the which we are led into a place of pleasure, where we begin
to live. In the old time the Sepulchers were built in gardens, which was done
not only for to bring into our minds our end, in taking of our pleasures and
delights, and by that means to moderate them, but also for to instruct us,
that death is a consecutiue after pleasure and Paradise, and is as a passage
for to enter into a pleasant Orchard: it is the reason for the which at Athens,
when they buried the dead bodies, they turned their faces toward the East, and
not toward the West, to show that in death our life and light begins: Why do
we put our bodies in Sepulchers as in chests, if it be not to show that they
are not lost, but laid up as precious vessels of the holy Ghost, and that in
time they shall be taken forth, and shall be put into light, for the decoration
of the house of their Lord. These things considered, let us take away all fear
and apprehension of death, let us rejoice and sing as do the Swannes when they
are near their death: let us say with David, Lord I have been glad when it
has been said unto me, Go to, let us go into the house of our Lord.

It remains now, before we end this present Treatise, to show how we should
behave our selves at the death of our friends, and how to mittigate the
sorrows, which we conceive for them, which to do we must consider that which
follows.

First, the unavoidable necessity of al men, the which cannot be remedied
neither by counsel nor any other means. David having a regard thereunto, did
comfort himhimselfe after the death of his little child, for whom he had wept
and prayed so much during his sickness, when there was yet some hope to
impetrate of God, by humble prayers, that he would restore him to health: but
when he saw that it was too late, that all tears were now vain and
unprofitable, he left his mourning and began to rejoice. Jesus Christ says,
that every day has afflictions enough of it self to trouble us, without that
we should heap on those of others, or of those that are gone, renewing it by
the remembrance of them; or of those which are to come, anticipating by fear
and conjecture. It is an instruction most necessary, and which we ought all to
take, for the rest and tranquillity of our minds. Secondly, we must consider
when our friends die, that it is the will of God, which does, nor ordeyneth
nothing but for the good of his children, as says S. Paul, to those that are
loved of God, all things succced and turn to their profit: if we do not
believe that, we are unbelievers; if we believe it, we ought not to grieve for
any thing that befalls us; for all is profitable to us. Now there is no great
reason that we should hide us from our profit. The sovereign wisdom of God is
cause that there is nothing better done then that which he does; and his
goodness that there is nothing better; if there be nothing better, nor better
done then that which he ordeyneth and disposes; and he disposes of us and of
our affairs, and generally of all that which happens unto us, why do we (...)
row, why do we desire any thing else? For we cannot have any thing that is
better why do we complain? For all is well and cannot be better done.

We must thirdly think, that to dye is a thing general and common to all: We
pass and fly away as does the water of a brook; and it is an act and statute
of our God, that we must dye all: if then that happen unto us which is common
to all, is it not a great folly and pride in us, to desire to be exempt from
the common condition, and to wish for a particular? What are we the worse that
our friends are dead? so do those of our neighbors die. Menander writing to a
friend of his to comfort him, alleged this reason unto him: Thou should
have, says he, just occasion to grieve, if thy fortune and destiny were worse
then other men's; but if it be alike, why do thou complain? There are more
that if we would diligently consider, and make an entire comparison between us
and others, we should find there are an infinite many worse fortuned then we
are. And that is true which Anaxagoras said, as reports Valerius the great,
that if it were possible to assemble all the miseries of the world on a heap,
for afterward to part them by equal portions, there is not he but would
rather choose his own then his part of the whole heap. Seeing that we are not
alone losing our friends, and that if we will look into it, we shall find
that there are enough, more ill at ease then we: let us content our selves,
that so it pleases God, and let us not desire immortal friends, where we see
those of others to be but mortal.

Again, let us think that it is a natural thing to die, as it is for winter
to be cold, and summer hot. Our bodies (says S. Paul) are mortal. Then let
us not marvel if in winter there be rain, frost and snow, for the season
brings it. Let us not marvel that the night follows the day, and that man at
night after his labor goes to sleep, for all that is natural. Also ought
not we for the same reason to be astonished when a man dies; no more, says S.
Basil, then when he is borne and comes into the world, for the one and the
other is ordinary: And want of considering it, is cause oftentimes, that at the
death of our friend we are so amazed, as if it were a thing prodigious and not
accustomed. When news was brought to Anaxagoras, that his son was dead, it
moved him not at all, only he said that it was not a new and unusual thing
that a mortal man should die, and that when he begot him, he did not beget him
immortal. What made him so constant, but that before hand he had foreseen and
often considered that it ought so to come to pass, being a natural thing?

Moreover, we must consider, that death is a tribute which we owe and are bound
to pay unto nature. Thou art dust and earth, and to earth thou shall return,
says God, speaking to man after he had sinned: Then, when one of our friends
dies, why are we discontented? Because he has quitted himself and paid what
he ought? If he had paid his King the tribute and ordinary tax, we would
approve of that as most right, and an obedience and duty toward his Prince;
and if he has done as much to nature, what reason is there to grieve at it?

Again, that in it God hears us; for we ask of God that his Kingdom come,
and that his will be done; what do we jest with God, asking him that which we
would not have, and fear to obtain? and do vex our selves, and murmr, in
stead of giving him thanks when he has granted our requests? We show well
that we think little on the prayers which we make: for if we thought upon
them, either we would not pray so, or else in praying so if God grant our
request, we would not be sorry for it.

Again, that when our friends die we lose them not; for our Lord whose they
are both before and after death, is not the God of the dead but of the living.
Cirus speaking to his friends before his death, for to comfort them, said; Do
not think when I shall be dead that I am lost, or shall come to nothing. When
we sow a land, the grains of corn are not lost, they rotte therein, but it is
the better to fructify; so are our bodies in the earth, for to revive one day,
and to rise again in incorruption, immortality, glory and virtue. When also a
man goes a long and tedious iourny, do we think him lost? when any one of our
friends is at the Court with his Prince, who will not suffer him to depart out
of his company, raised to honor, and provided of great offices, are we sorry
for it? Why then are we sorry for a friend whom we know assuredly to be in the
house of God, in honor and credit, and so well at ease, that he would not
change for all the felicity of this world? Again, that it is a very dishonest
and unseemly thing in a faithful man to grieve so immoderately and as if he
were desperate. A Christian ought to have a strength and courage, which should
be invincible against all adversities, and even against the gates of hell: he
should be like a building grounded upon a firm rock, that may hold firm
against all the storms, waves and winds, and all the inconveniences wherewith
he may be assailed; he must not be soft, and yield presently to adversity,
melting in tears, and therein drowning (as David said) his bed. The Liciens
in time past had a law, by the which it was ordained that whosoever would weep
for the death of his friend, should put on women's clothes, to show that that it
is more answering to a cowardly and effeminate heat, then to a manly courage.
And as it happens in men's bodies, that when they are tender and delicate, they
cannot endure the cold in winter, nor yet the heat in summer; so may we judge
of such courages, that if they cannot bear adversity without impatience, no
more can they prosperity without insolency.

We must finally consider, that by the tears and complaints which we use at
the death of our friends, we do not remedy our selves, no more then does the
sick man his disease by his sighs, but rather does increase his misery. And
we may say that even as by common experience, and the reports of Physicians,
we see in choleric folks, that the more they anger themselves the more
their rage and choler does augment: also in the mournful and heavy people,
that continuing in their tears and lamentations, their sorrow does grow and
strengthen. So said an ancient Philosopher to Arcinoe, to comfort her; If, said
he, thou love tears they will love thee reciprocally, and as friends will
always frequent and accompany thee: What then does this great mourning profit
us, if not to make us more miserable? I, but will some say, in excusing
themselves, it is a natural thing to weep at such an accident: I agree to it,
neither will I condemn a moderate sorrow. As a certain man saw an ancient
Philosopher weeping for the death of his son, and did reprove his
inconstancy: he answered him very well, saying, Good friend, suffer me to be a
man. We must not be like Barbarians or savage beasts without humanity, without
affection, without pity nor feeling. I wish, says Pindar, not to be sick,
but if I am, I would not be without feeling; for it is an evil sign, when in
our sickness we are dull and feel nothing. Then when in our mourning we
shall keep the mean, and shall avoid the two extremes, which S. Basil does
condemn as vicious, to wit, Philotrijnon and thiriodian, which is, that we be
not Stoikes, that is to say, without affection, nor soft on the other side, to
suffer our selves to be won and overcome with sorrow; I do approve, that if
we show our selves men in weeping, let us also show that we are Christians
furnished with hope in correcting and moderating our sorrows. Others say, I
loved them so dearly. If thou louedst him so dearly as thou say, show it
and rejoice at his happiness and rest: I rather believe that that which
causes in us this great mourning, is the love which we have of our selves,
which is the cause that we grieve at the loss of our friends, not for the
respect which we have to them, but to our selves, being discontent to be
deprived of the pleasure and consolations which they gave us. Which Jesus
Christ said unto his Disciples, seeing that they grieved that he had told
them, that in short time he should be put to death: It is not for love of me
that you are so heavy; for if you loved me you would be glad, for as much as it
is my good or happiness to die. Others say, he was so honest a man, therefore is
it that God took him, as he did Enocke, for fear lest by the malice and
corruption of this age, he should change. When the fruit is ripe must it not be
gathered, for fear lest it should rot on the tree?

Others say he died in the prime of his age; by so much the happier is he:
for, as said Anacharsis, that ship is happiest which arriueth first at the
port. Moreover, there is no certain time determined for all men to die: but as
we see in fruit time, some are gathered sooner then the others; so is it
amongst men. There are some also that say we must honor the dead, by mourning
for them, falling into the superstition of the Jews, who holding this opinion,
did hire certain singers and musicians, to sing pitiful and funeral songs
for the death of their friends; which Jesus Christ did reprove in the house of
the Prince of the Synagogue: and not without cause, for it is not good in
praise of a body to mourn for it: complaints and tears are rather signs of
misery then any thing else. We do not now weep for the holy Martyrs, which yet
we should do, if in tears there did consist any honor; but we honor them by a
remembrance of them, with blessing and thanksgiving, and by pain and study we
endeavor to follow them. If likewise we have a friend whom we will honor
after his death, it must not be with tears and lamentations, but rather by an
honorable mention which we are to make of him and of his virtues, and by a
desire which we have to imitate and follow his good and laudable fashion.

It is time to conclude this present Treatise, and to resolve the precedent
reasons; that we must neither fear nor fly from death, but rather love and
desire it more then life, and prefer the day of our death before the day of
our birth: for by our birth we come to pain and affliction, and dying we go
to God, and to a perpetual rest. Which the Greeks have very fitly showed us;
for in their language the day of our nativity is called Genethlia, that is to
say in the same language, Genesis ton athlon, and in our French tongue,
beginning of troubles: and death is called Thanatos, which is as much as to
say, according to the interpretation of Themiste, Now up to God. Let us then
strictly examine them, and judge of them, that we may take away the fear of
the one, and the excessive love of the other. God through his holy spirit give
us the grace to do it. So be it.

Prayers and Meditations touching Life and Death.
THE life of Christians ought to be occupied in considering the things that
follow, and to put them in practice; to wit, to have always in remembrance the
benefits which they have received at the hands of God; to give him thanks for
them without ceasing, both wih heart and mouth; to love him, who is the
goodness it self, to fear and worship him, seeing he is the Almighty, and
only wise; to be stirred up by the love which they bear to God, also to love
their neighbors. The love of God draws us from the love of corruptible
things, lifts us up to heaven, and inflames our hearts to a holiness of life.
The love of our neighbor turns us from all troublesomenesse, in will or in
deed, and does stir us up to integrity, and well doing.

An other.
LET us often think what we are: The principal part of us is the Soul, the
which is endued with understanding, with reason, and with judgment, to know
the sovereign good, which is God, to love him, to adhere and unite our selves
unto him, that we may have part of his immortality and happiness. Now we
forsake and contemn this great good, for to grouell upon the earth, and to go
down into the pit of carnal desires, applying the vigor of our understanding
and judgment, to things that are not worth the pains that we employ in them.
We bury our selves quick, by manner of speaking; of heavenly we become
earthly, and of men created for eternal life, we endeavor as much as in us
lies, to set our selves in the rank of brute beasts. God does not forsake us
nevertheless, although that our ingratitude has well deserved it, but calls
us unto him by his word, presents unto us infinite testimonies of his grace,
continues it daily, he supports, exhorts, counsels, chides and fatherly
chastises us; Nevertheless we continue blind, deaf, and negligent,
despising his goodness, or use it not as we should, or indeed abusing it:
which is worse, we love vain and transitory things better, and have our minds
too much fixed and settled upon them. God stretches forth his hand to conduct
us, we draw back ours, and fly when he calls us. If he put us into the way
of salvation, we grudge and repine for the world, we look behind us,
deferring and remitting our desire to dwell til to morrow. Let us awake then,
let us not always stick in the mire, let us strengthen ourselves in the virtue
of him that supports and succors us, let us a little undertake to despise
corruptible things, and to desire those that are truly good and everlasting.
When God calls us, let us hearken, if he guides us let us follow him, that we
may come to his house: let us receive his good things, and himself too; for he
gives himself unto us in the person of his Son. He shows us the means to
get to heaven, let us then desire of him to give us the will and the courage by
faith, repentance, charity and hope to aim thither, and that he would
maintain his grace in us until the end, to sigh in this mortal life, and to
wait (through the assurance of his mercy) for our departure out of this world,
and our last day, which shall be the beginning of our true life.

Prayers and Meditations.
HOW great are the illusions and impostures of the enemy of our salvation? He
shows us a far off things that are ridiculous and vain, and persuades us
that it is all good and happiness; he scares us with things that we ought not
to fear; makes us to fly from those things which we ought to embrace; He
calls, inticeth and flattereth us, by the intermission of our desires; if
that will not serve, he roares and storms, and endeavors to astonish us within
and without. O eternal light and verity, O Lord and merciful Father,
disperse those clouds of ignorance and error, illuminate our understandings,
and do not suffer us to come near to that, which thou have commanded us to
fly from, and which is hurtful and pernicious unto us; let us not desire, but
what is truly to be desired, to wit, thy self, who art the springhead of all
goodness, of our life, and of eternal happiness. All flesh is grass, and
the glory of man is like the flower of the field; cause then that we may seek
for our firmness and contentment in the grace which thy Son has brought
us: let our life lie hid in him, so that at the day of the separation of our
souls from our bodies, we may find it wholly in heaven, waiting with assured
rest and joy, the happy resurrection, of this flesh; in the which all
corruption, infirmity and ignominy being abolished, and death being swallowed
up of victory, we shall live eternally with thee, in an incomprehensible
happiness in thee, by the which thou shall be glorified. Maintain then thy
children, O Lord, in this faith and hope, finishing thy work in us, until
they be altogether with thee, for to enjoy the inheritance, and the glory which
thine only Son has by his merit purchased for them. Amen.

Prayer.
LOrd Jesus Christ, Creator and Redeemer of mankind, who have said, I am the
way, the truth, and the life, I do beseech thee by this unspeakable charity
which thou have showed, in yielding thy self to death for us, that I may never
stray any jot from thee, who art the way, nor that I doubt of thy promises,
seeing thou art the truth, and do accomplish that which thou promisest. Cause
that I may only take pleasure in thee who art the eternal life, beyond the
which there is nothing to be desired, neither in heaven nor earth. Thou have
taught us the true and only way to salvation, because we should not abide
erring like strayed sheep, in the lost ways of this world; showing us so
clearly that nothing can be more, that which we ought to believe, to do, to
hope, and wherein we ought to yield and settle our selves; It is thou that have
given us to understand, how cursed we are in Adam; and that there is no way to
escape from this perdition in the which we are all plunged, but by faith in
thee. Thou art that fair light which do appear to those that walk in the
desert of this life, and who having drawn us out of the darkness of the
spiritual Egypt, have driven away the darkness of our understandings, and
do enlighten us, to the end we may tend toward the promised inheritance,
which is the life everlasting; into the which the mistrustfull do not enter,
but those that have assuredly relied upon thy holy promises. O what a
goodness, that thou have vouchsafed to descend from thy Fathers bosom, and
from the everlasting throne to the earth, to put on our poor nature, of master
to become servant, to the end that by thy doctrine thou might do away the
darkness of our ignorance, to guide our feet into the way of peace, and to
make plain the way of salvation unto us? a way made unto us, the which if we
follow, we cannot stray nor wax weary, seeing that thy grace and power do
accompany us therein all the days of our life.

Moreover by thy spirit thou do strengthen us in it, and double our courage.
Thy word is bread which nourishes us therein, thy promise is the staff which
vpholds us. Thou thy self by thy secret and incomprehensible virtue do
bear and maintain us in it, in an admirable manner; to the end that both in
fair and foul weather we may walk with all alacrity unto thee. And as in
preserving us thou hinderest that we do not fall into the snares of Satan and
the world, also seeing thou art the truth, thou take away all doubts,
scruples, and mistrusts, which may trouble and let us, or turn us during our
course; thou causest us to behold the supernall vocation, the misery and vanity
of the world, the frailty of this present life, the gate of death, and the most
happy life which is beyond that. And as thou art this true life, even in this
world thou do quicke^ by thy truth, us that are poor, wretched, and dead in
sin; thou do augment that life by the ministry and efficacy of thy holy
Gospel, and do confirm it by the use of the Sacraments which thou have
established to confirm the faith of those that are thine, until that our
corruption and what we have of mortality in us, being abolished by the
resurrection, we shall be, and live everlastingly with thee, both in body and
soul, when thou shall be all in all. Life everlasting is to know the true God,
and thee his Son, which were sent unto us. Now we see thee by faith in a
glass, and in obscurity; but one day we shall behold thee face to face, and
shall be transformed into thy glory, and wholly reformed unto thy image. I do
beseech thee, merciful Savior, to increase my faith, that I may be so well
grounded in the doctrine of my salvation, that nothing may turn me from it:
increase in my heart the reverence which I owe thee, that I may never turn
from thy obedience; strengthen me in such sort that the allurements nor
threatenings do neither intrappe nor astonish me, but that constantly I may
cleave unto thee (who art my life) till death. Cause that in virtue of thy holy
promises, and of thy Spirit, I may heat my self more and more in thy love,
and leaving behind me the things of this world. I may tend to that which is
firm and perfect; Increase thy grace in me, that every day I may die in my
self, for to be quickened and guided by thy favor, fearing no other but thou
God Almighty, loving nothing but thee, as there is nothing but thee to be
loved; boasting my self in nothing but in thy only grace and mercy, which is
the glory of all thy servants; seeking no other good but thee, nor desiring
any thing but thee, who art the full and entire felicity of all the faithful.
Amen.

An other.
LOrd Jesus, who art always merciful, who do not stick to be my Savior,
as well in adversity as in prosperity, give me the grace in all humble
obedience to yield unto thy will, when it shall please thee to mingle bitterness
amongst so many sweet things which thou causest me to taste in living under thy
protection. Thou art admirable and most good in the time of afflictions: In
that by such means thou do heal spiritual diseases, and in visiting of us
in this world, thou disposest us to meditate of a better life, having thy self
showed us the example thereof. True it is that I find it very hard to digest,
but thou have been brought to a more strange condition, when for to draw me
out of hell, thou wentest down into it thy self, and for to reconcile me to
thy heavenly Father thou have undergone his curse, by reason of my sins. I
have so often deserved hell and the fiery torment, and thou deliueredst me,
assuring me that I have part in the merits of thy death, and thy obedience,
and that I am one of thy coheires, for to reign one day with thee in thy
kingdom; and at this present in the midst of so many afflictions, to be
nevertheless set in the heavenly places. Having part in so many good things,
why shall I vex my self for a little endurance, by the means whereof thou will awake me, and make me better, and draw me so much the more to thee? But
seeing thou know me better then I know my self, if it be thy pleasure to
put me to any trial, give me necessary force and patience to glorify thee,
converting all the evil that may happen unto me, to good and salvation. And
if in supporting my weakness, thy goodness is pleased to advertise me by
some light affliction, cause that this thy well willing may draw me more and
more to love and honor thee, to give thee thanks for the care which thou have
of thy poor little servant, and by that means to dispose me to weight for
thee at my death, that after it I may find the life which thou have purchased
for me by thy death, and therein with thee to have part in joy and rest for
ever. Amen.

An other.
LOrd God heavenly Father, when, I consider in how many sorts I have sinned
before thy face, and against thy high majesty, I have horror in my self, in
thinking that I have so often turned from thee. Propitious and favorable
Father; I detest my ingratitude; seeing in what servitude of sin, I have been
too often precipitate, selling as much as in me lay the precious liberty which
thy Son had purchased for me. I condemn my folly, I altogether dislike of my
self, I see nothing but death and mishap hanging over my head, and my
conscience rising for a Judge and witness of my iniquities. But when on the
other side I enter into a contemplation of thy infinite mercy the which
surmou^teth all thy works, and in the which if so I dare to speak, thou
surmountest thy self, my soul is comforted. And indeed, why should I make my
self believe that I cannot find grace before him that summons and so often and
gently calls the sinners to repentance, protesting expressly that he desires
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness and
live.

Moreover thy only Son has so well assured us, that we shall find favor
in thy sight, by the sweet words which he himself has uttered, as that of
the lost sheep, and of the prodigal son, the image of whom I acknowledge my
self to be; that I should be most unthankful, incredulous and wicked, to go
back and to be ashamed of thy presence, although I am wretched; and seeing
thou do so stretch forth thy hand unto me, and draw me to thee with such a
pitiful affection. I have very vildly forsaken thee, O benign Father, I have
unhappily let slip thy graces; and adhering to the desires of my flesh, and
straying from thy obedience, I have wrapped my self in the base servitude of
sin; I am fallen into extreme misery, I know not whither to retire, unless
it be toward thee whom I have abandoned. Let thy mercy receive this poor
supplication whom thou have supported during his errors. I am unworthy to lift
up mine eyes unto thee, or to call thee Father; But I pray thee bow down thine
eyes to me, seeing thou will have it so, and that without that, I am in the
power of thine enemies. The sight of thy face will revive me, and bring me
again to thee. Seeing I have some displeasure in my self, I know thou look
upon me, that thou have given me eyes to see the danger wherein I was: thou
have sought and found me in death, and in the world, and have through thy mercy
given me a desire to enter into thy house. I dare not desire that thou
shoudest kiss and embrace me, nor that thou should weep for joy that thou
have found thy poor servant and slave; I do not demand the precious ornaments
wherewith thou do honor thy great servants, and most affectionate children.
It is enough for me to be in the troop of the least of thy house, amiddest
the greatest sinners, that have obtained pardon of thee, and that have some
shelter in thy Palace, where there are so many dwellings: That even in thy
house I may be as little as thou shall please, provided that thou will avouch
me thine for ever.

O merciful Father, I beseech thee that for the love of thy well-beloved Son
my only Savior, thou would give me thy holy Spirit, which may I purify
my heart, and strengthen me in such sort, that I may always dwell in thy
house, there to serve thee in holiness and justice all the days of my life.
Amen.

Prayers.
WHat do we in this world but heap sins upon sins? so that the morrow is
always worse then the day before, and we do not cease, drawing thy
indignation upon us; But being out of this world in thy heritage, we shall be
altogether assured of our perfect and eternal felicity, the miseries of the
bodies shall be abolished, the vices and filthiness of the soul shall he done
to nothing. O heavenly Father, increase our faith in us, for fear lest we
should doubt of things so certain; imprint thy grace and thy love in our
hearts, which may lift us up to thee, and strengthen us in thy fear. And
because thou have lodged us in this world, there for to remain as long as it
shall please thee, without declaring unto us the day of our departure, the
which thou alone know, I do beseech thee to take me out of it when thou
shall know the time to he come, and then to do me that good that I may
acknowledge the same, that in the mean while I may fit my self thereunto as
thou have appointed by thy holy name. Amen.

An other.
THis body is the prison of the Soul, yea a dark prison, narrow and
fearful, we are as it were banished men in this world, our life is but woe
and misery: to the contrary, Lord, it is in thy heavenly kingdom, that we
find our liberty, our country, and our perfect contentment. Awake our souls
by thy word, to the remembrance and apprehension of such a good, imprint in our
hearts the love and the desire of the everlasting good things, and only to be
wished for; give unto our consciences some taste of that joy wherewith the
happy souls which are in heaven are filled, that I may hold as doung and
filth all that which the worldlings find so fair, and covet so much, which so
obstinately they retain, and do adore with such feruency. Cause that finding
taste but in thy verity and grace, I may wait for (calling upon thee) the day
of my perfect deliverance, through JESUS CHRIST thy Son, to whom with thee
and the holy Spirit be glory everlasting. Amen.

Another.
LOrd Jesus, the only salvation of the living, life everlasting of the dead, I
submit my self to thy holy will, whether it be thy pleasure yet to suffer my
soul to be some space within this body, for to serve thee, or that it please
thee to take it out of prison, being assured that what thou keep cannot
perish. I am content with all my heart that my body return into the earth from
whence it was taken, believing the last resurrection, which shall make it
immortal, incorruptible and full of glory* I do beseech thee to fortify my
soul against all temptation, enuiron me with the buckler of thy mercy, to
beat back the darts of Satan: as for me, I am weakness it self, but I rely
upon thy strength and goodness. I cannot allege any good thing before thee
whereof to boast, to the contrary, alas, my sins infinite in number accuse
and torment me, but thy merit assures me that I shall be saved: for I hold for
certain, that thou were borne for me, that thou were tempted, that thou have
obeyed to God thy father, that thou have taught and bought life everlasting for
me; seeing thou have given thy self to me with all these good things, let not
such a gift be unprofitable; let thy blood wipe out the filth of my faults, thy
justice cover my iniquities, thy merits make me to find grace before the
heavenly Throne. If my evils do increase, augment thy grace in me; so that
faith, hope, and charity may not die, but rather wax strong in me: that the
apprehension of death do not daunt me, but that even after this body shall be
as it were dead, cause that the eyes of my soul may lift themselves up to
heaven, that the heart may then cry fervently unto thee, Lord I commend my
soul into thy hands, fulfill thy work, for thou have bought me, I am thine by
the gift of thy Father: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be everlasting
glory.

AMEN.
TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND PVISSANT PRINCESS, THE Lady Iagueline of Rohan,
Marquiso of Rothelin, Princess of Castelaillon, etc.
THat which has given me occasion, Madame, to write this Treatise of the
Resurrection, in the which consists all the hope of our salvation, is to
warrant the faithful against the impiety of those, who desiring never to give
accounts of their works, ordinarily scoffing at this doctrine, and say with
those that were in the time of the Prophets: Isa. 21. and 16.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Wisd. 2.
Which is cause that they not only abandon themselves to all impiety,
persuading themselves, that after this life there is neither pleasure nor
sorrow, but also do stir up others to do the like, persuading them that the
Lord does so abide in heaven, enjoying of his happiness, that he cares not for
the government of men, of whom there shall be no more mention after death then
of other creatures. Which heresy taking away all hope of everlasting
happiness, does also take away from those that follow it the courage to live
well and holily for in all actions (as says Chrysostom) whether corporal or
spiritual, Mat. 22. Hom. 41.
that which causes to do, is the hope of the prise to come; for he that
tilleth, tilleth to reap, he that fights fights for victory. Seeing then
that it is so difficult in this life, to keep holiness and justice, who is he
that would take it in good part to fight daily against himself, if he had not
some regard to the hope of the resurrection? wherefore who so takes away this
hope, takes with it all the reverence due to piety and justice.

Now so it is Madam, that having seen the book, which is dedicated unto you,
of the preparation of death, and having known the pleasure that you take in
the reading thereof, for the singular devotion which you have to the heavenly
country, where through Jesus Christ our common hope, you look for your
perfect and sovereign beatitude: I have persuaded my self, that for to
increase in you this holy desire, it would not be to ill purpose that I did
offer unto you this my little Treatise, yet the better to mitigate the horror
that we have all naturally of the separation of the soul from the body,
knowing that there is no doctrine that can cause us to seek for heaven with a
better heart, and to despise the world then this, and that all the reasons that
may be alleged for to prepare us to go willingly out of this miserable age,
are of very little power if they be not grounded upon this Article of faith: as
also he that is well persuaded cannot but must desire, with the Apostle, to be
out of this world, Phil. 2.
for to be with Jesus Christ his Savior.

Wherefore, knowing the singular graces which God bestows upon you, in
ratifying his dilection unto you, and giving unto you a full resolution of your
salvation in his Son, by a lively faith, shining in you by the most ardent
desire that you have to persevere in his service in the midst of his Church:
I present unto you this my little labor, in the which you shall find a lively
Image, and true and certain description of that everlasting happiness, unto the
which God calls you, and for the which you have learned to despise the vanity
of the world, and to settle your heart altogether upon the inestimable treasures
of the kingdom of heaven. It is true that in describing the felicity to come of
the just, and the everlasting condemnation of the unjust, I have taken the
similitudes and comparisons which the scripture uses, not only when it
speaks of the future felicity and beatitude of the elect, and condemnation of
the reprobate; but even those which it uses to specify the prosperity which
God gives his in this world, and the punishment wherewith he threatens and
punishes the wicked even in this life. But I have done that, because that
according to my opinion, the felicity of the one, and the ill hap of the
others, which are incomprehensible unto us in this life, are more lively
represented unto us, by such holy circumlocutions or examples.

Now Madam, I humbly beseech your excellency, to receive this little present,
with as good will as it is presented unto you, by him who all his life, shall
be your obliged servant. And so Madam, after I have commended my self very
humbly unto your excellencies good graces: I will beseech our eternal God,
Madam, that in giving you and all yours, health, long and happy life, he will
augment unto you from day to day, the gifts and graces of his spirit, that you
may better and better serve to the advancement of his glory, and to the
edification of his people. So be it.

A BRIEF AND CLEAR DECLARATION OF the Resurrection of the DEAD.
FOr as much as in all times there have been some, who have mocked at the
Resurrection, and have utterly denied it: Mat. 12. Act. 17. 1. Cor. 15.
it is not without good cause that the Apostle S. Paul does so carefully teach
us, that the dead shall rise again: for even as this knowledge does bring unto
us a sovereign joy and consolation, and does give us a will and affection to
follow unto the end JESUS CHRIST our head and Spouse, Ephesians. 5.
to be crowned with him, with that eternal beatitude, which God has prepared
for his children. Also likewise those that are not assured of the resurrection,
Mat. 25.
which is the foundation of our Religion, are less affectionate to follow the
Lord, and to give themselves to piety and justice. And we must not doubt but
the wicked, who abandon themselves to all impiety against God, and who without
remorse of conscience, do exercise all sorts of wickedness against their
neighbors, they do it by so much the more freely, as they persuade
themselves, that so they escape the judgment and punishment of men, they shall
hear nothing of it after this life. For seeing that to avoid only the
vengeance of the Magistrate in this world, they hide as much as they can their
iniquities, and give such good colors to their misdeedes as possible they can,
to the end not to be convicted wicked; how much more do you think they would
be bridled from doing evil, if they were persuaded that although their bodies
die, yet their souls shall remain immortal, and shall endure the judgment of
God which it has deserved; and that one day their bodies shall rise again,
Heb. 10.
that both body and soul may be eternally tormented in hell, by the judgment
of God so horrible and fearful; Heb. 10.
whereupon we may see how necessary it is to know that the dead shall rise
again, being this doctrine the principal vpholder of Christian Religion; of
the which if a man be not altogether persuaded all the rest is nothing. And it
is impossible to persevere amongst so many difficulties and afflictions which
are daily present at the serving of the Lord: for if the hope of the
resurrection were not, we should be the most miserable of the earth, seeing
that in this world the faithful are ordinarily more afflicted, then the
infidels; 1. Cor. 15.
but our consolation is the promise of Jesus Christ, that although the world
shall rejoice for a time, and that we shall weep, Ioh. 16. Romans 8. Psalm. 37.
and 73.
the time will come that our Head will visit us, and rejoice our hearts with a
joy that shall never be taken from us.

Now for to understand this Article of faith, we must well understand these
three points.

First, we must now know whether the soul dies with the body or no.

Secondly, whether the body returns so into the earth, that it cannot rise
again.

Thirdly, if it does rise, who it is that does raise it, and in what estate it
shall be being risen.

THE FIRST POINT.
AS for the first part, The Lord for to declare unto us the immortality of
souls, compares death to the sleep, of man, and says that those that are
dead sleep: assuring us, that even so as when the body does sleep, the soul
does not sleep, as appears by so many dreams which men have, that also
although the body shall be put into the Sepulcher, as in a place of sleep:
nevertheless the immortal soul shall be gathered and assembled in its place;
from the which it shall come again at the day of judgment, to put on her
body; that therein she may enjoy the happy life, or suffer eternal punishment.
The Apostle speaking of the daughter of Iairus, Romans 2. Mat. 25. Luc. 8.
whom the Lord did raise again, says, That the spirit did return into her;
showing that it was not dead like the body, but only that she was gone to the
place, from the which by the commandment of Jesus Christ she came again to
re-enter into her body: as also that of Lazarus of Bethleem. Ioh. 11.
For even so as the body does return to the earth, from whence it was taken;
so the spirit does return to God, who gave it. The same Evangelist declares,
that the soul of dead Lazarus lives in heaven, Luc. 16.
and that of the evil rich man in hell. The Lord dying, to show that the soul
was not subject to death as the body, Luc. 22. Act. 7.
did recommend his soul to his Father. Saint Steven that first Martyr,
recommended his to Christ. Saint Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with
Jesus; Phil. 1.
knowing that after his soul should be delivered out of the prison of his
body, it should go to the joy of the children of God. Unto the thief it was
said, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; Luc. 23.
which cannot be understood of the body, but shows that the faithful dying,
Ioh. 5.6.
make the passage from death to life.

The which ought only to be understood of the soul, seeing that the body must
first be brought to earth, and that it must put off all corruption, for to rise
at the last day incorruptible and in glory. Jesus Christ against the Saduces,
who denied the immortality of souls, shows, Mat. 22.
that for as much as GOD calls himself the God of Abraham, of Isaacke and of
Jacob, Exodus 3.
infallibly the souls departed do live; for he is not the God of those that
are dead in such sort, that they are no more, but he is the God of those that
are, and that live; and does good to the posterity of those that are, and not
of those that are not; which cannot be understood but of their souls, seeing
their bodies were returned to the earth. Whereby we see that they deceive
themselves greatly, that say that their souls die and vanish with the body
where they sleep; also those likewise who think that they enter into other
bodies. Mar. 6. Luc. 9.
Even the Pagans by natural apprehensions, have believed that the souls were
immortal; as we see that Euripides in the Tragedy which he entitled Hecuba,
does declare it, when he brings in Polixena speaking to Hecuba, and dying,
saying to her, What shall I say to Hector thy husband, who was dead, she
answered her, tell him that I am the most wretched in the world: And in that
which he entitled, The supplicants, he says, The spirit shall return to
heaven. Likewise Pholicides says, That the soul is immortal, and living
always, waxes not old: Pythagoras in his golden verses said, If when thou
have left the body thou come into heaven, thou shall be as God, living
always, and being no more mortal: Cicero likewise writes of it in his book
of friendship, and in that which he writ of age, in some sort comforting
himself in the hope which he had of the immortality of his soul. We see then
that it is a thing most assured, that the soul is immortal, as the Lord by
his word, which is the infallible truth of heaven, does show it us: and
likewise the Pagans, how ignorant soever they were of the true religion, have
well understood it. Wherefore those that deny the immortality of souls,
accuse God of lying, and make themselves in worse estate then the Pagans.

This knowledge is a great consolation to the faithful in all their
afflictions, and does take from them the fears of death, knowing that their
souls being separated from their bodies live in heaven: 1. Ioh. 2.
in which they are admonished, not to settle themselves upon the transitory
things of this life; and not to load their souls with the burden of sin,
to the end that dying they may be raised up toward God our Father, and JESUS
CHRIST our Savior, unto whom we ought with a steadfast faith recommend them.
Now even as the faithful do rejoice at it, the unfaithful on the other side,
knowing the souls to be immortal, Jam. 1. 1. Pet. 1.4.
are so much the more fearful of death; seeing the eternal pains and
torments to be prepared for them at their going forth of this world. So that
which serves to the elect for joy and instruction, is unto the wicked nothing
but sorrow, and occasion of despair.

THE SECOND POINT.
TOuching the body, it is all apparent that it is subject to die, as well
because that we know that those that were in times past are dead, and that we
see that those of our time die one after another; as principally because that
the Lord declares to Adam, that by reason of his sin, Genesis 3.
he with his posterity shall be subject to return into the earth, from whence
he was taken. The Apostle says, that by a man sin came into the world, Romans
5.8.6.
and by sin death, and so death came unto all men, by reason that all have
sinned, and the reward of sin is death, whereof the hour is uncertain unto
us. Luc. 12.
Although we are certain that it is the journey that every man must go, Jos.
12. 1. King. 2.
by reason that unto them all it is ordained to die once, and that the Lord
has set bounds for man's life, the which he will neither advance nor put back.
Heb. 9. Job 14.
The Scripture is full of testimonies upon this matter, although it be well
enough known of all by every days experience. The Pagans themselves without
instruction of the word of God, have well understood that unto man it is a
thing that cannot be avoided; as Euripides shows it in the Tragedy of the
Supplicants, saying, that every part of man must return from whence it came;
the spirit into heaven, the body into the earth, which is the mother nurse
thereof. Wherefore it is a noted thing to all, that we must die; and all the
faithful ought to be persuaded that the Angels wait for the departure of men,
for to carry their souls into their place. The holy Angels carry away those of
the faithful, according to the charge which they have for their salvation,
into Abraham's bosom, and into the place of the happy; and the evil Angels
those of the wicked into hell. That is the reason wherefore men often hear and
see many things when a man is to die, the Angels giving to understand thereby of
their presence, and the near departure of men. But there is this difference,
that that which is seen before the departure of the just, is less fearful,
coming from soft and peaceable spirits, and seems to serve but for an
admonition to those that are near to the sick, for to stir them up to pray
unto God, and to comfort their brother, and to exhort and encourage him to
prepare himself for the will of God, to go cheerfully out of this world, that
he may be with JESUS CHRIST his Savior. Then the faithful being departed, all
such things cease; although it may happen that the faithful shall be in all
extremity assaulted by Satan, to make him fall from faith, if it were possible
for him: but those are extraordinary things, and in the mean time the Lord
gives victory to his, 1. Ioh. 5. Mar. 16. 1. These. 1. Genesis 24. and 31.
and makes them the better to know the power of their faith, and the assistance
of the holy Angels. But ordinarily that which is seen and heard at the
departure of the wicked, is fearful, coming from the destroying Angels and
enemies of men, and Authors of troubles; the which do all they can to bring the
unfaithful to desperation, and to keep the^ in it, and endeavor as much as in
them lies, to hinder and trouble the prayers of the assista^ts: for the fear
that they have lest their damnation should be prolo^ged; knowing well that the
prayers of the just, made for the sick, are of great power and efficacy
toward God, for the faith which they have in Jesus Christ. Then after the
departure of the wicked, Satan returns, James. 5. John. 11.
appears, and makes a noise, in the place which he did enjoy, before him that
was his, Mat. 12.
willing as it were to keep the place of his child deceased, and take
possession and enjoy of that which he had gathered him together. And we see
that the Scripture declares that the habitations of the wicked, after they
shall be hunted out of it, shall be the habitations of devils, Apo. 18. Ier.
51. Isa. 13. Ier. 50.
and a resort for all evil spirits, and of all filthy and execrable foul;
wherefore it is a great folly and abuse to think that the souls of the
children of men appear in this world after their death; for those of the
faithful do enjoy such and so great felicity, Mat. 17.
and find that it is so good remaining where they are, Marc. 9.
that although they could, they would not nor desire not to return hither,
Luc. 9.
but rather forgetting that which is of this life, are continually ravished in
the praise and service of the holiness of the Eternal, Apo. 4. and 7.
and in the contemplation of his glory, Mat. 17. Psalm. 16.
which is their sovereign good. Those of the wicked would feign come again,
and have so much respit, but they cannot, otherwise the evil rich man would
very willingly have done his message to his brothers himself, Luc. 16.
which he did request to be done by the Lazar. For the Scripture does not know
this third place, which Antichrist has forged, contrary to the declaration of
Jesus Christ, Mat. 7.
for to enrich himself, and purge the substance of the world for the
intertainment of her creatures; Satan being very glad thereby to suggest unto
him some matter and color after the decease of the Infidels and Idolaters. Now
by how much it is easy to believe, that necessity to die is imposed upon us,
by so much is it more difficult to believe that our bodies being returned to
dust, shall rise again: and indeed the sensual man cannot comprehend any
thing therein, neither has any thought of it; as we see that the Pagans never
thought of it, although that they have disputed of the immortality of souls.
But the man that is regenerate by the Spirit of God, doubts not but that the
Lord can raise the dead, seeing he will have it, and that nothing can hinder
his will. For as, says the Prophet, Psalm. 115. Apoc. 4.
he does what he will. We must then see how the Scripture does assure us, that
the bodies as well of the good as of the wicked, shall rise again, the first
to be crowned with glory, the other with perpetual infamy. For to teach us the
Resurrection, it compares death to a sleep, Dan. 12.
as has been already said, to the end we may be certain that as the bodies,
after they have labored shall rest by sleep, that they being awaked may with
so much more alacrity return to work; so when we shall have made an end of
this present life, our bodies shall be brought to the tomb, as in a bed of
rest, for to rise again from thence at the latter day, and be put into their
place. Job prophesying of the resurrection, the which he did firmly believe,
says, Job. 14. and 19.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he will stand up at the latter day
upon the earth, and although after my skin, this body shall be devoured by
worms, yet with my flesh shall I see God, I shall behold him, and my eyes
shall look upon him, and none other for me, although my reins are consumed
within me. David foretells the resurrection of Christ, Psalm. 16.
by whom we shall rise again; Ion. 2. Mat. 12.
the which was figured by this, that Jonas was three days and three nights in
the whales belly, as Jesus Christ himself declares it. The Prophet Esaias in the
26. chap. speaking of the elect, Isa. 16.
says unto the Lord with faith, Thy dead shall live and rise again with my
body. Awake and rejoice ye habitants of the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
the fields, and the earth shall cast forth the dead. The Lord willing to assure
his people Israel, that delivering the^ from the captivity of Babylon, he
would bring them back into the land which he had given them, he said unto them
in a vision, by the Prophet, that as certain as the dead shall rise, so
certainly will he deliver them from the captivity of the Babylonians, Eze. 37.
for to set them in peace in their own land. Daniel says, that those that
sleep in the dust shall wake, some to eternal life, and others unto perpetual
shame and infamy, and those which have been wise, Dan. 12.
shall shine as the brightness, of the firmament, and those which do persuade
many to righteousness, shall be as stars for ever and ever. Jesus Christ
shows the Saduces, that the dead shall rise again, Mat. 22.
because that God is their God; John 6.
In St. John he says, that the will of his father who sent him, is, that he
shall lose nothing of all that he has given him; but that he shall raise it up
at the latter day. The Apostle declares that Christ is risen again for our
justification. Then he says that even as we die in Adam, so we shall rise
again, and shall be quickened in Christ. Romans 4.5.6. 1. Cor. 15.
For seeing that he who is the life, when he was put into the Tomb, thereby
made many to rise again, John. 19. Psalm. 36. Matthew. 27. These. 4.
by much more reason now, being risen again and glorified, will he raise us
again. In like manner he declares, that he that raised up the Lord Jesus,
will raise us again by Jesus, and will cause us to come into his presence. And
even so as God is eternal, so he will cause that the bodies of his children,
which are his temples, 1. Cor. 3.6. and 14. 2. Cor. 6. John. 5.
shall be eternal. Brief, the Scripture is full of testimonies of the
resurrection; wherefore to end, I will bring in one, which ought to serve in
steed of all; St. John says, that the hour shall come, wherein all those that
are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and those that
have done well come forth in resurrection of life, but those which shall have
done evil, shall come forth in resurrection of condemnation.

All humane wisdom which is folly before God, cannot persuade themselves,
Mat. 24. and 25. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 7. 2. Cor. 5. Act. 2. and 4. 1 Thessalonians.
1.4.8. 1. Pet. 1. 1. Cor. 1.
that the bodies which are returned into dust, can rise again, nor those which
have been burned, whereof the ashes have been dispersed by the winds, nor those
which have been devoured by birds, and by beasts, and digested, and reduced to
doung, nor those which have perished in the waters, which have been made food
for fishes. But the Lord by that which he had done before, plainly shows that
hereafter it shall be very easy for him to do what he will with our bodies;
for seeing he has made all things of nothing, can he not make that to return
to life, Genesis 1. Psalm. 33. Gen 1.
which has already been? And as he made man first of the earth, can he not as
well make him to rise again from it? In the beginning the earth was so
obedient unto him, Genesis 1.
that when he commanded it to bring forth the bud of the herbs that seedeth
seed, and the fructifying tree, and the living creature, beasts, worms, etc.
it of it self by and by brings forth that which before had never been; how
much more easily by the commandment of God, may it restore many which have
already been, and shall be returned into it? John. 11.
We see that although that Lazarus of Bethania had already been three days in
the earth, and nevertheless when the Lord commanded him to come out of the
earth, presently it was done; He himself also rose again from the earth the
third day for to assure us that he will raise us again: Mat. 28. Apoc. 1.
for as death could not overcome Jesus Christ, but that he is risen, so shall
it not be able to hinder his members from rising again, Romans 14. Gal. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. and 4.
because that he has as much power over the dead, as over the living; If God
has raised the head, it follows, that he will also raise his body, which we
are if we believe. When we consider that he did hinder the so hot burning
furnace from doing any hurt to any one of Sidracke, Misake, and Abednego, Ephesians.
4. Dan. 3.
we shall not find it an impossible thing to God, to make them rise again
which have been buried, that they may be reunited unto their souls. And he
that shut the Lions Jaws, because they should do no harm to Daniel, Dan. 6.
shall be able to raise those again which have been devoured. And as he
commanded the fish to cast up Jonas, Ion. 2.
also can he easily cause that the sea shall obey him, when he shall command
it to cast up his dead. In brief, the faithful cannot doubt of his
resurrection, knowing that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, Romans 8.
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, can
separate him from the love which God bears him, in JESUS CHRIST our Lord.
Reave. 20.
For also the sea must cast up those dead bodies which are in it, and death and
hell those which are in them; for as much as the Lord has the keys of hell,
and of death, having power over them.

Moreover God cannot be true, Reave. 1.
nor truly wise, nor Almighty, nor Just, if he does not raise the dead, and by
consequent cannot be God. And so who denies the resurrection, denies also
that there is a God: for seeing by his word he promises to raise up the dead,
if he do it not, he is not true. And seeing that he declares that he will have
it, if he does it not, it follows, that it is for want of knowledge, and of
power, and so shall neither be truly wise nor Almighty. Also he shall not be
just if he does not render to every one that which he promises him; for the
Author to the Hebrews saying that God is, Heb. 11. Mat. 10. Marc. 8. Luc. 9.
says also that he is a remunerator to those that require it. Now in this
world, the children of God have nothing but afflictions every day, being set
out for a show, as men condemned to death, and being made a spectacle to the
world, Cor. 4. John. 16.
to the Angels and to men. As our Savior also says to his disciples, that it
shall come unto them, You shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice.
2. Tim. 3.
The Apostle declares, that whosoever will live holily in Christ, he shall
endure affliction. Act. 5.20.21. Col. 1. Heb. 10.11. Mat. 6. Marc. 14. 1. Cor.
10. and 11. 1. These. 1. and 3. Psalm. 37.
We see that the Apostles and those which received their doctrine, have almost
always been in continual afflictions. In our time the afflictions of the
faithful have been notorious, that there is none so simple but may see them. On
the contrary part the wicked in steed of receiving punishment in this world,
are ordinarily better at their ease then the faithful, and do flourish like
the bay tree, as says the Prophet; Wherefore there must necessarily be an
other place where the good shall be recompensed with joy and the wicked with
sorrow, otherwise God should not be just, and Christ should have died in vain.
But will some one say, God does accomplish his promises, upon the souls of the
just, and his threatenings upon those of the unjust, and by that means God
shall not let to be just although he should not raise again the bodies of men.
With this we must consider, that if it be so, that a free retribution is done
to the soul, as (according to the promise of God) it ought to be done to the
just, and punishment is justly inflicted upon the soul of the reprobate, to
the end that the justice of God may be safe, so must it of necessity be, that
the bodies be remunerated, some with honor, others with disdain, to the end
that God may remain just for ever. For eue^ so as the soul of the man renewed
by the holy Ghost, gives it self to serve God, so does the body, when it
cease from evil doing, Reave. 12
and being even ready to be martyred for professing the Lord, serving to
justice and holiness. For example we have the Prophets, Romans 6. Act. 7.
St. Stephen, the Apostles, and so many Martyrs and true servants of God, Reave.
6. and 8
whose bodies have greatly given themselves to serve God: also in like manner
as the spirit of the wicked does employ it self but only to offend God,
likewise they employ their bodies to serve to filthiness and iniquity, and to
do all evil; which is so apparent that there needs no example to prove it. By
that means, who so denies the truth of God, Romans 6. and 7
his wisdom, his power, and his justice, and so takes God from being God, and
as much as in him lies makes him the father of lies; and he makes no
conscience to make the incarnation and bodily passion of Jesus Christ
unprofitable. For if the body does not rise again, what needed he to take
humane nature upon him, and to suffer in it, to deliver our bodies from the
everlasting curse? Seeing that if it were so, that the bodies being dead,
should so return to the earth, that they should have no more being, and so
could neither enjoy the joy, nor suffer pains and sorrows; had it not been
enough that he had only suffered in soul, Marc. 14.
being heavy to the death, for to deliver the souls from hell? Whosoever then
denies the reestablishment of bodies, through ignorance makes the humanity of
Christ unprofitable, and accuses God the Father of cruelty, as if he had taken
pleasure to see his well-beloved Son, so cruelly entreated, without having (for
his part) deserved it, and without that it should serve to the elect; he makes
him also (for his part) in blaspheming, a liar with his father, because he
says, that he will raise his at the latter day. John. ^.
In like manner does he accuse the holy Ghost of vanity, which by the mouth of
the Prophets has prophesied and foretold the resurrection of the dead. Then he
disanulleth Christian religion; for if the dead do not rise again, Christ also
is not risen, and so the preaching of the Apostles should be false, and we
should be abused to believe their doctrine, and those which are dead in Christ
should be cast away. Cor. 15.
The Lord fitting himself to our capacity, as the mother nurse to the child,
teaches us the celestial things by the comparison of the things terrestrial,
to the end we may comprehend that which otherwise is incomprehensible unto us.
And touching the matter which we have now in hand, the Prophet Esaias declares
unto us, Esaias. 19.
that even as in Winter the grass of the field seems to be dead, and in the
spring after it has felt the dew it springs and waxes green again, also
likewise our bodies being dead shall rise again, when at the latter day they
shall feel the dew of the grace of God, hearing the voice of the Son of man.
The Apostle says, that as the seed must die before it be quickened, Mat. 24. 1 Thessalonians. John. 5. 1. Cor. 15.
and then it rises by virtue of the sap which it has had in the earth, in
greater glory then it was sown; so likewise all men must die, seeing they rise
again, the elect in greater glory then they were set upon the earth, Romans 8.
These. 4.
by the virtue of the eternal Spirit of Jesus, in whom they died; the
reprobate in greater dishonor then they were before, by the virtue of the
immortal spirit of Satan, in whom they are departed. For seeing the Lord does
so excellently unfold his power toward the insensible creatures, we ought not
to doubt, but he has at the least as much will to show his power in making
them to rise again for whom Christ died, to the end to crown them with glory;
and his enemies to be charged with shame and infamy, seeing they have so much
dishonored him. When a nut, or the kernel of a pear or apple is rotted in the
ground, God causes it to rise again to a great tree, for to bear much more
fruit, being risen again, then it did before; and a grain of wheat, being put
into the ground, John. 12.
and dying, brings forth much fruit; do we think that the Lord has not as
great power to raise up men, as he has to raise these things, so small, and as
it were of no value? shall it not be as easy for him to raise us again, as it
has been easy to him to draw us forth of the matrix of the mother alive,
where before we were borne, we were as it were in a sepulcher? If the Prophets
and Apostles in the name of God have raised up the dead, Psalm. 18. 2. King. 4.
Act. 9.
shall it be impossible to the Lord by his power to raise them? Let us assure
our selves, that nothing can separate the body and soul of the faithful from
the love which God bears them, neither hinder but that he shall make the
wicked both in body and soul to be his foote-stoole.

Now by reason that the Apostle says, John. 6. Heb. 10. 1. Cor. 15.
that the body which is sown is not that which rises again; there are that
will infer thereupon, that at the resurrection our souls shall not return into
those bodies which now we have, but into other bodies which the Lord shall give
us. He himself in that place shows us, that he speaks not that, but only
to show us, that although our bodies shall rise in the same substance which now
they have, they shall notwithstanding be changed in quality and glory; seeing
that this corruption must put on incorruption, and that this mortality shall be
swallowed up of life, and shall put on immortality; 2. Cor. 5.
declaring that they shall be these self same bodies in substance, but diverse
in qualities. St. Paul says, Christ will transform this vile body, Phil. ^.
that it may be made like unto his glorious body, according to the power by
which he is able to make all things subject unto himself. Mat. 27. Luc. 24.
John. 20.
Whereon follows, that as Jesus Christ rose again in the same body, which
was crucified for us, being cleansed and discharged of all infirmity; also we
shall rise again in the same bodies which now we have in this world, having in
them, cold, heat, hunger and thirst, poverty, sickness, banishment, Heb. 10.
and 11.
imprisonment, and such like adversities: being cleansed and disrobed of all
that which by sin did cause us any grief; for the justice of God cannot
consist without remunerating the bodies of those that have fought for his
glory, in crowning his graces in them, and punishing those which have labored
to offend him. Moreover we see that those which the Prophets and Apostles, and
Jesus Christ himself have raised again, Mat. 27.
it has been in the self same bodies in the which they had lived before. Who
doubts but those that rose again at the death of our Lord, did rise in the
self same bodies which they had before; for otherwise how should they have bin
known by those to whom they did appear? The Apostle puts us out of doubt of
it, saying, 1. Cor. 15.
That if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead, does dwell in us, he
that has raised up Christ from the dead, will also quicken our mortal bodies,
because his spirit dwells in us; he says moreover, that the body which is
sown in corruption, shall rise again in incorruption. It is sown in
dishonor, it shall rise again in glory: it is sown in weakness, it shall
rise again in force: it is sown a sensual body, it shall rise a spiritual
body. Wherefore, we ought to believe that the bodies which now we have, shall
be the self same which shall rise again in the same substance, but the earthly
qualities shall be changed into heavenly; which is no small consolation, seeing
that we love our bodies so much, although that in this world they be lode^ with
so many miseries.

The third point.
AS concerning the Author of the resurrection, the scripture does declare unto
us, that God the Father in the beginning made man by his word, which is his
son, Genesis 1. and 2. John. 1. Genesis 2. Psalm. 33. 2. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
and having made his body, breathed into him a living soul, by his spirit: so
in the resurrection of the dead, he shall raise us again by his Son in a
quickening spirit.

And when the Sun of justice shall come Mal. 4.
in judgment for to judge the quick and the dead, Mal 4. Revel. ^. 2. Tim. 4.
the Sun shall wax dark, and the Moon shall not yield her light, and the
brightness of the Stars shall be seen no more then if they were fallen from
heaven, and the virtues which are in the heavens, as the Stars, the Planets,
and other celestial creatures, Mat. 24. Luc. 21. Reave. 6. 2. Pet. 3.
with heaven and earth shall be shaken; then the Sea and her waves shall roar
after an unaccustomed manner; and when the order of nature shall be changed,
those shall be signs of the coming of the Son of man. And when that Jesus
Christ, Mat. 16. Luc. 1. Act. 1.
the son of God shall come, who took humane nature upon him in the virgins
womb, he shall come in the same body, wherewith he did converse here below
upon the earth, before and after his death, as he himself declares, calling
himself the Son of man, Mat. 24. Marc. 13. Luc. 24. John. 5. Marc. 16. and 24.
1 Thessalonians. 4. Reave. 1. Mat. 24.
sent of God his Father, (who gave him power to do judgment, in so much as he
is the Son of man) set above the clouds, at the right hand of the power of God,
accompanied, with cries of exhortation, with the voices of Archangels and of
Angels, with Gods trumpets, and all eyes shall behold him; for he will cause
his sign to appear in heaven, and his voice to be hard, the which at the 1.
Cor. 15.
last tromp shall be hard of those that have bin Put into the Sepulchers, to the
end that first they may rise again: 1. These. 4.
and those which shall be found living shall hear it also, to the end they may
be translated, which unto them shall be a kind of death, being changed from
mortal and corruptible, to immortal and incorruptible bodies, 1. Cor. 15.
and shall rise again, and shall be changed in a moment and twinkling of an
eye.

This day shall not surprise the elect that are in the light, because it shall
be the day which they have so long waited for, 1. These. 5. 1. John 1.
and wished, with the other creatures: but to those who have overcome Satan by
the blood of the Lamb, 1. Cor. 1. Romans 8. 1 Ioh. 2.4.8 5. Reu. 12. and 21.
and by the word of their testimony, and have not loved their lives to the
death, it shall bring unto them an unspeakable joy, making them to lift up
their heads aloft, seeing their perfect deliverance come. For their Savior
shall send his Angels with great sound of Trumpets, Esaias 35. Zach 9. Luc 22.
Romans 8. Mat. 25.
to gather them together, how far in funder soever they be from the four
winds, from the end of the earth to the end of heaven; and then they shall be
altogether caught within the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, for to be
joined with their head, 2. These. 4.
as members of his body, and shall be always with him who will separate them
from the reprobates, as the shepherd does the sheep from the Goats, Mat. 25.
to put them both in body and soul in full possession of the everlasting
heritage and happiness by them so long hoped for.

The estate of the elect that are risen again.
THen their bodies which shall be risen again in triumph shall be changed, not
in substance but in quality, being discharged of the earthly heaviness, for to
be made spiritual bodies; 1. Cor. 15.
to the end to be fit for the heavenly habitation; where they shall have no
need of meats which do corrupt, Reu. 7.
for they shall be no more hungry, nor thirsty, and they shall die no more, but
shall use of the heavenly food, which is the word of God: Luc. 20.
they shall also be delivered from the bondage of sin, for to serve evermore
to justice. For these are the two principal things which hinder man from
beholding the face of God, this heavy earthly body, and infectious sin. As
for the first, we see that the Lord said to Moses, Exodus 33.
who was desirous to see him; Man shall not see me upon the earth and live. As
for the other, it was cause that the wicked Angels were cast down from heaven,
and man out of Paradise; Genesis 3.
for there is nothing common between God and a sinful man. Wherefore the
faithful shall have a spiritual body, discharged and purified from al sin.
There shall also be no defect in their bodies, nor imperfection, and all
deformity and vice, which comes of sin, shall be done away; for the Lord
will transform their vile and contemptible bodies, and make them conformable
and like unto his glorious body. Moreover, Phil. 3. 1. Joh. 3.
they shall no more suffer any torments, pains, sickness, nor any other
adverse thing, because there shall be no more mourning, nor weeping, nor
laboring; for the Lord will wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there
shall happen no more corruption to them by death; Reu. 21. Isa. 25. Reu. 7. and
21
whereof there shall be no more remembrance, but being made immortal, they
shall be made incorruptible, and delivered from al suffering, for to be in a
happy estate for ever.

Their soul, which before was a living soul, shall be changed into a quickening
spirit: Genesis 2.
then it shall be delivered from all sorrows, griefs, annoy, 1. Cor. 15.
perturbatious and fear, which came through sin, and shall be set in rest,
Psalm. 61.
joy, consolation, happiness, good hope, and perpetual assurance, without
being any more troubled nor defiled with troublesome affection.

Then being put in so excellent estate, both of body and soul, the image of
God shall truly shine upon them, having this power to serve God, being
perfectly wise, holy, pure, irreprehensible, innocent, without spot, 1. Cor. 1.
Ephesians. 5. Col. 1.
good, just, true, immortal and incorruptible, being resplendant in glory and
honor, before the Throne of God.

The which shall be the white vesture, wherewith S. John says, they shall be
clothed, Reu. 14. and 21. Reu. 3 4.6.7.
which is the pure and shining Sipirs; which are the iustifications of the
Saints that shall hold the palms in their hands in sign of victory: after
that the books being opened, Reu. 19.
they shall hear the voice full of meekness, grace and mercy, receiving in
the presence of the wicked, Reu. 7.
who judged them the outcasts of the earth, the sentence of eternal blessing,
Reu. 10.
being found written in the book of life, which is the book of the Lamb,
Sap. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 4. Reave. 13. and 21. 2. Cor. 5. Gal. 3. Apoc. 14.
being clothed with the innocence of Jesus Christ: and having the name of their
Father written in their forehead, they shall be with Christ the Spouse, crowned
with the incorruptible crown of life, and eternal glory, being pronounced the
sons and heirs of God, and co-heyres with Jesus Christ, Reu. 2. 2. Tim. 4.
1. Pet. 5. Romans 8. Gal. 4.
and Judges with him of all the Apostate Angels, and of all the reprobate: for
all power and judgment is so given to the Son, that he will receive the
Saints to participate in this honor as his assistants, Wisd. 3. Mat. 19. Luc.
22. 1. Cor. 6. John 5.
they shall be put in possession of the Kingdom of heaven, having praise of
God, which is the incorruptible heritage, which cannot contaminate, nor wither,
and which is preserved in heaven for them: they shall shine therein as the
firmament, and as the Sun, Reu. 2. Mat. 25. 1. Cor. 4. Pet. 1. Dan. 12. Mat.
13. Wisd. 3. Reu. 2.21. and 22.
and as the stars for ever. Then they shall have their right in the tree of
life, and shall enter into the new celestial Jerusalem: in the which there
shall be no temple, for the Lord Almighty is the temple thereof, and the Lamb.
They shall be in it everlasting Kings and high Priests, offering sacrifices of
praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Then being in the house of God, Reu.
15. and 7.
which is the blessed house which the faithful have in heaven, which is not
made with hands, 2. Cor. 5.
they shall be filled with the magnificence of the Lord, and shall budde like
the Olive branch, and blossom like the Palm, and like the Cedar which is in
Lebanus, Psalm. 16.17.52. and 92.
being immortal and incorruptible, and shall not be importuned by Satan, to
sin and offend God. The face of God which is the fountain of light, 1. Cor.
13. Psalm. 16. Reu. 22.
the brook of pleasure, and sea of good hap, they shall see it, which shall
give them such a great and perfect joy, that all the joys which may be
compared to that, Marc. 9.
are but as a sparkle compared to a great fire; It will make them forget all
terrestrial, Heb. 11. and 12.
what pleasure soever they could take in them in the world, and they shall not
remember any thing that may bring them sorrow or grief. They shall be led to
the mountain of Sion, and to the city of the living God, which has no need
of the Sun nor Moon to shine in it: Reu. 21.22.
for the light of God has lightened it, and the Lamb is the candle thereof;
and of thousands of Angels, and of the assembly of the first borne, which are
written in heaven, and to God which is the Judge of all, 2. Cor. 11. Col. 1.
Ephesians. 1. Reu. 19.
and to the sanctified souls of the just, and to JESUS CHRIST their head and
their Spouse, mediator of the new alliance, and of the blood shed, preferring
better things then that of Abel: then with all this company, and all the other
Saints, with whom they shall be fellow Citizens, being domestickes of God, and
with Mary and the other Saints, they shall be called to the nuptial banquet
of the Lamb, and shall enjoy the Kingdom of God their Father, Reu. 19.
the felicity which Jesus Christ by his death has conquered for them, in whom
they have put their whole trust; Heb. 2.5.9. and 10. Gal. 3. and 4. Romans 4 and
5 Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 5.9. and 10. Ioh. 12.14. and 17.
for the which also they shall not be confounded: as he himself promises,
saying, Father, I will that those which thou have given me be with me, and
see my glory which thou have given me; and then, I dispose the Kingdom unto
you, as the Father has disposed it unto me; to the end you may eat upon my
table in my Kingdom. The Apostle says, Luc. 22.
if we die with him we shall live with him, and if we suffer with him we shall
reign with him, and shall be glorified with him. 2. Tim. 2. Romans 8.
Of these promises the children of God need not doubt: for seeing that the
Lord when he died, gave Paradise to the thief, can he not more easily give
it to those to whom he has promised it, when he shall come into such great
glory and Majesty? Now being with him, Luc. 23.
and seeing him as he is, 1. Ioh. 3.
they shall have a much more greater joy then had the Disciples, seeing him
transfigured: they shall be so understanding, Mat. 17. Marc. 9. Luc. 9.
that they shall know all the Saints that ever have been, and even those with
whom they have conuersed in this world joyfully, and according to God. For if
it be so that in the transfiguration of our Lord, which was but a little
demonstration, as well of the glory of the body of Jesus, as of the estate and
condition in the which the children of God shall be in heaven; for their
meanenes and infirmity could not have been able to see the incomprehensible
Majesty of the Lord, without being destoyed: the Apostles although they had
never seen the body of Elias and of Moses, nevertheless they knew them. How
much sooner shall the elect know themselves, when they shall be endued with
this perfect knowledge and intelligence of the image of God, which shall be in
them? That if Adam in his first estate which was a great deal less, why shall
not that of the sanctified by Christ? 1. Cor. 13.
Did he know the beasts which God brought before him, 1. Cor. 1.
and did properly impose a name to each one: and even knew Eve to be bone of
his bones and flesh of his flesh; Genesis 2.
although that the Lord took the ribbe from him without his feeling it: shall
not we in this admirable glory, have more wisdom to know each other? Luc. 16.
Now this knowledge shall be disrobed of all carnal and corrupt affection; for
the elect shall not be known for loving the one more then the other, or hating
one reprobate more then another, in calling to mind the injuries and
displeasures which they may have received in this world.

But they shall love directly without respect of persons, those which God
loves, and shall hold in abomination those which God shall detest: For then
all Paternity, brotherhood, and marriage shall be abolished, and there shall be
but God alone Father of all, whose children we shall be, and brothers and
sisters one to another: the children of God shall be made partakers of the
divine nature; Marc. 12. Ephesians. 4. 2. Cor. 6. 2. Pet. 1. 2. These. ^.
for God shall be glorified in his Saints, and shall be made admirable to those
that have believed. Wherefore seeing God will communicate his glory, virtue and
justice to his elect; imparting himself unto them, let us know, that this
benefit contains the sovereign good of man, which all desire, and which the
wisdom of man could never comprehe^d. And indeed when by all the similitudes
which the Scripture does teach us, we shall have said and learned much of the
excellency of the children of God, it is almost nothing in comparison of that
which shall then appear; then the Apostle with the Prophet has good reason,
1. Ioh. 3.
having tasted in spirit the inestimable glory of the elect in the heavenly
life, to say, the things which eye has not seen, nor care hard, and which is not
come into the heart of man, are those which God has prepared for them which
loves him, which are unspeakable: and it is not possible for man to tell
them. 1. Cor. 2. Isa. 64. 2. Cor. 12.
For although Adam was created in a very noble estate, yet so it is, that if
the elect were to reassume that estate, they should be miserable in regard of
the soueraign excellency, in the which they shall be set.

Genesis 2. 1. Cor. 14.
1 He had an earthly and sensual body, the elect shall have spiritual and
celestial bodies.

2 He had a living soul, they shall have a quickening spirit.

3 He could fail and render himself subject to death, they shall not be able
to fail, 1. Cor. 15.
nor fall in danger of death; the which then shall be abolished.

4 Satan had power to tempt him, and to make him to fall; but he shall not
have power of either of both to them.

5 He was husbanding in an earthly Paradise, they shall be in rest and enjoy
the heavenly Paradise.

6 He had command over the birds of the air, Genesis 2.
the fishes of the Sea, the beasts of the earth; they being in greater power
shall condemn Satan and all the wicked: and the holy Angels shall be their
companions, Mat. 22.
and shall have power in the kingdom of their Father.

7 Adam had such great wisdom, that he named every beast according to their
property; 1. Cor. 9. Romans 2.3 and 5. 1. Pet. 3. 2 Cor. 1. Romans 15. Romans 3. and
4. Mat. 3. et 17
they shall be endued with such wisdom and filled with such a perfect knowledge,
that they shall be ignorant of nothing. Brief, we ought to be much moved and
stirred up to worship and serve God; who, without any desert of ours, will for
the love of his well-beloved Son so admirably unfold his incomprehensible
goodness unto us.

The estate of the reprobate.
NOw this day shall surprise the wicked and reprobates which are in darkness,
Romans 2. and 9
whom the Lord has borne and suffered with great patience, to the end to
bring them to repentance; as the thief by night steals upon the Master of
the family while he sleeps; and they shall be found without clothes, and
shall walk naked, Reu. 2. Reu. 16. 1. Cor. 5.
and their shame shall be seen: for when they shall say peace and security,
then shall sudden destruction come upon them, like to a woman in travel, and
they shall not escape, 1. These. 5.
but shall be marueilously afraid, by reason that it shall be a day of
darkness unto them, Amos. 5.
and not of light, an obscure and not a clear day and then they shall be
condemned by their own consciences, like unto Caine, giving praise to God,
seeing the Lord with his Saints come, which are by millions, for to give
judgment against those that have not had the fear of God before their eyes:
and to the end to convince all the wicked of all the evil works which they
have wickedly done, and of all the rude speeches which the wicked have
preferred against him: Sap. 4. 5. Gen 4. Romans 14. Jude. Romans 3. Reu. 19. Ephesians. 5.
then for to weigh down the Wine Press of the anger and wrath of Almighty
God, because they have persecuted Jesus Christ in his members, which are bone
of his bones, and flesh of his flesh; so that they shall be in such great
agonies and afflictions feeling the terrible judgment of God to come upon them,
Heb 10. Romans 2.
that they shall hide themselves in holes and between the stones of the
mountains, and shall say to the mountains and stones, fall upon us, Reu. 6.
and hide us from the face of him who is set upon the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, Reu. 9.
and who is it shall be able to subsist? They shall seek for death and shall
not find it, and shall desire to die, but death shall fly from them; they
shall strike themselves with despair, and shall be as dead for fear, by
reason of the expectation which they have of those things which shall come
suddenly upon them: Luc. 21.
they shall lament before the Lord, who shall have a flame of fire to do
vengeance and judgment, according to truth and justice, upon those which have
not acknowledged God, and who have not obeyed the Gospel of the Lord, Mat. 24.
Reu. 1. 2 These. 1. Romans 2. and 3. Ioh 5. 1. These. 4.
and shall punish them in body and soul with eternal perdition in the face of
the Lord, and in the glory of his strength.

The bodies of those which were dead before, shall come out of the earth: and
of those which shall be found living shall be changed, and put on immortality,
and shall be charged with oprobrious infamy before God and his Saints: for he
shall make clear the things that are hid, and shall manifest the counsels of
hearts and of tremblings and incomprehensible sufferings, Reu. 16. Dan. 12. Isa
66. 1. Cor. 4. Reu. 20.
being charged with the burden of their sins, for afterward to be thrown
down into the bottomless pit.

Their immortal soul shall be laden with fear, with sorrow, with
frightnings, with grief, with desolation, Mat. 24. Luc. 21. Marc. 13. Reu. 1.
and with such despair, that it is impossible for us to comprehend it.

Then being in such opprobry in body and soul, the image of Satan their head
shall appear upon them: that is to say, infidelity, iniquity, wickedness,
abomination, filthiness, hatred, cruelty, tyranny, perjury, lying, envy,
and all that is of impiety and injustice, which is the black roabe of the
reprobate: and even so as the elect have Christ for their head, of whom they
are the body, 1. Cor. 11. and 12. Ephesians. 1. and 5. Mat. 25.
unto whom they shall be made alike; so likewise the reprobates have Beelzebub
for theirs, unto whom they shall be made conformable.

For although that all the Devils are all apostate Angels, nevertheless the
Scripture in sundry places attributes the principality to one alone, to the end
to gather all the wicked unto him, as members in one body, for to be put to
perpetual ruin.

Then the wrath and indignation of God shall show it self clearly upon all the
infidelity and injustice of the fearful, 2. Cor. 4. Ephesians. 2. Mat. 9.10.12.
and 25. Marc. 3. Luc. 11.21. Romans 1.2. Romans 2. Reu. 21. and 17. Romans 9.
unbelievers, and execrables, which shall not be found written in the book of
life; for which they shall receive sentence of condemnation, and being separated
from Christ, shall be driven from before the presence of the Lord, as the dust
before the wind, and cast like dogs forth of the City of the children of God,
and sent with their Captain Satan and his Angels, who did accuse the elect
before God night and day, in perpetual malediction, Psalm. 1. Isa. 17. Reu. 21.
and 22. Reu. 12. Mat. 25.
for to drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, filled
into the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone
before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and the smoke of their torments
shall mount for ever, Reu. 14.15. and 16.
and they shall have no rest neither day nor night.

Now this place of torment for the wicked is so horrible, 2. These. 1.
that it is incomprehensible unto us; and even as God is eternal, also this
ruin shall be eternal. The Scripture for to declare it unto us, Psalm. 55.
Reu. 9. Isa. 30.
uses many comparisons. David says, that the wicked shall be cast into the pit
of ruin, and of the bottomless pit. Isay says that the torture is already
prepared for the wicked, which God has made deep and large; the building of it
is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like unto a brook of
Brimstone does kindle it; Isa. 66.
then he says that the worm of the wicked shall not die, and therefore shall
not be quenched, and they shall be hateful to all flesh. Dan. 12.
Daniel says also that they shall be in perpetual shame and contempt.
Malachy declares that the day of the Lord shall come, Mal. 4.
burning like an Oven, and all the proud and those that do wickedly shall be
like the stubble, and the day of the Lord shall burn them, and shall leave
them neither root nor branch. Mat. 3.
S. John Baptist says, that the chafe shall be put into the fire, which shall
never be quenched. Mat. 13.
The Lord says, that they shall be cast into the Furnace of fire, which is the
everlasting fire. Mat. 25. Luc. 16.
Saint Luke shows that the evil rich man whose soul is in hell, is in such
great heat, that he greatly desires to have a drop of water, which he shall
never be able to get; how much more shall he be tormented when he has put on
his body? Heb. 10. Reu. 19.20 21.
The Apostle says, that they shall feel a feruentnesse of fire, which shall
devour them. S. John declares that they shall be cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. For although they shall live, yet by
reason of these incredible torments, they ought rather to be called dead then
alive. Now although that by all these similitudes it is demonstrated unto us,
that the damned shall be grievously and everlastingly tormented: yet
nevertheless man cannot think nor comprehend how great the everlasting
sufferings shall be, no more then he can comprehend the joy of the children of
God. Marc. 9. 1. Cor. 2 Hebr. 10.
Wherefore with good cause the Author to the Hebrews says, that it is a
terrible and fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. For
although that we should see one continually knawed with worms, and burnt with
fire, that torment should notwithstanding be as nothing, in regard of that
which is prepared for the wicked. For besides that their bodies shall be
horribly afflicted, their souls shall be in incredible distresses and
sorrows. This ought well to stir us up to watch and pray, and to refrain
from doing evil, Reu. 3. Mat. 24. 1 These. 1. Psalm. 25. and 51. Iere. 31.
Lamen. 5. Cant. 1. Luc. 17. Ioh. 3. Wisd 4. and 5.
and to move us to serve God, and to desire him with the Prophets and Apostles,
to change, revive and increase our faith, that so being made new creatures, we
may escape this place of torment, and be numbered amongst the sons of God.
Which the Lord grant for the love of his well-beloved Son our Savior, to whom
be all honor and glory for ever and ever

AMEN.
A conclusion of this book containing an exhortation to all estates to prepare
themselves to die well, for fear least the uncertain hour of death should
surprise them.
Moreover my brethren and friends it remains, that this book be not only in
our hands, but also in our hearts, and if we have any desire to amend ous
lives, let it not be deferred till to morrow; for when to morrow shall come,
we will yet refer all to the next day, and so consequently the whole year
shall pass, yea our whole life.

If then at this present hour there be some little good affection in us, let
us not suffer it to be quenched, let us not kill that grace which God has
given us; but to the contrary by all means which shall be possible to us, let
us endeavor our selves in such sort, that from hour to hour it may not only
be confirmed, but also augmented.

God is merciful enough and liberal to grant us our requests, but he will be
importunated, not in his own regard, but ours, for he knows how backward we
are to pray and call upon him, and how soon we are weary of it; although we
should desire nothing more in this world, for it is no small thing to speak
unto God. And which ought yet more to move us, is, that he does willingly
hearken unto us, and never puts back those which come unto him,

I speak this, because I see not that by any other better means we can
prevent confusion, than by prayer. Surely if ever men had need of this aid, we
are in great necessity of it, in these last days, and old age of the world;
for we must not doubt but that Satan now does set himself in arms, perceiving
well that the hour draws near, that he shall not be able to do that which
he has done heretofore, and that the Son of God must be manifested to all
creatures, and that then the perfection ought to come of the blessed and the
finishing of their happiness, of the which he knows well he has no part.
If then for his part he sets himself forth in his strength, it remains that
we should do the like for us, that we may be furnished with all celestial
armor, and that we be not daunted with all his plots and treacheries; for
surely the victory is in our hands, so that we fight against him, and not
with him, as does almost all the world at this day, although that the most part
think the contrary, for so they have the name of a Christian, and be without
reproach before men, who are no better then themselves, they then think
themselves very well assured. Others think that they shall need but a good
sigh, (as they say) at the last hour for to blot out all the rest of their
life passed, and presently to transport them into the kingdom of heaven; but
who has assured them that God will give them the grace to make that sigh, and
to have a true repentance of their sins, at the hour of their death? Where
have they had pattents and good assurance, that they shall not die a sudden
death? Is not that to mock God openly? If that may serve, verily St. Peter and
St. Paul and the other Apostles should have been much deceived to labor and to
toil so much, and to bear so grievous a Cross, if it were so easy a matter
to enter into the kingdom of heaven; I mean, by the means which those
Libertines do pretend.

Let us assure our selves that the way is strait which leads to salvation,
and that there are few that go therein. These words are no lies, but I pray God
that we may not experiment the truth of them, to our great pain and grief. I
know well that the mercy of our God is incomprehensible and infinite, but it
is toward his servants, it is toward those that fear and reverence him.

Besides I know that among the children and servants of God, there are many
infirmities, even a great imperfection in all virtue and justice, and which
endures till death; but there is a great difference between your life, O
worldlings, and the life of the elect of God. The just man sins seven times
a day; but he shall be raised seven times. Now you continue in your evil, and
go to bed with your sin as with your friend and companion.

Men will say an Aue Marie, beat themselves on the breast, or perhaps will have
some distaste of their sin and wickedness. But if we nearly look into all,
we shall find that it is nothing but mere hypocrisy. If our friend or
kinsmen dies, if we loose our goods, if wrong or injury be offered unto us, if
our good name be taken away, if we be stricken or hurt, behold we are presently
in choler, or very extremely sad, our hearts even closed up with melancholy;
but if our spirit dies, and if we loose the everlasting riches by our
transgression, we make no account of it, we are not moved with it, we grieve
more for the loss of this world, which is nothing, then we do for the loss
of God, which is all.

In seeing all which, cannot such men yet feel their grief? can they not yet
know how much the opinion which they have of their virtue and prudence is vain
and frivolous? Can they not see how far they are from their reckoning?
Certainly the world is full of such people that have no feeling of their sin,
but the prophesies must needs be accomplished, to the end when the Son of man
shall come, he may find no faith upon the earth: Verily this hour comes on
a pace, the signs thereof are very manifest. But because we should not be
dismayed, seeing such a danger round about us, let us be sure that the Lord will
be with us till the end of the world, provided that our Lamps be burning, and
in steed that the wicked every day shall be worse and worse, for our parts let
us endeavor to go forward in all holiness and justice. I know well, that they
will mock at us, and at our simplicity, that we shall be cast out of their
companies. But we shall be exalted of God, and received of the most blessed
assembly.

Wherefore let us with all patience wait for the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and let us labor that so we may be found of him without spot, and
without reprehension. Surely that day ought to be very fearful to the wicked,
but as for us we ought so much the rather desire it, knowing for a certain
that there is no condemnation for those that are in Jesus Christ; knowing well
the great goodness and kindness of him which is to come, with whom God grant
we may live for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer unto God on the same subject.
ALas when shall we come before the face of God our Father, and when shall we
have a dwelling in his house, and until when shall we be in this exile,
whereunto by sin we have bin regenerate? But how shall the sinner consist
before this great God? How shall this poor flesh be able to go up into this
heavenly and everlasting Paradise? O how uncertain should our hope be if we
had not the true promises of our God, and how miserable should we be, if we did
rely upon our selves? But O great God, thou will that all things be possible
to believers, for the believers do trust only thy promise, and in thy mercy. Do
not then O Lord regard so many sins which are in us. Remember rather that we
are thy creatures, and the work of thy hands. We are unworthy to be called
thy children, but it pleases thee to be our Father; It was thy will that thy
Son Jesus should come down to us here beneath, to make that we should go up
to thee. We fear not death O Lord; for thou have promised to be with us;
death lost her strength, when thy dear Son died, so that when our bodies
shall be knawne with worms in the sepulcher, our souls shall rejoice in
heaven with the holy Angels. We desire then to die to see thy amiable and
glorious face, to live with Jesus Christ out head. O our God open us then the
gates of thy Kingdom. Cause us to hear that sweet speech which was spoken to
the poor thief upon the cross, which is, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Alas Lord we are unworthy of it; but thy mercy and thy promises do
give us assurance. Give us also O heavenly Father, the strength to persevere,
and desire the immortal and glorious life to come, which thou have purchased
for us, through thy Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory for evermore. So be it.

FINIS.

