THE PRACTICE OF Thankfulness; OR DAVID'S choice directions how to praise GOD.

In an Exposition and Application upon the whole sixty six PSALM.

With a short Treatise upon the thirty one, and thirty two Verses of the one
hundred and seventh PSALM.

1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God, in
Christ Jesus toward you. LONDON Printed by G. P. for Roger Iackson, and are to
be sold at his Shop, near to the Conduit in Fleet Street. 1622.

TO THE NOBLE, VIRTUOUS, AND CHRISTIAN LADY, THE RIGHT Honorable Countess of
Lincoln: Lady-Mother to the Illustrious, and truly Religious Earl of
Lincoln.
MOst worthy Lady, apparent it is, that the Father of mercy has enriched you
with that, 1. Pet. 1.7.
which is more precious then the best tried gold; with that Faith, 2. Pet. 1.5.
which is attended on with the luster of Virtue, the grace of Knowledge, the
government of Temperance, the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, the support
of Patience, the splendor of Humility, the gain of Godliness, the bond of
Brotherly kindness, and the glory of Love. And albeit the most righteous Lord
has darkened your comfort in the weakest, yet has he most brightly lighted
it with a manifold shine in the greatest: Here there shines remembrance of the
Creator in youth; in youth, learning to know Time, and Reason; discretion to
answer the enemies in the gate; wisdom to prefer and choose that, whose
price is far above the Rubies; satisfaction to your Honor, and hope of wished
glory to your most Noble house, and generous race. O, the lines are fallen to
your Honor in most pleasant places, so that you are able to say to the profane
wonderers, and to all your Peers, Marvel not that I am zealous of reading,
hearing, and meditation; marvel not that I love not this world, nor the evils
thereof, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life;
marvel not that I study to have my conversation in heaven; or that I call so
often for the exercises of Prayer, Preaching, and Thanksgiving; for God has
done so great things for my soul, as I can never be thankful enough.

O most Christian Countess; two things I have often thought upon: the one, how
I might satisfy the continual request of diverse Christian friends, by some
fruits of my unpolished labors: the other, how I might testify to the world,
my most respective duty to your Honor: now at length for the satisfaction of
the one, and testification of the other, I have presumed to tender that, which
always hitherto I trembled to offer, because of my weakness; fearing the
carping of some Momus, for bringing no nouelty amidst so much variety: or some
Moses should blame me, for bringing any more amidst so much sacietie. Yet
considering, that since the time of Reformation is come, the Temple of the Lord
is in more places then Jerusalem, and of such spacious capacity, as though
knowledge abound therein as the Sea; yet there is place still empty to receive
it. And now the Builders are not so many, and the fit stuff is not so much,
but that there is a renewed charge, that toward the Lords Work every one
bring what he can, that as he has received the gift, he should minister the
same to other, as good Stewards of the manifold graces and gifts of God.

Therefore, some little of that spiritual blessing, which his holy Spirit has
communicate to me, his unworthy instrument in meditation, according to the
necessity laid upon me, I have uttered, and ministered to others in preaching,
and here do present, as to all my fellow members, and Christian friends every
where: but first, and chiefly to your most Honorable and virtuous self, in
writing. The subject and ground of my labor, is the sixty six Psalm, a
Psalm of Divine praise, made by the sweet Psalmist of Israel, upon the
deliverance of Gods people out of many sore calamities, and of himself out of
the bloody hands of his persecuting enemies. I wish it to all, because all
have more then much need to be awaked, to this duty of praising God in this
time of security: but I dedicate it only to your Honor, as to the prime
moouer of this my present endeavor.

For, when I had neither a purpose to any such Treatise, nor thought of this
most worthy Psalm: then did your Honor, whose affections are ever set on
heavenly things, name this Song and Psalm unto me, commend it to my
meditation, request me to entreat of it, help my labors with your prayers,
and joyfully heard what the Lord spoke by me out of it. Therefore, I beseech
your Honor, take this my Dedication, as a true token of my most grateful
affection to your most Noble self, another Marie in choosing the better part:
as a testimony of my longing to add something to the cure of the lamentable
neglect of holy duties: and as a witness of my desire to further this service,
to Gods praise* and glory. Even so be it, even so be it, Amen.

Your Honors ever to command in the Lord, N. LARK.

AN EXPOSITION OF the sixty six PSALM, by Doctrine and Exhortation.
IN this holy Psalm, consider: The Title.
First, the Title: Secondly, the Psalm it self: the Title commits it, To the
chief Musician, or the Master of the harmony, or Him that excels; and
intitles it, A Song, A Psalm, as being one of that kind, which the Church in
David's time used to sing with Instruments and voices. It serves well to
prepare attentio^ and intention to the matter of the Psalm. For it may plainly
teach us: First, skill, and consent in singing the same: Excellency, and to
be used so, as our Divine praises may be made more pleasing, sweet, and
excellent by it. Thirdly, Music, and melody to God, Ephesians. 5.19.
even with the glory of the Tongue, Col. 3.16.
and the grace of the Heart: lo, how the Title is a preparatiue to the
understanding, affecting, and using of this special Psalm.

In which there is: The Psalm
First, A general; Secondly, A particular setting forth of the praise of God:
by diligent perusing whereof, we shall learn much worthy and necessary
knowledge: knowledge, how to make Gods praise glorious: to comfort our selves
in his greatness: to rejoice in his noble Works: to suck sweetness out of
our afflictions: and to relate without either affectation, or ostentation, to
God glory, and to others edification, the Lords admirable goodness unto
every one of us, and to awake us unto all these; thus this Psalm begins.

Make a joyful noise unto God, Verse. 1.
all ye lands.] In giving God thanks, it is our duty to have great
rejoicing; they that do it without rejoicing, yea, even in him, do it not so
rightly, as is fitting to his Majesty. Therefore in doing this duty, rejoice
greatly, be not ashamed to let thy rejoicing be seen, and heard; make a
joyful noise, like the noise of the Trumpets in the days of your triumphs,
Number. 10.9.10.
of your gladness, of your festival solemnities, and of the times wherein you
found special acceptance of your sacrifices: and make this noise unto God.

Divine thanksgiving, is to be appropriate only to Gods person. Deny it to
all creatures in heaven, or earth: deny it to false gods, Psa. 68.19.
and give it to the true everliving God, the God of our salvation, 90.17.
our own God, even the God that saves us, and establishes his grace in us.

All ye lands.] None of the universal Church of God, is exempt from praising
God: high, low, Jew, Gentile, bond, free, male, female, hold not back your
praise from God; he holds not back his benefits from you, 65.19.
but ladeth you daily with the same: you have, 1. Cor. 4.7.
or can have nothing, but what you receive from him, and that, not for your
merit, but only for his mercy, which indureth for ever.

Sing forth the honor of his Name, Verse 2.
make his praise glorious.] True Thanksgiving is such an action, as
cheerfully sets forth the glory of Gods Name: let not your thanks to God,
the most High over all in heaven, and earth, be any abasing of his Majesty,
but ascribe that to his great and fearful Name, which is honorable: Psa.
29.2, 8.
give to him the glory due to his Name, let every one that speaks of him,
speak of his glory: confess that his Name is above every name in heaven,
Phil. 2.9, 10
and earth: confess that at his Name every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and in earth, and things under the earth. Pro. 18.10.
Confess that his Name is a strong Tower to all that trust in him: Psalm. 8.
confess that his Name is wonderful excellent in all the world: confess that
his glorious Name is greater then all thanksgiving, Neh. 9.5.
and praise: let the desires of your soul be to the praise of his holy Name.

Also Make his praise glorious.] Divine thankfulness makes Gods praise
glorious; glorious to the hearing, and understanding of men, though it can
supply no defect of glory to God, for his glory is always infinite, and
absolute: lessen not his praise, praise him not basely, give not his praise to
any other: so praise him, Ps. 108.1, 2
as becomes him: let your hearts be prepared, and your tongues awaked, to
utter forth the greatest praise you can of Gods Highness.

Say ye: Verse. 3.
] Thanksgiving is to be performed with speaking: be not silent from this
duty; avoid that silence, as great disobedience: neither can you excuse it by
pleading ignorance: here you are taught what to say. He that requires your
thanksgiving, teaches you what you should speak in the same: he that
commands to make his praise glorious, shows, how you should make it
glorious: of his goodness he finds you heart, mouth, tongue, words, and
all; that to neglect this duty, you should have no excuse at all.

Say ye unto God:] In praising God, that must only be said of him, which may
with a good conscience be said even to him. Use not the Lord as you do men, to
say one thing behind his back, and another before his face: for you can never
be but in his sight, never think a thought, but he understands it; never
speak a word, but he knows it: therefore say ye things glorious of him, and
say ye the same unto him. Show that his benefits, his Name, his glory, and his
praise do so affect you, as you cannot, but like a grateful man to a most
beneficial friend, meet the Lord your God in your meditations, and breaking
out into zealous praises of his bounty, speak, and say even unto himself,
that which may best testify, how desirous you are to show your best
thankfulness for all his loving kindness: hence say ye unto God:

How terrible, or reverend art thou in thy works!] To the high setting forth
of Gods praise, is required a feeling confession of his most reverend dealing
in every action. Beware you want not the consideration, that should bring this
confession; they are near destruction, Psa. 28.5. Isa. 5.12.
and the sound of great woe is to them, that regard not the work of the Lord,
and consider not the operation of his hands. Hos. 14.9. Ps. 107.43.
Do you otherwise, be you wise to understand the ways of God, be you
careful to observe those things in Gods administration, which may teach you
this feeling confession, that you may say unto him with admiration; Psa. 8.1.
How excellent, O Lord, is thy Name in all the earth? 92.7.
How great and glorious are thy works? And how innumerable is the number of
them? 104.24.
How unsearchable are thy judgments? Exo. 15.11.
Who is like to thee, O Lord, among the gods? So glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, and doing wonders. Thou so rulest in the Armies of Heaven
above, Dan. 4.32.
and so workest in the Inhabitants of the earth below, as to thee we always
say, How reverend and fearful art thou in thy works? the like whereof none
can do.

Through the greatness of thy power.] It is a principal point in the praising
of God, to ascribe the glory of victory to his power only; say not, Our own
arm shall save us; our Idols have saved us; our Horses, and Chariots shall
save us: but ever say unto God in every victory, Thou, O God, Psa. 76.4.
art more glorious and excellent, then the highest helps; 115.1.
only at thy rebuke both the Horse and Chariot are cast asleep; Not unto us,
O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name we give the glory. Thou, even thou alone,
by the greatness of thy power, have gotten thy self the victory; and through
this power

Shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee, though dissemblingly.] When
we see Gods enemies driven for fear to dissemble Religion, and not to dare to
withstand the defendours, and Ministers of Christ's Kingdom, we should admire,
and acknowledge Gods mighty power therein: say not, This is through man's
policy: say not, This is for fear of man's power: but confess and say, Behold
the mighty power of God: through the greatness of thy power, Ezra. 6.
Heathenish Darius submitted himself unto thee, and forwarded the building of
thy Temple: through the greatness of thy power, Dan. q. 37.
great Nebuchadnezzar submitted himself unto thee, and extolled, and praised,
and honored thee, the King of Heaven: through the greatness of thy power,
hardhearted Pharaoh submitted himself to thee, Exo. 12.31.
to let thine Israel go. So still shall thine enemies, and the enemies of thy
Christ, submit themselves unto thy Majesty.

Thine enemies.] All are not true friends to the Gospel, that under Christian
Kings, and in the Churches prosperity profess the Gospel: Through the
greatness of thy power, O God, some are thy enemies, and therefore not to be
trusted by thy servants (because they, in respect of the betternesse of the
times, and some other hand of thine, dare do no other:) Some are in subjection
unto thee, and submit themselves among thy people, as Judas among thine
Apostles; only they do it sore against their heart; they do it with desire
rather of opportunity to cast off thy yoke, and to show their enmity.

Dissemblingly, and lyingly.] They come near Gods enemies, that serve him in
hypocrisy, or for servile fear of his power, and not in truth and sincerity,
for duty, and love to his Majesty. Look to your hearts, that you have not
guilty consciences this way, so as you may woefully accuse your selves, saying,
Through the greatness of thy power, we submit our selves unto thee, and to thy
Kingdom, only in dissimulation, and perforce, because we dare do none other:
Psa. 125.4.
but be ye so good, 1. Tim. 1.5.
and true of heart, as you may find your selves in a child-like submission,
with faith unfeigned, and pure love; and so may say this unto God, only of his
enemies, Through the greatness of thy power, thine enemies fainedly submit
themselves unto thee.

All the earth shall worship thee. Verse. 4.
] There is no respect of person, in Gods Vocation of men to salvation. Be not
discouraged, because thou art a Gentile, or bond, or female, or weak, Gal.
3.28. Acts 10.34, 35.
or a thing of nothing: God calls all that are his, the Gentile, as soon as the
Jew, the bond, as soon as the free, the female, as soon as the male, the weak,
as soon as the strong: he puts no difference, he does nothing for any ones
person sake, but all for his own mercy sake. He concludes not his Church
within some one Town, City, Nation, or Country, but many come from all
Regions, to sit down with Abraham, Matt. 8.11.
Isaac, and Iaakob, in his kingdom; and all this through his power: through
the greatness of thy power, All the earth shall worship thee.] It is Gods
praise only, that his people do worship him. If you be worshippers of God,
praise not your own wel-willing that way, your own selfe-affection to
godliness, your own apprehension of the means, the power of the instruments:
but praise the riches of Gods grace, and the power of his Spirit; Romans 5.6, 8,
10.
and say unto him, Of our selves we are weak, we are sinners, Joel 2.32.
we are enemies, we are ungodly. Now that we are turned to worship thee,
thine is the praise: Ioh. 6.44.
thou have called us unto it, thou have drawn us, Psa. 65.4.
thou have caused us to come unto thee, only through the greatness of thy
power we worship thee.

And all shall sing unto thee.] Singing rightly, is a singing unto God
himself. Sing not holy Hymns, spiritual Songs, divine Psalms to your own
minds carnally merry, or to please the uncircumcised ears of profane friends:
but sing them so, as you do certainly sing them unto God, Ephesians. 5.19. Col.
3.16.
making a melody in your heart unto him, and singing them to him with grace in
your minds.

Sing unto thee.] Right singing unto GOD, is a part of the worship of God: an
effect of the gracious operation of GOD: an action belonging to every member of
the Church of GOD. All the earth shall, in worshipping thee, sing unto thee;
through thy power they shall sing unto thee, and all they shall sing unto thee.
If you never sing unto the Lord, how do you give him his whole worship? Psalm.
68.4, 32.
Where is his joyful Service? Therefore as you say unto him, so sing unto him,
sing daily unto him, sing praises, sing praises, sing skillful praises unto him.

They shall sing to thy Name excellently.] The chiefest, and worthiest renown
that can be spoken of people, is, that they be religious, and zealous
worshippers of GOD. In ascribing unto God the glory due unto him, say this
chiefly unto him, He rein is thy praise glorious, that through the greatness
of thy power, people do worship thee, and sing unto thy Name excellently: this
being GODS special honor to effect this, it is our special renown, that it
is effected in us: if any be not a true worshipper of GOD, he has no
renown, Psa. 49.20.
he is without honor, he is most base, he is even abominable. But they that
are made his worshippers, are noble in name, in praise, Acts 17.11. Deuteronomy. 26.19
and in glory above all other: and this is the glory of very Kings, to bring
presents to him, to offer gifts to him, to fall down to worship him, and to
serve him. Therefore, think your selves greatly exalted, that you are become
his religious servants, rejoice in this against all earthly abasements, and
hope after the increase of the number of his true worshippers, and say still
unto the Lord, with confident expectation of the restoring of the Jews, and of
the fulfilling of the Gentiles, Psalm. 7^.
All the earth shall worship thee, they shall sing to thee, they shall sing to
thy Name excellently.

Come, Verse 5.
and see the works of God.] Unto the worshipping of GOD rightly, Ier. 2.31.
is required a willing coming to the means that teach us his glory: Luke
14.2. Job 21.15. Luke 14.18
say not as Papists, It is heresy to come: or with the rebellious and
voluptuous, We will not come: or with the Atheists, What profit is it to come?
Isa. 65.5.
or with worldlings, We cannot come: Isa. 55.1.
or with Separatists, We are too holy to come: Mat. 11.28
but with the hungry and thirsty come; with them that are burdened and heavy
laden come, Jsa. 2.3.
with them that are zealous, Ioh. 6.45.
provoke one another to come, with them that are taught of GOD come; Psa. 34.11.
and you shall not come in vain, but coming to the means, you shall learn
the fear of GOD.

Come.] The Ministry of the Word of God teaches, and inuiteth us to make use,
and godly benefit of the works of GOD, that bids us come: 1. These. 5. Heb. 2.
Psa. 95. 1. Cor. 2. Isa. 30. Psalm. 27.4. Eccles. 4.17.
and let us not be absent, not from this; neglect not this; harden not your
hearts against this; but frequent this, hear this, believe this, obey this,
submit your selves to this and examine how you profit by this; and according to
the present charge of this, Come and see.] The way to the profitable use of the
means of godliness, Ier. 42.20. Acts 2.13.
is to see, behold, and consider the same. Come not as hypocrites to dissemble:
come not as sluggards, to sleep: Ez. 33.32.
come not as scorners, to deride, nor as enemies, to catch, nor as children and
fools, to gaze, prattle, or play; but come as the lovers of goodness, to seek;
as the wise, to observe; come as the godly, to learn, as the prudent, to
consider, and as the obedient, to see.

The Works of the Lord.] The works of GOD are special means to furnish us,
and fit us to worship and praise GOD. Do not esteem them as dead things; do
not pass by them as idle matters, and of no reckoning; do not sin, as those
that are complained of, for that they regarded not the works of GOD, nor
considered the operation of his hands; but come, and behold his works, use
them as happy means to make thee happy, that is, to fit thee to be an happy
and holy worshipper of God.

Use his works of creation, Psalm. 33. 9. 36. 6. 31. 23. 7, 8, 9, 10. 67. 4. 9.
16. 145. 15, 1^ 111. 9.
to draw you to fear him; his works of common preservation, to admire his
providence; his works of special preservation, to love him; of
administration, to trust and to rejoice in him; of judgment, to acknowledge
him, and to stand in awe of him; of sustentation to wait on him: and his
works of redemption, to praise his holy and fearful Name: in stead of vain
and corrupt communication, Ps. 105.2, 5
talk of his wonderful works, and in stead of remembering vanities, remember
his marvelous works which he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of
his mouth.

He is to be reverenced in his doing toward the sons of men.] They that
rightly consider Gods working, do find that he is most worthy to be
reverenced in every action: O thou man, that do not perceive this, thou art
very foolish. Psalm. 92.
But ye holy ones, whom God has made glad through his works, and who rejoice
in the work of his hands; happy are you, for you see how true this is, and you
admire that he is so reverend in his doing.

Toward the sons of men.] The very person, toward whom God is so reverend in
his dealing, is full of argument of his commendation: for who be these? Even
the sons of men. Oh then, praise the Lord highly for his administration to
such persons: confess his bounty unto these, bounty unspeakable; confess
his goodness unto these, goodness immeasurable; confess his mercy to these,
mercy most laudable; confess his love to these, love most admirable. For these
have plunged themselves into all misery: these have provoked his wrath by
infinite iniquity: these have nothing in them to deserve any compassion: these
have all that is in them to bring condemnation. O we men, Genesis 6.5. Romans 1.21.
whose imaginations are continually evil, whose foolish minds are full of
darkness, whose very hearts are most deceitful, whose mouths are full of
blasphemy, whose throats are an open sepulcher, Romans 3.
whose eyes are full of vanity, whose ears are full of idleness, whose hands
are full of blood, whose feet are swift to every mischief, whose life is most
sinful, and whose body is most vile: Let us wonder that God is so reverend in
his dealing to such most unworthy persons, and wondering, let us to his glory
say, What is man, Psalm. 8.
that thou art so favorable a God unto him? What is wretched man, that thou
art mindful of him? What is the son of mortal man, that thou visitest him?

He turned the sea into dry land.] Verse 6.
God shows himself wonderful in his doing, for them that fear him: Their
enemies were behind them, the Red Sea is before them: What now shall become of
them? Why, Psalm. 106.9.
behold the salvation of the Lord to his own people, he forthwith rebuked the
deep Sea for staying them, and it presently gave way unto them, ouerwhelming
all their enemies that followed them. See how reverend the Lord was in his
doing toward these sons of men; join your selves to this God, and he will
do wonders for you; believe in him, and he will make all things possible unto
you; expect with patience his deliverance, if no means be with you; if all
means be against you, yet can he find means to help, and save you; he
turned the sea into dry land:

They went through the flood on foot.] To whom God makes himself known in a
special favor, and manner, to them he will magnify his power: that they
might see his great salvation, he led them dry shod-thorow the great depths of
the cruel sea: Josh. 3.10.
and after, that they might know that he the living Lord was among them, and
that he would not fail to do all that he promised them, he cut off the
waters of the River Jordan, and made them stand on an heap, even when it was
at the broadest, until all his servants were clean gone. If he do not thus
to you, but lets seas and floods of iniquity keep you from entering into his
holy Canaan, then lament; for it argues that he yet has no savor unto you: if
you would have him thus magnify his power some way toward you, then call your
selves by the name of Iaakob, Isa. 44.5.
and subscribe with your hand unto the Lord: if you be his people, then expect
one great deliverance after another: and if you know who fear him, do not
mock nor despise them; but say, Deu. 33.29
They are happy; say, Who is like unto them, so saved by the Lord, the shield
of their help?

There did we rejoice in him.] Gods admirable and comfortable dealing begets
present rejoicing in him, in them that love and fear him. They were no sooner
passed through the Red Sea, Exodus 15.
but then and there Moses and the children of Israel sang joyfully, a song of
thanksgiving unto the Lord: there also Miriam the Prophetess, with all the
women answered the men, with well-tuned instruments, holy dances, and sweet
voices in the same thanksgiving: There did they rejoice in nothing of their
own, in nothing of any creature in heaven or earth, in nothing else but in God
alone, in his triumph alone, in his strength alone, in his salvation alone, in
his Name alone, in his right hand alone, in his power alone, and in his
greatness alone. But do we not honor him in the very place where he has
honored us? Not praise him in the very time, wherein he has done great
things for us? Not rejoice amidst all our comforts, benefits, and deliverances?
Are we not now most glad, that he gives us blessed proofs, that he is become
our own God, strength, deliverer, and salvation? Oh let us tremble at this
unthankfulness, and so amend this negligence, as we may say justly, as they
have said, There, there did we rejoice in him: and still may we rejoice in
him.

For, Verse 7.
He rules by his power for ever.] Ye righteous, fear not the frowns of
fortune, falsely so called, the hatred of the world, sickness, famine, sword,
or pestilence, the sons of mortal men, hellish principalities, or powers,
Dan. 4.
nor any creature: for your God rules according to his will in the armies of
heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, Psalm. 135.
doing whatsoever pleases him every where. Ye wicked, fear, and tremble; be
full of sorrow, and heaviness; Psa. 145.20
howl and lament; for God rules, who preserves all them that love him: but
all such as you are, he destroys: All ye ungodly, Romans 8.28.
repent speedily, for God rules, who makes all things work together for the
best to them that love him: Psalm. 11.
but upon you he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, this shall be the portion of your cup, because not chance, nor
fortune, nor Planets, nor winds, nor Popes, nor hell, nor creatures rule, but
God alone rules.

He rules by his power.] Ye Potentates, and sons of the mighty, lift not up
your horns on high, oppose not your greatness against any ordinance of God; for
he rules by his power, Dan. 4.35, 37.
none can stay his hand, nor may say to him, What do thou? Them that walk
in their pride, he is able to abase. Ye sinners, provoke not him to anger,
for he rules by his power; if ye still forget him, and will not consider,
he will tear you in pieces, Psa. 50.22.
and none can deliver you. Ye that fear him, be not discouraged, because
your enemies are too strong for you: doubt not of relief, because your misery
seems helpless: despair not of recovery, because you see no remedy: for your
God not only rules, but he rules by his power, even by his mighty power,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself: Phil. 3.21. Ephesians. 3.20.
even by his infinite power, whereby he is able to do exceeding abundantly
for you, beyond all that you can ask, or think.

For ever.] Think not, O ye wicked, that there is any time, wherein you shall
have the rule in your hands, or shall escape his judgments; for he rules for
ever, Dan. 4.34.
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and of his kingdom there is no end.
Rejoice, O ye righteous, for the providence, the goodness, the protection, the
presence, the power, the justice, the mercy of the Lord your God shall never
be diminished, shall never cease, shall never fail you; for he rules by his
power for ever: Ps. 146.10.
Thy God, O Sion, reigns, and he shall reign for ever.

His eyes behold the nations.] O ye mad people, Isa. 29.15.
that seek out deep devices to hide your counsels from the Lord, and to keep
your works secret in dark, asking, Who sees us? Who can know us? woe be
unto you: for his eyes behold the Nations; Pro. 15.11.
hell, and destruction are before him; how much more the hearts of the children
of men? he has seen all your imaginations, Psa. 10.14.
he beholds all your mischief and spite to requite it with his own hand. Ye
faithful ones, be the same in all places, and in all countries, dissemble no
where, sin no where; for your God will find it out, his eyes behold all
Nations, Psalm. 33.13.
he beholds all the sons of men, his eyes are upon all the ways of man,
Job 34.21.
and he sees his goings; his eyes are in every place beholding both the evil
and the good. Prou. 15.3.
You that are in affliction, do not say, Isa. 40.27.
My way is hid from God: but be glad, and rejoice in his mercy, Psalm. 31.7.
in the midst of thy misery, with full assurance that he considers thy
trouble, and knows thy soul in adversities; for his eyes behold the Nations,
and his eye- lids do try the children of men: Isa. 40.28.
there is no searching of his understanding: Behold, his eye is upon them that
fear him, and that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, Psalm.
33.19.
and to keep them alive in famine. All people trust in the living Lord of
heaven and earth, have him alone to be your God, for he is the very God: The
Heathen gods have eyes, Psalm. 115.5.
and see not; Genesis 1.31.
but our God sees every thing that he has made, and his eyes behold all
Nations.

Let not the rebellious exalt themselves: they which are rebellious, let them
not be lifted up too much in themselves.] Pray for this unto the Lord, so often
as you hear of Nations rebelling against any Christian Country; for he alone
is able to tame, and spoil the stout- hearted, Psalm. 76.
and can cause the men of might to have no strength in their hands. Pray for
this unto him, so often as you see any proud persons exalt themselves against the
free passage of the Gospel; Romans 16.20
for he alone is able to bruise Satan himself, and to tread him down under
our feet. Pray for this unto him, when the enemy waxes still prouder; for
though he suffer them sometime to afflict us, Deu. 32.27
yet he cannot abide that they should behave themselves proudly, and strangely
against us. Pray for this unto him, even when thy sons and daughters are
arrogant and insolent: for he will either break them, because they are
rebellious, or if they belong to him, he will heal their rebellions.

O bless our God, Verse 48.
ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.] Gods holy ones are
so affected with desire to praise him, as they provoke all other also to praise
him. Have you no desire to praise God? Oh, how can you ask any mercy at his
hands? Is your desire to praise him so weak, as it moves you not to draw
others to this duty? Oh, how little reckoning make you of God, and of his
glory? and how careless are you of others salvation? Do you provoke others to
dishonor and blaspheme him? Oh, you do an abominable thing; such a
wickedness, as never did wicked Idolaters to their false gods. Beware of no
affection: beware of too little affection, and labor to this high affection
unto the praise of God, which will move you to exhort others to it, Psalm. 34.3.
saying, O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

Our God.] This is the glory of Gods people, that the Lord has made them so
near unto him as they may very boldly profess, and call him, Our God. Oh ye
hypocrites, this glory does not belong to you: if you call him, Matt. 7.21.
Our God, he denies it, saying, Away from me, ye workers of iniquity, I
know you not. Oh, you enemies to the true doctrine of Christ, this glory does
not belong to you; if you call him, Our God, he denies it, saying, Not I, but
your belly is your god, Phil: 3.19.
and your end damnation. Oh you worldlings, this glory belongs not to you,
ignorant, blind, and unbelieving souls: if you call him, Our God, he denies
it, saying, Not I, 2. Cor. 4.4.
but the Devil is your god. But, oh ye servants of the Lord, to you, even to
you does this glory belong, if you call him, Our God, he denies it not, but
answers, I am the Lord your God, Psalm. 81.10.
and you are my people. All that desire this glory, Hos. 2.23.
be his true servants, be in Christ, be in fellowship with his Church, then
may you say also, The Lord is Our God, even our own God: Psalm. 144.
then are you blessed, Oh blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. Romans
8.32.
Then are you protected. If God be on our side, who can be against us? Then
are you safe: Psalm. 48.14.
Our God will be our guide even unto death. Rejoice that the Lord is become
your God, prepare an habitation for him in your hearts, Exodus 15.2.
exalt him with your tongues, and call to others, saying, Bless our God,
bless our God, O ye people.

And make the voice of his praise to be heard.] This is the token that people
are come unto God, when they make others hear them praise God: they that make
others hear them praise Images, and superstitious Popish Ceremonies, show no
token that they are come unto God: they that make others hear them praise the
sinful pleasures of wicked lust, show no token that they are come unto God:
they that make others hear them, by swearing, and lying, and other sins,
blaspheme God, show no token of coming unto him: they that are afraid, and
ashamed to let others hear them profess, praise, and glorify God, show no
token that they are come unto him. But they that with zeal, modesty,
reverence, and sincerity do make others hear, and perceive that they do
acknowledge, honor, and praise God, do show a sufficient token that they are
indeed come unto him. Therefore, when the exercises of praising God are
performing, congregate together readily thereto, lurk no where in Kitchen, or
Hall, or Butterie, or Chamber, or Yard, or Street, or any where absent, which
is enough to make you suspected of irreligious hearts. But come forth all, and
come affected, and come prepared to pray together, to hear together, and to
sing together, that we may together bless our God, and make the voice of his
glorious praise heard, even his praise, [Which holds our soul in life.]
Verse. 9.
Even his praise, which has restored our soulevnto life: The restoring of our
souls unto life, and the holding of them in life, are special reasons to lead
us to praise God. Oh man, or woman, whose soul by sickness, or by the malice
of enemies, or by other evils has been compassed about with the sorrows of
hell, and been in the snares of death, and God of his marvelous goodness
has redeemed it, and restored unto life, and does still preserve, and keep
thee healthful, and alive: Do thou disobey this good God? do thou
dishonor him with thy life? do thou sin against him with the health and
liberty that he gives thee? do thou not praise him for his wonderful
kindness? O foolish body, and unwise, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
do you thus requite the Lord?

O ye righteous, be it far from you to be so ungracious: do not you so
requite the Lord; but remember all his benefits, Psalm. 107.
think upon all his goodness, and consider in particular, how when your
souls were in woeful misery, when your lives were in great ieopardie, your
troubles were sore, and many, he heard your cry, he sent you help from his
holy place, and he redeemed you from all your miseries; and it is he only
which holds our soul in life, and

Suffers not our feet to be moved.] They that do serve God faithfully, are
in the greatest safety. Ye bloody and deceitful men, why do you imagine
mischief against Gods faithful servants? They shall be as Mount Sion, Psalm.
125.1.
which cannot be remoned. Ye gates of hell, why do you offer violence to
Gods Saints? Ioh. 10.29.
They are in his hands, who is greater then all, and none can pluck them out.
Ye men on earth that desire to be safe, why do ye not turn from your sins,
and come to our God to serve him? Then you shall be safe, Psalm. 15.5.
and shall never be moved. Ye righteous, why are you afraid in any
condition, or for any man's threatening? Fear not, Psalm. 55.22.
faint not, cast your burden upon the Lord, he will sustain you, and will
never suffer you to be moved. Are we safe? Is our King safe? Is the Kings
son safe? Is our Land safe? Are our Preachers, and people safe? Are our
wives, and children safe? Are our goods and cattle safe? Give God alone the
glory, sing praise to his Name: Psalm. 36.6.44.4, 6, 7.
for he only saves us, he preserves man, and beast: Not our own arm, nor
our sword, but he himself has saved us from all our enemies, putting them to
shame that hated us: Psa. 18.34.56.13.
he inlargeth our steps under us, he holds our feet that they slip not, he
keeps them from falling, he sets them, 40.3.
as on a Rock, and suffers them not to be moved; and if at any time, 30.6, 7.
to check us for our security, and vain confidence, we be moved, and
troubled, it is only his gracious trial of us, that we might then look to
him, and say to him, In this also we acknowledge thine hand.

For thou, O God, have proved us: Verse 10.
thou have tried us, as Silver is tried.] Gods children can pick matter of
thanksgiving, and of consolation out of their affliction. O thou that
quarrellest at the godlies Religion, because of their tribulation, and scoffest
at their Profession, because of their affliction: their cross is better then
thy crown; their miscrie, then thy prosperity; their sorrows, then thy
pleasures. For thou pickest out of thine abundance, matter of irreligion, of
pride, of unthankfulness, of cruelty, of condemnation: but they out of their
sore affliction, matter of rejoicing, of thanksgiving, and of consolation.
Psalm. 73.21, etc.
O child of God, whose mind is grieved, who art pricked in thy reins, whose
flesh, and whose heart fails because of rebuke, and chastening; be no more so
foolish, so ignorant, and so like a beast before the Lord, regard and take out
this lesson, pick thou matter of comfort, and of thanksgiving out of thine
affliction.

But here must be grace, wisdom, experience, and observation: First, grace;
for if we be by faith in Christ entered into that grace, Romans 5.2, 3
wherein we stand under hope of Gods glory, then shall we even glory in
tribulations. Secondly, wisdom; for if we be truly wise, we shall understand
the easy and wealthy place of the ungodly to be so slippery, Psalm. 73.18.
and their end such infelicitie, and so unhappy, as we shall praise God that
we drink not of their full cup of prosperity, Heb. 11.25, 26.
and prefer the affliction of Gods people, before their sinful and short
pleasures; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the treasures
in Egypt. Thirdly, experience; for if we find the trial how God comfort us
in all our tribulation; 2. Cor. 1.4.
yea, so far as he makes us able to comfort them which are in any trouble,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of him, we shall get much
joy, and hope, and bless the Lord with great gladness. Fourthly, observation;
for if we observe, first, Who afflicts us, namely, our faithful Creator,
our heavenly Father, our own God, who may justly say, Mic. 6.3.
What unkindness have I ever done unto you? Wherein have I been any way
grievous unto you? 2. Cor. 1.31.
I have been always a Father of mercies unto you; a God of all comfort unto
you. I am the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9.
to whom you ought to be in subjection, much rather then to the fathers of your
flesh. Secondly, Verse. 7.8.
How he deals with us when he afflicts us, namely, he therein deals
with us, as with sons; not as with bastards, whose-fathers are ashamed to
have them under their nurture; but, as with natural, and legitimate children,
whom the parents nourish and chasten.

Thirdly, Out of what affection he af^licteth us, namely, out of his most
fatherly love. Prou. 3.12.
For whom he loves, he chasteneth, even as a father does that son in whom he
delights. Fourthly, His ordinary entering of us into his number, and into his
Kingdom, which is by afflictions: For every son, whom he receives, Heb.
12.7.
he scourges; Acts 14.22
and through much tribulation we must enter into his Kingdom. Fifthly, How he
afflicts us, namely, in measure, with such moderation, and mingling of mercy
with judgment, as, though we be sore chastened, Psa. 118.18
yet we are not killed: Lam. 3.22.
though we be sharply corrected, yet we are not consumed: 1. Cor. 10.13.
though the tentation be long, or great, yet we be made able to bear it.
Sixthly, What he does in afflicting us, namely, he proves us, he does not
provoke us like the Tempter, but proves us like a Father, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
that he may know, or that rather he may make it known to our selves, and to
our friends that joy at it, and to our foes that gnash their teeth at it, what
is in our hearts, and what care, and constancy there is in us to keep his
commandments. Seventhly, To what end he afflicts us, namely, to our profit,
and to do us good; Heb. 12.10 Deuteronomy. 8.16. and ver. 2.5. Isa. 27.9. Hos. 5.15.
1. Cor. 11.32. 2. Tim. 2.12
as to purge us: to humble us: to take away our sin: to nurture us: to draw
us to himself: to save us from the condemnation of this world: to make us
partakers of his own holiness: and to fit us to reign with him in his
Kingdom. Eightthly, How he esteems us, in afflicting us, namely, not as he
esteems the wicked, whom he takes away from the earth like dross: but as
he esteems his Saints, whom he keeps under his own wings, and in his
own hand, as precious gold: not as refuse silver, which he rejects; but as
fine silver, which he has tried, and fined for his own use. If we observe
all these, who sees not that we may pick out matter of consolation, and
thanksgiving out of our affliction, and rejoice that we are able to say,
Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is tried: thou have
magnisied us, Job 7.17, 18
in setting thine heart upon us, to visit us every morning, and to try us every
moment.

Thou broughtest us into the net: verse. 11.12.
thou laydst affliction upon our loins: Thou have caused men to ride over our
heads: we went throrow fire, and through water.] God does ofttimes exercise his
very dear children with very sore, and manifold affliction. Art thou
afflicted, O Christian? Look unto God, as Job did: as David did: Job 1.21.
Psa. 118.18. Dan. 9.12.
as Daniel did: as here the godly did: and confessing it to be he that has
brought thee unto it, that has laid it upon thee, that has caused men to do
it, consider it wisely: Eccl. 7.14. Iam. 4.7. Heb. 12.9.
submit thy self to it quietly: take it reverently: acknowledge it thankfully,
and bear it constantly; yea, Heb. 10.32, etc.
though thou know thine own innocence: for so he exercises often times his
dear, and his righteous children.

Art thou his obedient child? Job. 1.8. 1. Sam. 13.14. Dan. 9.23. Acts 9.15.
Mat. 3.17.
think it not strange, be not discomforted that thou art afflicted: Job
righteous: David a man after his own heart: Daniel, beloved: Paul, a chosen
vessel: Christ, his only Son, in whom he is well pleased: yet all these he
sorely afflicted. Being so; O ncere Christian, under his affliction, admire his
wisdom: think of the lot of thy fellow brethren: care not for the wickeds
vpbraiding: endure the vncharitables censuring: and refresh thine heart with
consolation, though, being one of his children, thou suffer sore affliction.

How sore is it, when he casts us as down on the ground, and (as it were)
throws us along under the most vile contempt of men, setting even Atheists,
and Sycophants (as it were) to tread and trample upon us, and to make us no
better then as mire under their very horses feet: exalting them on high above
us, and bringing us to most low and base estate: Dout. 28.43, 44.
and us the tail? when he puts us to the hardest pinches, pains and perils
that can be, and drives us through the most grievous extremities, and most
fearful calamities, to make us as hoplesse to escape, as they are the burning
that pass through a violent fire; or they drowning, that go through a deep
gulf of water? Therefore, O beloved Christian, art thou in any affliction? 1.
Pet. 4.12. and 5.9. Heb. 12.3, 5.
think it no news; think it not thine alone case; think it not strange; be
not weary of it; do not faint; distrust not; despair not: Acts 16.25
sing in thy prison; rejoice in thy dungeon; refuse not to take comfort; yea,
remember thy lesson;

That God, even our most gracious God, often times does exercise his very dear
children with very great affliction: and not only so, but also with manifold
affliction; Deuteronomy. 28.15, etc.
afflictions of the body by aches, pains, sicknesses, diverse diseases;
afflictions of the name, by infamies, reproaches, and all bad reports:
affliction of the goods, by losses, by thefts, by robberies, by debts, by
sundry casualties: affliction of the mind, by terrors, by fears, by
discontentments, by discomforts in husband, or in wife, or in children, or in
servants, or in neighbors, or in friends: affliction of every kind, nets to
ensnare us, burdens to oppress us, men to tyrannize over us, fire to burn
us, water to drown us.

O Christian man, or woman, is thine affliction not only sore, but also
manifold? Fret not thy self for all this: Psalm. 37.8.
consent not in any wise to do evil: forget not Gods Name: Psalm. 44.17, 18, 20.
deal not falsely in his Covenant: let not thine heart turn back, nor thy
steps decline from his way, Heb. 10.35, 36, 37, 38.
nor stretch out thine hands to a strange god: cast not away thy confidence:
live by faith patiently and joyfully; and to this end remember that thy
confidence has great recompense of reward: remember, that after long patience,
thou shall receive the promise: remember, that many are the troubles of the
righteous: Psalm. 34.19.
remember, that yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry.

Only, see thou be not the cause of thine own affliction, as wicked sinners
are, as companions of the wicked are, Pro. 13.20. 1. Cor. 11.30 Ps. 107.17
and as careless Christians are: for then thou art a fool; then thy best
comfort in thine affliction is to repent of thy transgression, Ier. 17.16.
and to crave pardon. Again, see that thou desire not affliction; for though
God please to send it, he will cause it to work to thy best: Romans 8.28.
yet if thou wilfully desire it, he may leave thee to thy self, and so thou will pervert it to thy worst: it shows faith and obedience, wisely to bear
it; but shows arrogance and vain confidence, to desire it. Also marvel not,
that God exercises his children often times with sore affliction, when they
would feign be in liberty and freedom; for it is his will: and who should have
their will; the Father, or the Child? Parents ought to show, and mainetaine
their own right will against the child's wicked, or wanton will; yea, though
the child do pet at it, and be sick at it, etc. Otherwise (as lamentable
experience shows) the child's wills fulfilling, is the parents shame, smart,
pain, and undoing. Now our heavenly Father, whose will is most holy, and who
knows that his childrens willed liberty, and wished freedom would be many
times abused to his dishonor, therefore chooses rather to his glory and their
good, to cross their indiscreet and childish will in denying them ease, and
freedom; and to do his own will in exercising them with sore affliction. Isa.
30.18.
O behold his goodness and wisdom herein! for all this is that he may have
the fittest occasion to be gracious unto us: this he even waits for, and this
these holy ones so experienced, as they have left a worthy confession of it,
saying,

But at length thou broughtest us into a wealthy place.] After God has tried
his children by affliction, Psalm. 103.9.
he brings them out into the ways of consolation: he afflicts them, he
childeth them, he is angry with them, he brings them into the Net, he
abaseth them, he commits them to the fire, he casts them into the water, he
does try them by affliction, but not always. Oh afflicted Christian, be
patient, though the Rod of the wicked come upon thee, Psalm. 125.25
it shall not rest upon thee: be content, though thou be in trouble, thy
trouble shall not last ever: be cheerful, though thou be in poverty, in
debt, in misery, thou shall come out: be of comfort, though it be long, Pro.
23.18.
yet there will be an end, and thy hope shall not be cut off: be thankful,
and wait still on God, and let thy Soul keep silence unto him.

For after he has tried his Children by affliction, he brings them into the
ways of consolation, he his own self does it: he brought Israel out of
Egypt, Exo. 20.2. Acts 7.10.
Joseph out of Prison, David out of all his troubles; these out of the Net, out
of the Fire, out of the Water: and he his own self brings all his Children
out of their affliction. O thou good Christian, whom God has brought into any
grievous condition, Psalm. 123.2.
even as the eyes of the Servant look to receive help from the hand of his
own Master, and as the eyes of the Maiden are lifted up to the hand of her
own Mistress: So lift up thine eyes, and expect deliverance from Gods own
self: he himself has wounded thee, and he himself will heal thee: he
himself has cast thee down, and he himself will raise thee up.

Thou shall not need to cry to any Creatures in Heaven or in Earth: Oh who
will help me? Who will heal me? Who will comfort me? Who will deliver me?
for he Himself will do it: as in afflicting thee, he gives not his Authority
to another: so in releasing thee, he will not give his glory to another:
Rejoice in the Net he has brought thee into; rejoice in the affliction he has
laid upon thy loins; rejoice in the riding of men over thine head; rejoice in
the fire ready to burn thee, and in the water ready to drown thee, for he
himself will bring thee out, even he, to whose help thou may most
confidently trust. Vain is the help of Man, Psalm. 60.11.
but he is a sure Helper, he is a sure deliverer, he is a sure comforter; his
power is a sure power, his willingness is a sure willingness, his promise is
a sure promise, his mercies are sure mercies; Isa. 55.3.
they shall not be ashamed that wait on him, they shall not be forsaken that
seek him, he will never fail them that trust in him: but after, for his own
glory and their good, he has tried them some while by affliction, he will in
due time, even in due time, bring the^ out into consolation.

O Christian, though yet thou be chastened every morning, do not say, Psa.
73.13.
I have washed mine hands in Innocence, and cleansed mine heart in vain: do not
not say, The Lord has forgotten to be merciful: do not say, 116.11.
They that prophecy of future comfort unto thee, are Liars: do not say, thy way
is hidden from the Lord: Isa. 40.27.
do not say, thy Judgment is passed over of thy God: Psalm. 97.11.
but believe that light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart, and in due season, such shall reap a pleasant crop: Psa.
30.5, 11.
believe that at length he will turn thy mourning into rejoicing, and thine
heaviness into gladness: though weeping endure all the night, yet joys shall
come in the morning: 126.5, 6.
Though thou do now sow in tears, yet hereafter thou shall reap in comfort:
he will bring thee out of borrowing, into the ability for lending; out of
present misery, into permanent felicity; out of a poor, sick, desolate and
doleful case, into a delightful and wealthy enclosure.

And when this is not according to thy expectation in Earth, remember the
infinite and endless Consolation prepared, and reserved for thee in Heaven:
16.9, 11.
and let thine heart be glad, and thy glory rejoice, and thy flesh rest in hope
of that fullness of joy, and of those pleasures at his right hand for evermore.

I will go into thine house with burnt Offerings. Verse. 13.
God delivering his people out of affliction, moves some in particular to
greater zeal of the duties of Religion. Oh see the contrariety of some in
affliction! they seem full of Devotion; but no sooner delivered, they return
again to their vain conversation: these are even such as God says, Ier. 2.30.
receive no correction: they are such as have not upright hearts with him:
Psalm. 78.37. Isa. 1.5. Hos. 4.14.
they are such as provoke him to strike them no more as his children, but let
them alone as bastards unto destruction. Oh, happy are we, if we be not of the
number of these, but of such as in their own particular are moved to be more
zealous in the duties of Religion, after they see how comfortably God has
brought them out of affliction: here is more then common grace; for such are
very rare; here is true Wisdom; for after a wise man is rebuked, Pro. 9.8.
he will love more: here is right profiting by afflliction; for after such
are afflicted, Ps. 119.67, 71. Psame 116.12.
they learn and keep Gods Word the better: Here is a thankful mind indeed:
for such are zealous of Gods praise; such study what to render unto God; such
desire to express their thankfulness in the presence of all Gods people;
such make haste to meet the Lord in his worship, saying even to himself, I
will go into thine House.

Oh man and woman, that art willing to go into the Tavern, and into the
Alehouse, but unwilling to go into Gods House: How foolish art thou to go
like the evil servant, Mat. 24.49.
to eat and drink with the drunken, and to sit among Hypocritical Scoffers,
and to refuse to go like the Servants of God to his House, to sing and pray
with his Children, and to hear his holy Ministers? Oh thou that art willing to
go into the gaming house, but not into Gods House! How foolish art thou to go
like the ding-thrift, to spend the precious time, and thy needful goods with
the profane, unto thy undoing, and to refuse to go like the Prudent, Pro.
23.23.
to buy the truth, and get grace unto health, and wealth, and salvation? Oh
thou that art willing to go into the Harlots house, but not into Gods House!
How foolish art thou to go like a Fool to the Stocks, Pro. 7.22.
and like an Ox to the slaughter, unto the house that leads to death, and to
refuse to go like the Wise and Religious, unto the House that leads unto
Happiness, Comfort, and eternal Life?

Oh man or woman that art willing to go into Gods House, that love the place
where his Honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8. Psa. 84.1, 2.
that hold his Tabernacles amiable, that feel thy soul longing, and
fainting for the Courts of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1
that art glad to hear and see others willing to go unto his House, Psalm. 27.4.
that desire to dwell all the days of thy life in his House; how prudent and
how wise art thou? for there thou shall behold the beauty of the Lord, enquire
at his mouth, Romans 10. Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 84.4, 11.
hear the happy tidings of peace and of good things, be satisfied with
goodness, be ever praising of God; there God will be the Sun and the Shield
unto thee; there he will give thee grace and glory; Psalm. 63.5.
there he will feed thy Soul with better then marrow and fatness, there will
he hide thee in his Pauilion, and in the secret of his Tabernacle in the time
of trouble.

With burnt Offerings will I go, Ver. 13.15.
I will offer unto thee burnt Sacrifices of fat Rams, with Incense: I will
prepare Bullocks with Goats in abundance.] The godly worship God personally,
rightly, delightfully, and plenteously: Personally, for they come, and they
offer in their own persons: Rightly, for they offer to God that which he
prescribes, then Legal, now Evangelical Sacrifices: Delightfully, for they
offer with Incense, Exo. 30.34.
with artificial and most pleasant persume of sweet Spices: under the Law,
with spiritual most pleasant perfume of Christ's most sweet intercession, and
of the most sweet grace of his Spirit under the Gospel: Plenteously, for they
offer not a Ram, 1. Chr. 29.21.
or a Bullock, or a Goat, but Rams, Bullockes, and Goats, many Offerings
and many Sacrifices.

O you that come not to appear before the Lord in the assemblies of his people
personally: how saucy and vnreuerent is this? Not a pretended necessity, to
ride out to see your purchase; Luke 14.18, 19, 20.
nor the desire to go try your yoke of Oxen newly bought; nor your reason to
tarry at home with your late wedded wife, will serve to excuse it. Oh, you that
come, and do offer, but not rightly, in that you offer not that which he
prescribes, but your own fancied repetitions, your own supposed good
intents: how unjust, how uncomely is this? Mat. 15.9. 1. Sa^. 15.23 Eccl. 5.1.
This worship, is a worship in vain: this service, is a rebellion and
stubbornenesse: this offering, is a sacrifice for fools: this doing, is doing
of evil. Oh, you that offer, but not delightfully, not with incense, not in
Christ's name; not in sincerity; not with grace in your hearts: how
unprofitable, and how unacceptable is this? You keep back Gods part, his
portion, his delight, and so (without you repent) you shall find him another
day, as Nadab and Abihu partly found him, Leu. 10.2.
that is, a consuming fire. Hob. 12.28, 29.
Oh, you that come and offer to God, but not plentifully, but empty- hearted,
grudgingly, with weariness, and snuffing at it, even snuffing at the pure, and
plentiful worship of God, disdaining that he should be so plenteously made
known by his Preachers, and his Word so powerfully taught by them! how ungodly?
how crooked? and how unthankful is this? Mal. 1.6, 7, 8, 10, 14. and 2.2.
The Lord holds this a despising of his Name, and a contemning of his Table.
He has no pleasure in such worshippers, he accepts no such offerings, he
reckons such offerers, deceivers, he curses them, and their blessings.

Oh, you therefore that fear God, follow the example of the godly Prophet;
come (especially on the Sabbaths) and appear personally before the Lord, to
worship him in your own persons. For thus do all his Saints, they all sit
down at his feet, Deuteronomy. 33.3.
that every one of them may receive of his words: Psalm. 84.7.
every one of them appears before him in Sion. Come, and offer to him the
sacrifices which he prescribes: so did the godly under the Law; so do you
under the Gospel, worship him rightly: then they gave him the burnt offerings
of fat Rams, Bulls, and Goats: now give him that which is your reasonable
service of him; even in all thankfulness for all his mercies toward you in
Christ Jesus; Romans 12.1.
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to him. Come, and
worship him delightfully, pray, give him thanks, hear his Word, receive his
Sacraments with holy incense, with a pure mind, 1. Tim. 2.8.
with truth in the inward affections, Psa. 51.6. Heb. 12.28 Col. 3.17.
with grace in your hearts, and in the Name of the Lord Jesus. For this he
loves; this is pleasing unto him; in this he delights; this makes our
sacrifices acceptable unto him. Come, and worship him plenteously: as they
prepared many Rams, and Bulls, and Goats to offer unto him; so prepare to bring
in your prayers, plentiful devotion; in your thankesgiuings, plentiful
affection; in your hearing his Word, plentiful attention; in receiving his
Sacraments, plentiful feeling; and in dedicating your whole life, and self
unto him, plentiful and unwearied application.

I will pay thee my vows, Verse 14.
which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble, or
affliction.] What the godly promise God in their debts, sickness, or any
other misery, they are careful to perform in their wealth, health, and
liberty. Oh thou man, or woman that did vow, and promise to God, that if he
brought thee out of debt, thou would never be a vain companion, a
careless waster, an idle walker, vnthristie, ungodly any more; Pro. 3.9. Psalm.
16.3.
but honor him with thy substance, and extend thy liberality to his Saints!
O, thou that did in thy sore sickness promise and vow unto him, that if he
brought thee to health again, thou would never neglect the Church, neglect
hearing his Word, profane his holy day, swear, lie, keep ill company, be
unruly any more; but fear, honor, serve him, live like a good Christian all
thy life! O, thou that did in any kind of distress, trouble, or misery
promise and vow unto him, that if he would deliver thee, thou would never
be irreligious, unholy, wicked, disobedient any more; but do all such duties,
observe all such orders, follow all such Ways as most agree to his holy will,
and Word, and glory! And has he been kind unto thee, according to thy
necessities? and have not thou paid thy vows unto him, which thy lips uttered
in thine affliction? but denied, neglected, or forgotten the same?

Oh, how unjust, how unthankful, how ungodly, how dishonest, how shameful is
this? So to promise, was as little as thou could do; and will thou not
respect to do so little for God, that has done so much for thee, as to
endeavor to perform thy promise? Thou would have given any thing, and been
at any cost to have bin delivered; GOD has done it freely for thee, and do
thou deny to pay him thy vowed service? Whom will thou regard? Isa. 57.11.
To whom will thou keep thy word, since thou lie unto God? Thou can no way
excuse thy self: Eccles. 5.2, etc.
if thou plead rashness, and haste; oh, how durst thou be rash and hasty, to
speak thou could not tell what unto the high God of Heaven? If thou
confess it was thy folly; why, he has no pleasure in fools. If thou think
it no great matter, thou deceiuest thy self, in promising without conscience
to perform; thy mouth has caused thy whole self to stand guilty of much
sin: better it had been (though that would have witnessed thine
unthankfulness, and forgetting of God) that thou had not vowed, then to vow,
and not to pay.

Oh, Christian, do thou both, vow, and pay: God by troubles and afflictions
does (as it were) call thee, and even importune thee to vow someting unto him;
as some lawful, allowed and prescribed testimony of thy thankfulness: if thy
lips have uttered, and thy mouth has advisedly, reverently, and holily spoken
some vow unto his Majesty, in the day of thy misery; see that thou carefully
perform it, as soon as he grants thee any delivery. If a filthy fornicatour,
and a rebellious fornicatresse, pretend conscience of keeping their abominable
vow against all GODS forbid; Judge. 11.3.
if Micha's mother, making a mad vow to make a graven image for her son, was
so diligent to perform it; oh, how careful should we be to pay our lawful
and holy vows, a part of his worship unto GOD? Precept, praise, peace,
pattern, and profit requires this at us. Precept of GOD; for he commands
us to pay our vows unto him, Eccl. 5.4.
and that quickly, without delay. Praise; Psalm. 65.1.
for this is a part of the praise given to Sion, that in it the vow shall be
performed unto GOD. Peace; Deu. 23.21
for if we have speedily paid that we vowed, our conscience shall excuse us of
that inquiry, and that sin, that otherwise we are guilty of. Pattern; Genesis
28.20
for this is exemplified to us in Iaakob; in Israel; in David; in Hannah; Number.
21.2. Psalm. 116.
and all other holy ones: and paying our vows to God, we follow their godly
example. Profit; for if we pay our vows to GOD, 1. Sam. 1.11
he will still give us more blessings, and make us have such experience of his
goodness, as each one of us shall have cause to say,

Come, and hear, all ye that fear God, Verse 16.
and I will tell you what he has done for my soul.] The knowledge of Gods
goodness to his people in general, moves the true godly to note what it is
to themselves in particular. Oh, beware here of the most fearful spirit of
some; I mean of the spiteful wicked: for when they see GODS goodness to his
people, Ps. 112.10.
they be grieved at it, they gnash their teeth for anger, and they melt away
with envy: which shows that they are inspired with the malice of the Devil:
for from the beginning, he and his have been so hellishly-minded. But behold,
and take your mark by it: the true godly put the sight, and knowledge of this
to a most worthy and excellent use: for it moves them to note, what Gods
goodness is to their very selves in their own particular.

Oh Christian, do thou so: have thou heard what great, excellent, wonderful,
and what comfortable things, God in all ages has done for his people, to
witness his mercy, love, righteousness, and truth unto them, and to make them
hope in him, trust in his Name, serve him, and be assured that they are blessed
of him? Oh think, and observe what he has done also for thy person! Oh, if
thou can tell of none, but common to every creature, yea and to the unjust,
as well as to the just, then thy case is vnco^fortable: but if thou find, that
to thee also he does communicate his special kindness, and his singular
favor; then thou have that which is for comfort, for rejoicing, for assurance,
and for instruction: for comfort, because thereby thou see that God comforts
thee, as one of his own, by doing for thee, as for his very own. For
rejoicing, because thereby God gives thee reason to sing with blessed Mary,
Luke 1.46.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
for he has done great things for me. For assurance, because thereby thou art
assured, that God remembers thee with the favor of his own people, Psalm.
106.4, 5.
and makes thee see the felicity of his chosen. For instruction, because
thereby thou art fitted to relate the goodness of the Lord unto others out of
thy own experience.

Come, and hear, and I will tell you, what God has done for my soul.] He
that is guided by a right spirit, is careful to use all good means to bring
others comfort. Oh, the scarefull carriage of such as be guided by a froward,
and unclean spirit, as Cain, Saul, Doeg, Judas, and the like: for these use
what means they can to bring to others, and especially to the godly,
discomfort. Oh, happy are they that are guided by a right spirit: for they
seek every way to comfort others, chiefly such as are godly: they lead a life
to comfort them, perform good actions to comfort them, and they lay up words
to comfort them: they even purpose to relate what sweetness they have found in
Gods goodness toward their own souls, unto other Christians to rejoice, and
solace their holy minds therewith: Act. 14.26, 27.
so did Paul, and Barnabas to the Church at Antioch: so did Peter to the
Christians in the house of Mary praying together: 12.12, 17.
teaching us the like zeal, delight, love, and desire to comfort others, David
stands forth and says to the godly,

Come, and hear, all ye that fear God.] It is a Christians duty to hear of
Gods private and special benignity. O worldling, thou sauourest nothing,
Psalm. 4.7.
but this transitory world: O profane person, Act. 18.15.
thou hold such questions, nothing but vain words, and idle names: O
hypocrite, thou (measuring another by thy line) accountest such relation, but
vain glory: O sincere Christian, it is my duty to declare it, Psalm. 25.12,
14.
and thine to hear it; for thou fear God, and so ought to have the
special things of God revealed unto thee: thou fear God, and so wilt be
glad to hear how kind God has been unto me: Ps. 119.74.
thou fear God, and so wilt cheer thine own soul with that comfort which
thou hear that God has given to another soul.

And I will declare what he has done for my soul.] It agrees to true
piety, to declare our own experience of Gods special mercy. O man, or woman,
to whom God has been specially merciful, Psa. 106.7, 21.
and thou have not understood it: O thou to whom he has vouchsafed a multitude
of mercies, and thou have not remembered them: O thou, for whom he has done
great things, and thou have forgotten him: O thou, Psalm. 147.
with whom he has dealt more graciously, then with many others, and thou do
not so much as think, or speak of it: O thou, Deuteronomy. 32.
whom he has crowned with rare benignities, and thou have lightly esteemed
both himself, and his benefits: how perverse, froward, and impious is this thy
dealing? Many would feign see that, which God has offered thee to see, and
cannot: many would feign hear that, which thou might hear, and may not:
many would turn unto God, and love him, and praise him, if those glorious
things, mighty works, and gracious doctrines were uttered to them, that have
been plentifully showed unto thee: woe unto thee for thine ingratitude, woe
unto thee for thine impiety.

O Christian, be it otherwise with thee; Genesis 45. Exodus 18.1. Sam. 1. Luke 1.
1. Tim. 1. Psa. 40.10.
show thy piety, by declaring thine own experience of Gods special mercy, as
Joseph did: as Moses did: as Hannah did: as Mary did: as the Apostle did: hide
not his righteousness within thine heart: conceal not his loving kindness, but
declare his mercy, and his salvation. Thou declarest to thy wife, or to thy
neighbor, thy experience of some friends special friendlynesse; O how much
more should thou, to win them to God also, declare to wife, and family,
and neighbors, thine experience of Gods special mercy? Imitate this holy man,
saying: Come, let your work alone a little while; come, let your business
stay a little while; come, leave off your other communication a little while;
come, sit down by me, and give ear a while to what I shall tell you, and
hear, and I will tell you excellent, admirable, comfortable things, even

What God, has done for my soul.] Much of our bounden praise of God, consists
in an holy observation, and faithful mention of our own part, in the
particular goodness of God. O thou, whom God does not afford the matter of
such observation: O thou, to whom God gives no cause of any such mention: Hos.
4.17.
but lets thee alone, like Ephraim, like those blind leaders: leaves thee in
fearful hunger, Mat. 15.14
thirst, shame, sorrow of heart, and vexation of spirit, Isa. 65.
like those that forsake him: suffers thee to walk in thine own ways, like
all the Heathen of old time: Act. 14.16
gives thee up unto vile affections, and to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.26, 28.
like those unreasonable Idolaters: thou can not sing of his Name, thou can
not praise him, thou can not glorify him; but clean contrary. And this is
the punishment, the plague, the judgment of God, that thou can be merry,
but not in him: thou can rejoice, but not in him: thou can show testimonies
of his wrath against thy soul, but thou can not tell of any grace he has
given to thy soul.

O happy Christian, remember wherein thy bounden thanks to God, and the
plentiful argument of thy praising of him consists, namely, in thy holy
observation, and faithful mention of thy own part in his particular
goodness. O how great is his goodness, Psa. 31.19.
that he has laid up for them that fear him! Be thou wise to observe thy
part in it, Ps. 107.42.
that thou may understand the Lords loving kindness unto thy soul: observe
whether thou can say with the Prophet; Come and hear, all you that fear
God, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul.

He has chosen me, Psalm. 4.3.
and set me apart for himself: In the Volume of his Book of Life, 40.7.
my Name is written in Heaven: 23.3. 31.7.
He has converted, and restored my soul: He has known my soul in
adversity: Psalm. 30.3.
He has brought my soul from the grave: 86.13.
He has delivered my soul from the lowest hell: 71.17.
He himself has taught me, 32.5.
even from my youth: He has forgiven mine iniquity, 103.10, 13
and my sin: He has not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me
according to mine iniquities: As a father pittieth his children, so he has
pitied me: 118.6, 7, 21.
He is on my side, he takes my part: He is become my salvation: He vpholdeth
me in mine integrity: 41.12.
I was brought low, and he helped me: 116.6.
Sometime he has showed me great, 71.20.
and sore troubles; but he has by and by quickened me again: He has brought
me up again out of my deep miseries: He has increased mine honor: He has
returned to comfort me on every side: He has healed all my diseases: 103.3.
He has delivered my soul from death, 116.8.
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.

I cried unto him with my mouth, Verse 17.
and I was exalted for the words of my tongue.] I cried earnestly unto him in
my grievous misery, and because I prayed without doubting, in a steadfast faith,
he lifted me up out of all my fears: He has delivered me, 71.3.
and caused me to escape: He has given commandment to save me: 139.17, 18
O how precious are his thoughts unto me! how great is the sum of them! If I
should count them, they are more in number then the sand: Psa. 116.7, 23, 6.
He has dealt so bountifully with me, as surely goodness, and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, and I shall even dwell in his House for
ever.

Can thou tell all this the Lords admirable doing to thy soul (as every
experienced Christian can?) see thou declare it, to shewthine abundant
rejoicing in God: to magnify his benignity: to glorify his Name: and that
sincerely, conscionably, reverently; and as David did, which was both (as Gods
Saints use) to utter forth abundantly the mention of Gods great goodness: 145.7.
and also to show (contrary to carnal men's thoughts) how rich God is to all
that call upon him, sets his heart upon them, cares for them, and prefers
them.

If I regard iniquity in mine heart, Verse 18.
the Lord will not hear me.] The godly apply that unto themselves, if they
become like the wicked, which God speaks properly of them that be wicked. Oh,
the unbelief of wicked ones indeed! for these will not believe the
threatenings, that properly are threatened against them: they persuade
themselves, Ier. 5.12, 13
that no evil shall come upon them; they be conceited that they shall never see
the judgments denounced; they hold the Preachers Words, prophesying the same
to be an empty wind: Yea that the Preachers themselves shall sooner smart then
they: they bless themselves in their own minds; they say in their own
thoughts, We shall have peace, Deu. 29.19
though we walk in the imagination of our own hearts. O intolerable
blindness! O high presumption! Hence they add drunkenness to their thirst;
run with the Thief; Psalm. 50.18 19, 20, 21. Eccl. 11.8.
partake with the adulterer; have hearts set on them to do evil; do never
think and say in themselves upon the hearing or sight how God plagues such as
they are, Certainly if I be still such a one, God will plague me also in the
end, and more and more harden their hearts. O the fearful effects of the
wicked and unbelievers of that which GOD has set down as their doom; and yet
this is not near all: Pro. 28.15. Ier. 5.12. Deu. 23.20.
for hence they fall into more evil, they do even belie God himself, and God
denies them his mercy, besides, hence they cannot repent.

But the true godly believes and applies to himself, if he do that which is
wicked, even the same punishment which God himself speaks properly to them
that are wicked: he expects no other, he looks for no toleration, he hopes
for no dispensation: he says with Job, If I sin with the vain persons, Job
3.1.
or the deceivers, or the adulterers, or the cruel Masters, or the
oppressors, or the vncharitables, or the vniusts, or the idolatrous covetous
ones, or the ungodly worldlings, or the spiteful euious ones, or the churlish
Nabals, or the common sorts sin, or any sin; the plagues of such sinners
will come upon me. He says with the Church, If I deal falsely in Gods
Covenant; Psalm. 44.17, 18, 20, 21.
if I turn back, if I forget his Name, if I lift up my hands to a strange
god, he has said, He will search out such sinners to punish them, and therefore
I shall not escape, but he will surely search me, and my sin out also. He
says with David, God has said, Isa. 1.15.
When the wicked do spread forth their hands, I will hide mine eyes from them;
when they make many prayers, I will not hear them. Joh. 9.
I do not hear sinning sinners; therefore, If I regard wickedness in mine
heart, I believe that I shall fare alike; out of all doubt he will not hear me.

Thus the truly godly apply Gods threatenings to themselves; and that, because
of their belief, and their experience; they belecue that he is so true, as he
will not break any of his words; they believe that he is so holy, as he cannot
endure any to have access unto him in their sins; they believe he is so just,
as he judges without respect of person; Josh. 22.20.
they observe in their own experience, how, as God has threatened, even so he
has executed upon them that have sinned.

Oh the happy, and blessed fruits of the godlies belief of Gods judgment,
even upon themselves, if they fall unto sin! Hence they stay themselves from
yielding to temptations, saying: Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? Hence, though they
endure never so much affliction, yet they hold faithful, Psalm. 44.17.
saying: All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee. Hence they
labor to prevent sin in their brethren, lest they be judged together with
them, saying, to those that they think are reuolting, Iesh. 22.17.
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed
until this day; but that ye must turn away from God, and so you rebelling to
day, to morrow his wrath will come upon us all? saying, to them that break the
Sabbath; Neh. 13.17, 18.
What evil thing is this that ye do? Did not your Fathers thus, and did not
God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more wrath
upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath. Hence they live always in fear to
offend, 1. Pet. 1.17.
saying, Since we call him Father, that judges without respect of person,
according cording to every man; work, let us pass the time of our soiourning
here in fear. Hence the Prophet says, I will wash mine hands in innocence,
and so compass Gods Altar.

The Lord will not hear me.] They are in woeful misery, whose hearts regard
iniquity. O man, or woman, whose heart imagines that which is evil: because
thou art in health, in peace, in wealth, in prosperity, at hearts-ease; do
thou think that thou art not in misery? Yes, yes, thou art in woeful misery.
For because thine heart deuiseth, nourishes, and regards iniquity, the Lord
does not hear thee: this is thy misery, and this is a grievous misery; Genesis 4.
This was the misery of Cain, that God would not hear him. This is the misery
of such as hear not Gods Word to obey it, Prou. 28.9.
that God hears not their prayer, but holds it abomination; Jer. 14.11, 12.
this is the misery of such as fall away from God, that he will neither hear
their own prayers, nor have his Prophets pray for them; this is the misery of
such as refuse to be reclaimed from their old customs, vanities, and sollies,
Prou. 1.28.
that though they come in their extremities, and call earnestly, and seek
early unto God for mercy, he will not be found of them, he will not answer
them, he will not hear them; this is the misery of such, as for all Gods
continual pains, and care, and cost in bringing them up like children, Isa.
1.2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
yet they rebel against him; that he delights not in their sacrifices; that
he is displeased with their appearing before him, that he accounts their
offerings and their incense abomination; that he cannot away with their holy
days, their Sabbaths, their solemn meetings; that he hates their high
times, takes them a trouble to him, is weary of them, cannot bear them, and
that he hides his eyes from them, and will not hear their prayers. Oh
consider this, thou, whose heart is full of wickedness, whose heart regards
neither piety, truth, or mercy, but iniquity, ungodliness, vanity: consider
and see, if this be not a sure, and heavy misery, that the Lord will not hear
thee.

O believe, as thou ought, that it is a grievous misery indeed: for what is
a more grievous misery, then Gods most severe judgment? and as the foresaid
places do prove, it is one of his threatened fearful judgments; such a
judgment, as makes the godly lament, saying, (...). 3.8.
When I cry, and shout, he shuts out my prayer: such a judgment, as make
us unto our selves comfortless. For what comfort can we have, when we cannot
have comfort in God? And what comfort can we have in him, while he will not
hear us? Such a judgment, as makes us unto others helpelesse: for what help
can we give them, when we can procure no help to them from God? And how can we
procure help to them from him, when he will not hear us? such a judgment, as
denies us hope of all benefits for body, and soul: for what hope can we have
to obtain any of them, when God, at whom we seek them, and of whom alone we
must receive them, will not hear us? Such a judgment, as presages to us
final exclusion: for what can we look for, but that in the end God will say
to us, Away from me ye workers of iniquity?

But, blessed Christian, Romans 13.12
that have so cast off the works of darkness: washed, Jsa. 1.16.
and made clean thy self: put away the evil of thy works out of Gods sight:
ceased to do evil: Ps. 73.13.
cleansed thine heart from the wickedness, and hypocrisy thereof: abandoned
the love of iniquity: thou escapest this woeful misery, and thou partakest his
most comfortable mercy: Ioh. 9.31.
for be hears thy prayers; Isa. 65.24.
even while thou art speaking, he will hear, and before thou call, Pro.
15.8.
he will answer; yea, thy prayer is his delight.

O here is a mercy indeed: such a mercy, as intitles the Lord himself with
that honorable description; O thou that hear Sions prayer: Psalm. 65.2.
such a mercy, 1. Kings 8.30, 32, 34.36, 39, 43, 45, 49.
as in the dedication of the Temple King Solomon chiefly prayed for saying, to
every kind of occasion of prayer; Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place:
Such a mercy, as makes us able to comfort our selves in God in all our
necessities: such a mercy, as arms us against discomfort in all miseries: such
a mercy, as makes us hopeful of all temporal and eternal blessings.

For whom he promises so to hear, he hears to the purpose indeed: Psalm.
34.17.
as it is said, The righteous cry, 145.19.
and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles. They that
fear him, cry, and he hears their cry, and saves them. They ask, and he
grants: they seek, and he lets them find: they knock, and he opens unto
them: they pray, and he gives them good things: they desire, and he gives
them the Holy Ghost. This mercy is most worthy to be noted; this favor is most
worthy to be observed; this blessing the holy Prophet took such notice of, as
he was able to say: Verse 19.
But verily God has heard me, he has attended unto the voice of my prayer.]

Oh, Psalm. 65.2.116.1.4.3.6.8, 9. Exodus 8.8.
this moves them to come unto him constantly: this moves them to love him
dearly: this assures them, that he highly regards them: this comfort
them against their enemies: this causes others to honor them, 1. Sam. 7.8.
Ioh. 9.31.
with craving their prayers: this witnesses that they obey his Word, that they
worship him, 1. Ioh. 3.22.5.14.
that they do his will, that they do the things which please him: that they
pray according to his will: that the Spirit prays in, and for them. Romans 8.27.
This makes them the mostprofit able members in a family, in a town, in a
city, in a kingdom: this proves to themselves, and others, their integrity, and
upright heart with God, and that (notwithstanding, through humane frailty they
err in many things) they cherish no hypocrisy, they digest no wickedness,
they purpose no evil in their hearts. This special benefit David got, by
observing how God heard his prayers, and thence reasoned, saying, If I regard
iniquity in mine heart, God will not hear me: but verily God has heard me,
and attended unto the voice of my prayer: therefore, who dare say, that I
regard any iniquity in my heart? Lastly, this observation provoke (as it
ought) the true godly, to great thankfulness; as it did this holy man, saying:

Blessed be God, Verse 20.
which has not put back my prayer from him; nor his mercy from me.] Gods not
refusing our prayers, and his not withholding his mercy from us, requires
special thanksgiving at us. O they, that have had much, and long experience,
how God has not put back their prayers, nor kept away his mercy from them;
and yet the time is to come that they have made, even very this point, an
argument of thanksgiving. O this, even this one neglected, this one unknown,
this one forgotten duty, puts them into the guilt of much iniquity; as the
guilt of presuming, that God owes them the hearing of their prayers, and that
he owes them his mercy: the guilt of esteeming, that it is no such great
matter, that he turns not away their prayers from him, or his mercy from them:
the guilt of not reckoning these among Gods special benefits: the guilt of
ignorance, that these are worthy signs of his goodness, and do deserve high
account, much praise, and great thankfulness.

Therefore, O Christian, if this have been thy guilt, repent unfeignedly
thereof; show thy self sorrowful before God for it; make suite to him for the
pardon hereof: and remembering, that ever since thou wast called, thou have
been a petitioner unto him; remembering, that thou have made innumerable
requests to him; remembering, that he might justly have excepted against thy
petitions, for diverse wants in the best of them; remembering, that thou art most
unworthy to utter thy mind unto his most high Majesty; remembering, that thou
art not worthy of the very least of his daily, hourly, continual, corporal,
spiritual, necessary, more necessary, most necessary innumerable mercies, that
he has showed, does show, and according to his faithful promise will show
unto thee.

Remember these things, and then think; how for all thy often coming, thy
never ceasing to ask at him thy manifold wants, thy great unworthiness; yet,
though a father, a mother, a most kind friend would have been weary; he never
showed himself troubled, grieved, or weary, never put back thy prayers, nor
kept back his special mercy, his most needful mercy, nor his saving mercy
from thee. Thinking, I say, how for all thou have given him sufficient occasion
to provoke him to do it, yet he has not done it; oh be thankful, oh be
thoroughly thankful!

For who knows not, that if he would, he might have turned away thy prayers
from him: he might justly in anger, and sore displeasure have rejected them: he
might have held back his mercy from thee? Oh what would become of us, if the
Lord should refuse our prayers, and turn away his mercy? Oh then calamities,
fearful desolation, dreadful destruction like a whirlewind, and sore
distress, and anguish would come upon us, and we should find none to help
us, there could be none able to comfort us, in the bitterness of our souls
we should lament, we should cry out, saying: Oh, are not all these griefs,
miseries, troubles, and evils come upon us, because the Lord has put our
prayers back from him, and kept his mercy back from us?

O consider these things, and let us be wise; let us not still provoke him to
refuse our prayers, by refusing his precepts; let us not still provoke him to
hold back his mercies, by our holding back our duties: O, that our secure
generation, so given over to manifold provocation, could so number their days,
as they might apply their hearts speedily to this wisdom! never more need of
this wisdom: oh, let us be yet wiser: let us make sure, that God shall
continue not to turn away our prayers from him, nor his mercy from us; and
this we do, namely, if we turn not away our hearing, and obedient hearkening
from his Word: if we hold not back our obedience, he will not hold back his
acceptance: if we keep not back our duty, he will not keep back his mercy.

And if he keep not back our prayers from himself, nor his mercy from us;
oh, how happy are we! Then we have assurance that he loves us; forgiues us;
will deliver us, and save us; heal our Land of all the miseries thereof; teach
us in the good way wherein we should walk; and when we make moan because of
drought, or famine, he will hear the Heavens (as it were) crying for us, and
make the Heavens hear the Earth gaping after rain for us, and cause the Earth
to hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, longing to grow forth for us,
and will see that these shall hear us according to our want and several
necessities. [My prayer from himself, nor his mercy from me.] God makes a
blessed exchange with his blessed servants. O man, or woman, that say
otherwise: o thou that say; I have offered unto God, and he had no respect
unto it. Job 21.15.
What profit should we have to pray unto him? We have fasted, and he beholds
us not; we have humbled our selves, and he takes no knowledge of it; we find
no such exchange; we think, the proud and wicked receive more favor then we
do; we account it is but in vain to serve him. Mal. 3.13.
O fearful stout words against God, and most false, Genesis 4.
except thou be naught, as Cain was; except thou be an Hypocrite, as the Jews
were; Isa. 58.
except thou be a wicked servant, as Judas was; which, if thou be, thou must
blame thy self. Otherwise thou shall find his service, an happy service; thou
shall find a great difference between the righteous, Mal. 3.17, 18.
and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves him not;
between the religious, and the irriligious: thou shall find a service, like
the service of a child to his dear and loving father. For as a father with
such a child: so he makes a blessed exchange with his blessed servants.

They bring him their offering, Genesis 4.4. Romans 12.1. Ps. 115.12. Prou. 23.
Matt. 7. Ephesians. 4.
and he gives them his holy acceptance: they give him their bodies, and he
gives them his blessings: they give him their hearts, and he gives them his
Spirit, and his grace: they give him his worship, Psalm. 50.23
and he gives them the comfort of his salvation: they honor him with their
substance, and he fills their barnes with abundance: Prou. 3.10. Mat. 10.41, 42.
Iam. 4.8. Romans 8.28.
they give his Messengers a small reward, and he gives them a great reward:
they draw near to him, and he draws near to them: they love him, Psalm.
91.14, 15. Mal. 3.16, 17.
and he makes all work for the best unto them: they honor him, and he
honors them: they think of his Name, and he keeps in remembrance their name.
His glory, is their jewel, and he makes them his jewels: they are ever sending
up their prayers, and praises to him, and he is ever multiplying his mercies
unto them: oh, what a blessed exchange does he make with his blessed servants?

O wonderful bounty! o admirable benignity! behold, and admire this blessed
exchange: it is worthy to be admired and magnified for ever. For what is it,
for which God makes this exchange with his servants? Oh it is, Isa. 64.6.
as out of them, and as it is theirs, even no better then as filthy rags: and
what are they with whom he makes it? oh, Mat. 8.8. Isa. 64.6.
as of themselves they are most unworthy; they are even as an unclean thing:
and what is that, that they give him, considered in it self? Oh, it is none of
theirs, 1. Cor. 4.7.
it is nothing, but what he has first given them; it is nothing, but what they
have first received of him; it is only his very own: they must needs confess,
saying, What are we, O Lord, 1. Chron. 9.14, 16.
that we should be able, or apt to offer any thing unto thee? for all things
come of thy self, and of thine own have we given unto thee: all duties that we
render unto thee, are first taught us by thine own hand, and all that thou
exchangest with us, is thine own, it is all thine own.

O Christian, let this blessed exchange move thee to be ever in an holy
exchanging with the Lord: move thee to glory in his liberality: move thee to
hold no gain comparable to godliness: move thee to serve the Lord with
gladness: move thee to come before him with rejoicing: move thee to
maintain to the face of all blasphemers, that no service is so commodious to
them that serve in it, as the Lords service is to his servants; none so
honorable, none so comfortable; and that he is most rich to all that call upon
him: move thee to confess, and say to him for all his exchanges in general;
Now therefore, 1. Chron. 29.13.
o my God, I thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name: move thee to confess,
and say to him in particular for this exchange; Blessed be God, which has not
put back my prayer from himself, nor his mercy from me. His Name be extolled;
his Name be praised; his most glorious Name be blessed for ever, and ever,
Amen.

A short Treatise upon the thirty one and thirty two Verses, of the one
hundred and seventh PSALM.
THE Holy Ghost, The drist.
setting forth the great praise of GOD, by this whole Psalm; First, The parts.
in a general proposition of the same in the first Verse, does set it also
forth. Secondly, by certain particular instances, or presidents of his most
praiseworthy administration toward sundry most calamitous, and distressed,
persons: The ending of each Narration.
ending the Narration of each of these, with one and the same special
Exhortation. As also his gracious dealing toward miserable wanderers,
harbourlesse, and succourlesse in strange Countries. His most favorable regard
of woeful inthralled captives under the yrons of cruel Tyrants. His wondrous
mercy extended to such as were sore broken with violent sickness; and his
admiral relief to such Seafaring men, as were in such desperate ieopardie,
as no way but lamentable perishing, without his present powerful help.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, Verse 31.
and for his wonderful works to the children of men! Verse 32.
Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people and praise him in
the assembly of the Elders.

Or thus rather: Let them Confess, Magnify, Praise, To, Or before IEHOVA, his
benignity, and his marvelous works to, or, before the sons of men: And let
them exalt him in the congregation of the people: and in the assembly of Elders
let them praise him.] What these verses are.
Which two Verses are an amplified exhortation to excellent Thanksgiving,
teaching indeed (and without being more curious then the Text does intend) thus
much unto us: What they teach.
viz. That it is the duty of every one released out of misery, and of every
partaker of Gods benignity; both privately and publicly to praise his
goodness, his works, and himself most worthily.

It is the duty of the first sort, Proof of the first and second point.
by express precept in six Verses of this Psalm: it is also the duty of the
second sort, as by the direct command of the 11. and 12. Verses of the 148.
Psalm: so by implication in the said Verses of this said Psalm; as the
learned Translatours of the New Translation do witness, in translating
indefinitely, O that men would praise the Lord! Now it is their duty, to what?
Why, Of the third
both privately: for, to, or with, or before Iehoua, as it used to be rendered,
intimates that secret devotion, which in Matt. 6.6. Christ commends, and
commands to his Disciples. Also publicly: for, to, or before the sons of
men, Of the fourth.
means that open devotion which all are to join together, called next by way
of exposition, The praising of God in the congregation, and in the assembly.
This duty here, Of the fifth.
is to praise, First, Gods goodness, Magnify to Iehoua his benignity.
Secondly, His noble works, and his marvelous works. Thirdly, Himself, exalt
him, praise him: and how? Most worthily. For all these circumstances, Of the
sixth.
praise his marvelous or wonderful works, and exalt him; and that before
himself, and in the congregation of the people, and in the assembly of Elders;
do confirm this worthiest manner of doing this duty. Now to come to the
application of this Doctrine:

O, Application to the former.
we that have been released by the Lords admirable mercy, out of any misery,
grievous corporal misery, or which is worser, grievous spiritual misery; The
things reproved.
O let us think of our forgetting, of our neglect of this duty privately, or
publicly, and worthily to praise our gracious God: How to think of these.
let us even seriously, and heavily think hereon to be ashamed of our
unthankful forgetfulness, and negligence, and to repent thereof. To further
this, How to search these consider Gods desire.
o let us search out and measure the grieuousnes of this forgetting, and of
this neglect: to this purpose consider, First, How it crosses Gods own
desire; being released, eased, delivered, redeemed, healed, he desires that we
come and praise him; but we forget it, The godlies use.
we neglect it, albeit he desire it. Consider, secondly, how contrary we are
herein to the examples of the ancient godly ones; o where do we find in the
Scripture, any of the true holy ones defamed with this forgetfulness,
Idolaters practice.
and with this neglect? Consider, thirdly, how, even gross Idolaters may rise
up to condemn us; for which of them forget, or neglect to praise their
abominable Idols, when they receive any victory, or be delivered out of any
misery?

Consider, Our taking on.
fourthly, how our own carriage in calamity serves to condemn these sins.
For when griefs are upon us we, pray, we cry, we shead tears, we make vows
to God to move him to help us; and yet being helped, this duty is forgotten,
this duty is neglected. Consider, Our case.
fifthly, what a case we were in before we were released; what a far more
grievous ease we had been in, if we had not been delivered, Our
unworthiness.
and how unworthy we are that the Lord should relieve us at all. O let us
consider all these, and then finding in our selves, that for all the same, yet
we have forgotten, yet we have neglected this duty of praise: let us then
confess, and cry out: O, The use.
we have sinned, we have done wickedly: God has remembered us, and we have
forgotten him; he has been liberal to us, and we have been unthankful to
him: o, we have deserved, that our misery should have been doubled; o, we are
ashamed; o forgive us, Lord, o, forgive us.

And o we, Application to the latter things reproved.
that are otherwise partakers of the loving kindness of the Lord, let us also
think of our negligence, vnmindfulnesse, and backewardnesse to this duty to
repent also, and to be ashamed of the same: considering to that end; First, to
aggrauate these, consider Gods mind. The godlies use.
that it is against Gods mind that we are so: for he would have us thankful
for all his benefits we do enjoy. Secondly, it is against the use of his right
servants: for they praise him, and as it is, Psalm. 145.10. they bless him for
all his goodness. The unreasonableness.
Thirdly, it is against all reason, that we being crowned with his benignity,
should neglect this duty: for we deserve none of it. Fourthly, many arguments
make greatly against us for our ingratitude. The argumen sagainst.
Oh, what a thing is it, when happiness, when our own gladness, when others
commending our estate, cannot awaken us out of our neglect? Happiness; for as
it is said, Psalm. 144.15. The people are happy that have such bounty.
Gladness; for as it is said, Act. 14.17. God by his goodness, as we find
also in our experience, does fill our very hearts with gladness. Psalm. 126.2.
They that behold Gods manifold blessings upon us, do say that he has done
great things for us. The use.
Oh, if we therefore do forget and neglect this duty; let us confess; let us
repent; let us be ashamed, as before: let us also judge our selves worthy to
have it said of us, as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you so requite the Lord, o you foolish
people, and unwise? worthy that the Lord should contest against us, as Isa.
1.2. saying, Hear o Heavens, and give ear, o Earth: I have nourished, and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. Worthy that he should
take all our abundance, our riches, our comforts, our peace, our honors from
us: should power contempt upon us, should turn our rivers into dry land; our
water-springs into a wilderness, our fruitful land into barrennes, and humble
us under sore oppression, affliction, and sorrow.

And, let both sorts of us now at the length, Admonition to both.
settle our hearts to the sincere practice of this duty of private, public,
and worthy praise to God, even to bring forth fruit worthy amendment in this
point. O, A description of the first.
we that have felt the fainting of our souls; that have been in sore
trouble; that have (as it were) sit in darkness, and the shadow of death; that
have been even bound up in affliction; that have had our hearts brought down
with heaviness; that have had our life next step to the gates of death; that
have had our spirits melted away with perplexity; that have been compassed
about with most woeful miseries, and that have seen how when we cried unto the
Lord, he brought us out of our darkness; he delivered us out of all our
distresses; he satisfied our longing souls; he healed us. Let us, o let us now
practice cheerfully and readily this holy duty.

To incite us thereunto, let us consider: First, To move the first to practice,
consider Gods readiness.
Gods exceeding readiness to hear us, and his presentnesse to deliver us;
yea, though our afflictions came on us, because we had rebelled against his
Word, because we had transgressed, because of our iniquities. Secondly, Gods
answerablenes.
Gods fulfilling of our very wishes, and bringing us to the very state we
desired. Thirdly, the due time, Time, manner, means.
the sweet manner, the gracious means of his deliverance of us. Fourthly, the
passing comfort we found, The sequent comfort.
after he had delivered us, filling, as it is, Psalm 126.2. our mouth with
laughter, and our tongue with singing.

And, A description of the second.
o we that have not yet come where any sorrow, woe, bitterness, worme-wood
has been put into our cup: but we only have lain down in green pastures,
and walked along beside the still waters, and our table has been always richly
furnished, our head anointed with oil, our cup running over, goodness and
mercy following us all the days of our life. O let us, let us also, if not
much rather apply with haste, and haste with godly zeal, unto this duty,
urging our minds thereto with these considerations.

Considering; To move the second, consider receipt.
First, that all our comforts, are things merely received, as 1. Cor. 4.7.
What have thou, that thou did not receive? Secondly, Whence received.
that they be all received from Gods good pleasure, as of corporal things it
is said, Psalm. 145.16. Thou openest thine hand, and fillest every living thing
of thy own good will: and of spiritual things, Phil. 2.13. God works the
will and the deed, of his own good pleasure. Vndesert.
Thirdly, that all the bounty we enjoy, is contrary to our desert: for as
Daniel 9.7. To us belongs confusion, or shame of face. Fourthly, that our
prosperity, All as we would have them.
our choice, our matches, our bargains, our dwellings, our friends, our
alliance, our food, our raiment, our peace, our means, our aduancements, our
times, our seasons, our affairs, yea and our Sabbaths are even as we would
have them; as if that were verified to us, which is said of the true fearers of
God, Psalm. 145.19. He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him. O let us
consider these things;

And let these persuade us to the duty here required of both kinds of us:
Effect of the considerations.
for surely these rightly weighed, cannot but make us say, O come, and we
shall tell you what God has done for our souls: O magnify the Lord together
with us: O, what shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits? O, we
will pay our vows, which our lips have uttered, and which our mouths have
spoken in our affliction: O, we will do our duty of solemn praise unto him
privately, publicly, and worthily. O that men would so praise the Lord; O that
high and low would so praise the Lord; O that every one would, as they are most
bounden, so praise the Lord.

Praise him so, privately: How praise privately.
privately with the family, as Joshua with his family; more privately, with
some of the family, as Abraham with Isaac; most privately alone, as the Prophet
David most often: and in private say unto him, Pattern of this private.
as Psalm. 92.1, 2. It is a good thing to give all thanks unto thee, O Lord,
even to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High: yea, to show forth thy loving
kindness every morning, and thy faithfulness every night: as Psalm. 116.16,
17. Oh Lord, verily I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaid; thou have loosed my bonds, I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and will call on thy Name, O Lord. And Ps. 118.21, 28. I will
praise thee, O Lord, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation: thou
art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, and I will exalt thee: and
as Psalm. 104.33, 34. I will sing unto thee, O Lord, as long as I live: I will
sing praise to thee my God, while I have any being; my meditation of thee shall
be sweet: I will be glad in thee. O, after this blessed manner, let every one
praise God privately.

Every one praise him also publicly: How praise publicly in the congregation
of the people.
both in ordinary on every Sabbath; with addition of more thanks, and more
zeal in thanking, on the Sabbaths of celebrating the holy Supper of the Lord:
also, in extraordinary, on the days of solemn public thanksgiving, as
Nehemiah 12.27, 43. and Ester 9.17. and let every one profess concerning this
public, saying: as Psalm. 34.3. Patterns of this.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together: and as
Psalm 108.3. I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, and will sing
praises unto thee among the Nations: and as Psalm. 111.1. I will praise the Lord
with my whole heart in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation:
and as Psalm 109.30. I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will
praise him among the multitude: and as Psalm. 116.18, 19. I will pay my vows
unto the Lord now, in the presence of all his people, in the Courts of the
Lords House, in the midst of thee, o Jerusalem.

O let every one, How in the assembly of the Elders.
thus praise the Lord publicly in the congregation of the people: and not
only so, but also in the assembly of the Elders: if at any time (as they
ought) the Princes and great ones do assemble, upon special occasion
together, to give glory unto the Lord: even glory unto his Name, and to worship
him in the beauty of Holiness: as Psalm. 29.1, 2. they are commanded; and as,
because God has done greater honor to them, then to meaner people, they are
more bounden: O let every one, who has any calling to be amongst them, as a
teacher, or as an hearer, or as otherwise conuented, praise the Lord even
before them also, and say concerning this, Patterns of this.
as Psalm. 119.46. O Lord, I will speak of thy testimonies even before Kings,
and will not be ashamed: and as Psalm. 138.1. I will praise thee, O Lord, with
my whole heart: yea, before the gods, or great Potentates will I sing praise
unto thee. O, thus let us praise the Lord privately in his own presence,
publicly in the congregation of the people; boldly, in the assembly of the
Elders.

Let none of us be like the wicked, Who are contrary to these.
whose secret closets are for secret sins; but not for secret duties of
godliness: whose private houses are for private sports, pastimes, profits,
pleasures: but not for private prayers, and praises to God. Neither let us be
like the popish Recusant, or the selfe-weening Separatist; who disdain the
congregation of the people, and have their own will-worships for corners, but
no praise for the Lord in public Temples. Neither let us be like the timorous
and fearful, who dare not profess God before the gods, nor praise the Lord
before lords; but treacherously lay their hand upon their lips, when their
mouth should be open to show forth his praise. Let these evils be far from
us, and let us laud the Lord our God with conscience in private, with
cheerfulness in public, and with courage before the Elders.

Thus praise his benignity, The praise of Gods benignity: that it is Ancient,
thus praise his wonderful works, and thus praise himself. O praise his
benignity, by commending, First, the ancientnesse thereof, for as Psalm. 25.6.
His tender mercies, and his loving kindnesses have been ever of old. Secondly,
Great,
the greatness thereof: for as Neh. 9.17, 25. his is great kindness, and
great goodness. Thirdly, the richness thereof: for as Romans 2.4. Rich,
Admirable,
there is riches of his goodness. Fourthly, the admirablenes thereof: for, as
Psalm. 31.19. O how marvelous is the goodness that he has laid up for them
that fear him; yea, which he has already wrought for them that trust in him,
before the sons of men? Fifthly, Excellent,
the excellency thereof: for, as Psalm. 36.7. How excellent is his loving
kindness! Sixthly, Immeasurable,
the immeasurablenesse thereof: for, as Ephesians. 3.18. O the breadth, and length,
the depth, and height of his mercy! Seventhly, Cause of all goods.
the endlesnesse thereof: for, as Psalm. 136. It indureth for ever, and ever.
Eighthly, the effects thereof, as Titus 3.4, 5. Out of it comes mercy to save
us: as Psalm 63.3, 5. comes that to us, which is better then life, and which
satisfies our souls as with marrow and fatnes: as Ps. 65.12. It is that which
the year is crowned with such blessings, such fatnes, such abundance, such
flourishing flocks, such goodly corn, as causes all people to sing, and
showt for joy: saying, Therefore, how ancient how great? how rich? how
admirable? how excellent? how immeasurable? how endless? how fruitful is the
benignity of the Lord? praise it before him; praise it before the sons of men;
praise it before the congregation of the people; praise it before the assembly
of the elders.

And so praise his wonderful works toward us, To praise his wonderful
works, by looking back two ways:
or others in our miseries. First, praise them by looking back to his
goodness and power, showed, in doing that he did for us, when he redeemed us,
when he delivered us, when he healed us, when he brought us to that we desired:
by looking back also to his power and goodness showed in preserving us, in
preventing us, in staying us from perishing, from being beneath, from final
perdition in our most forlorn case, until he did deliver us. Secondly, By
acknowledgement,
praise them by acknowledgement of his might, and his will to be alone, and
singular herein: saying, O Lord, who can, or who could, who will, or would have
done such works for us, as thou have done? None would, none could, but thou
only; thou only, to whom nothing is hid, nothing hard, nothing impossible; who
never faintest, art never weary, and of whose understanding there is no
searching. Thirdly, praise them, By admiring
by admiring his doing of them unto us: saying, as Psalm. 8.4. O what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? What is the son of mortal man, that thou
visitest him? and Psalm. 144.3. Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of
him? or the son of man, that thou make account of him?

And help this admiration, Helps to this admiration, by considering what we
are.
by thinking how we are, Ephesians. 2.3. all of us by nature the children of wrath:
and Genesis 6.3, 5. Of our own we are naught but sinful flesh, every
imagination of the thoughts of our heart being only evil continually: and
Genesis 18.27. We are but dust and ashes: and Isa. 48.8. We are transgressors
from the womb: and Psalm. 144.4. We are but vanity, and our days as a shadow
that passes away: and Romans 7.24. The holiest are but miserable and wretched. O
mark these well, and wonder at Gods works of grace, of mercy, and of loving
kindness unto us: praise them before him, praise them to the sons of men:
saying as here, Patterns of this praise.
Surely these works of the Lord are wonderful works: and Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4.
They are great, they are honorable, they are glorious works, oh he has so
done, and so wrought the same, as he has made them to be remembered for ever.
Say, as Ps. 78.4. Verily these works are the praises of the Lord. Say, as Ps.
92.4, 5. Thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy works: I will triumph in
the works of thine hands. O Lord, how great is thy works, and thy thoughts
are very deep?

Oh, Sins against Gods bonignity: Not remembering, Presuming, Despising. Sins
against his works: Not to acknowledge,
be it far from us to be guilty of that complained of, Psalm. 106.7. Not to
remember the multitude of his mercies: or that in Deuteronomy. 29.19. to presume to
sin, through saucy confidence in his mercy: or that in Romans 2.4. To despise
the riches of his goodness: or that in Psalm. 92.6. To be so brutish, as not
to acknowledge his works, and so foolish, as not to discern the same: or that
in Psa. 28.5. Not to regard his works: Not to regard. Sins against himself:
or that in Psa. 95.9. To provoke and tempt him, though we have seen his
glorious works: or that in Psalm. 10.4, 5, 13. Not to seek, Not to think,
To be so proud, as not to seek God, as not to have him in our thoughts, as to
think his ways always grievous unto us, To contemn.
as even to contemn him. O far be these from us: and as it is said, Job
21.16. Far be the counsel of all such from us.

Himself, To praise. himself.
whom, as Psalm. 65.1. praise waits on in Sion: himself, who is, as Psa.
18.3. most worthy to be praised: himself, who Ps. 22.3. inhabiteth the praises
of Israel: himself, whose praises, Psalm. 78.4. the godly do show to their
posterity: himself, to whom, Psalm 147.1. it is good, and pleasant, and
comely to sing praises: himself, who, Psalm 145.3. is great, and greatly to
be praised: himself, who, Deuteronomy. 10.21. is our God, and our praise, and glory.

Him, even him let us praise worthily, To praise him worthily, is, To exalt him.
which in one word, is to exalt him: let us so praise him, as we exalt him: not
our selves, but our God: for as Mat. 23.12. Whosoever exalts himself, he
shall be abased: not Idols, but the Lord, for as Psa. 97.7. Confounded be all
they that serve and rejoice in, and so exalt Idols. No, no, but the Lord, the
Lord, let us exalt him alone: let us exhort others to exalt him, Exhorting
others.
as Psalm. 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God: let us in our selves exalt him,
saying, Isa. 25.1. Doing it our selves.
O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, and praise thy Name; Patterns.
for thou have done wonderful things. Let the progeny of the godly exalt him,
saying, Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my strength, and song, he is become my
salvation, he is my God, and he is my fathers God: I will prepare him an
habitation, and I will exalt him: thus praise the Lords own self, by exalting
him.

Exalt him; Exalt him: set all under him, in the congregation,
set all under him in the congregation: cry, Down with Idols, down with
Images, down with men's devices, down with Invocation of Saints, down with
worshipping of Angels; and intertaine and exalt in the congregation of his
people, none but his own ordinances, his own Word, his own Sacraments, his
own Name, his own self. Exalt him: In the assembly of Elders,
set all under him in the assembly of Elders: Bid them, as Reu. 4.11, 10. fall
down before him, worship him, and cast down their crowns at his feet. Bid
them, s. 2.10, 11. be wise, and be instructed to serve him with fear, and to
rejoice before him with trembling. Bid them, as Psalm. 29.1, 2. give to him
glory, and strength, and give to him the glory due to his Name. In the Family,
Exalt him, set all under him in the Family: Wives, children, servants, in your
duties fear the Lord, look up unto the Lord, do all your service of
subjection, and obedience, as unto the Lord. Husbands, fathers, masters, rule,
as under the Lord, exalt him as your Master which is in heaven.

Exalt him, Set him above all.
set him above all, say, as Psa. 136.2, 3. Thou art God of gods, thou art Lord
of lords: say, as Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Thou, O Lord, art far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every Name that is
named, not only in this world, but in that also which is to come: all things
are under thy feet: say, as Genesis 14.19. Thou art the most High God, the
possessour of Heaven and Earth. Thus exalt him: Set most by him.
exalt him also in setting more by him then all, saying, as Ps. 73.25. Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire besides
thee. Exalt him, in setting praises on him more then on all, Set most praises
on him,
saying, O Lord, I more delight in thee, then in father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or friends, or goods, or pleasures, or lands; yea, as Psa. 63.3. Thy
loving kindness is better to me then life it self. Thou art my portion, my
glory, and song. Exalt him, Set apart chief place for him,
in setting apart a chief habitation for him to dwell in, even thy soul all
trimmed, as, Isa. 66.2. A lowly, a poor, a contrite spirit, trembling at his
Word. Prefer place and means of his sernice, Be at cost to serve him,
Exalt him, in preferring a place, and means for his service, before all thine
own comforts, as David, Psalm. 132. Exalt him, in being at cost to serve him,
as the same royal person, 2. Sam. 24.24. Exalt him, in giving him the best
service of all, Give him best service,
that is, as Romans 12.1. thy body, and thy whole self a living sacrifice, holy,
Give him best dish.
and acceptable unto him. Exalt him, in giving him the best dish, even as Prou.
23.26. with Psalm. 51.6. thy very heart abounding with sincerity, and truth in
all the inward parts thereof.

O, that men would thus praise the Lord privately, publicly, and worthily: O,
that we had our minds heated, and inflamed by all this that has bin said, with
holy zeal, to tie our selves thus to confess before the Lord his loving
kindness and his wonderful works before the sons of men; thus to exalt him
in the congregation, and every where; thus to praise him also in the Assembly
of the Elders. But, who is sufficient for this Angelical duty? How to come to
the grace to praise God thus.
Of our selves we have not a thought toward it: God is the owner, and God is
the giver of it; therefore that we may perform it to him, we must first crave
it at him, saying with the Prophet, Psalm. 51.15. O Lord, open thou my lips, and
my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

And lest we deceive our selves, Proofs of such as do praise God.
thinking we be of the number of those that praise God rightly, when indeed we
be not, we must note the proofs of such as do praise him, his benignity, and
his works soundly, and examine our selves of them. First, If we have this
special grace to praise him; then we find in our selves, Affecting of God.
that we so affect the Lord, as we seek, we thirst, we long greatly after him,
and after the exercises of his worship: for this, in Psa. 63. is showed to be
in him whose mouth praises the Lord with joyful lips. Secondly, If we have
this grace to praise his benignity, Leading to repentance by his benignity.
then we find in our selves that it leads us unto repentance, as it is said
it ought to do, Romans 2.4. so as our love is set upon it, more then life, as
Psalm 63.3. and it moves us to walk truly, and godly in Gods sight: for
this in the said Psalm, and in Psalm. 26. is spoken of him that compasses Gods
Altar with the voice of Thanksgiving. Thirdly, His works affect us with love,
etc.
If we have this grace of pratsing Gods wonderful works; then we find in our
selves a loving of them, a taking pleasure in them, a gladness in them, a
rejoicing in them, a gracious acknowledgement of them, a holy showing of them
to our posterity, a desire to come to praise God in the assembly for them: for
these are said, in Psalm. 111. and 92. and 78. and 26. of such as have this
grace of magnifying GODS works. Fourthly, If we have the true Art of praising
God, we find in our selves, Ordering our life well.
that we order our life well: for in Psalm. 50.23. this is joined with the
offering of praise unto God. O, let us look to these proofs of our fitness
to this duty: if we have them not: then, as in Psa. 50.16. God calls us
wicked, and challenges us of vile audaciousnes for meddling with any Divine
duty: but if we have them, then he says, to encourage and to comfort us, that
we glorify him.

Which is the mark that in all things, Gods glory our ^yme.
and especially in Thanksgiving we must shoot at: for his glory is the chief
end of all. Being now come, and hereafter coming to the Sermons, and to the
action of Thanksgiving, let us ever think of Gods glory; for he will have us do
this duty for his mere glory: Difference of this duty from others.
all other duties of his service, are almost only for our necessity; but this
all for his glory: and therefore in Psalm 66.2. it is called a singing forth
of the glory of his Name: and in Psalm. 29.2. a giving of glory due to his
Name. And worthily: because if we be skillful in it, we therein speak such
great things of him, and of his properties, and of his works, and of his Name,
according to a special parterne, in the 145. Psalm, and many others, as we
show himself to be a glorious God, and his Name, to be a most glorious Name.
O that men would so praise him in secret, in the family, in the congregation of
the people, in the assembly of the Elders, The lerme of this duty.
as they might thus show his glory. And, o, that this might not be at some
seldom fits, but as Psalm. 145.2. every day: and as Psalm. 146.2. while we
do live, and while we have any being.

Note a special rule how to continue this always in our selves, and in our
families: Rules to continue it in our selves.
in our selves to continue it, the rule is this, To have his loving kindness;
his everlasting mercy; his holy remembrance; his continual benefits; and the
promises of the better life always in our thoughts, and (as it were) before
our eyes, with a blameless conversation, and a conscience of thanksgiving. If
we observe this rule, we shall never cease to praise the Lord in our selves.
Rules to continue it in our families.
To be the like in our families, the rule is not to entertain, but to cut off
from them every popish, profane, dissolute, pick-thanke, slanderous, vain,
wicked, deceitful, dissembling, dishonest, drunken, ungodly, idle, irreligious
person, and to maintain (through all due respect yielded to every one in their
place) peace, amity, agreement, unity; as there be no unkindness, iarres,
contentions, breaches to make interruption of godly exercises. If this rule be
observed, then, as we shall want no comfort, honor, commendation to our
families: so in the same we shall bless the Lord our God daily.

Whereupon, The reward of this duty.
will follow the reward of this our thankfulness to God; which is this,
namely, That if it be such as we have heard, and so attended with a
well-disposed way to prevent all occasions of Gods dishonor, and with a
well-ordred life to promote the glory of his Name; then he will let us see,
yea, cause us to enjoy his salvation, as it is promised, Psalm. 50.23. not his
destruction, as he threatens the unthankful wicked in the 22. Verse, Gods
account of the thankful.
but his salvation. So great account does he make of the right thankful, as
he will not let them be over- wronged, taken away, or destroyed, suppressed,
beaten down, nor consumed: he will not part with us; he will not be without
us: but that we may still honor him, praise him, and glorify him; he will
keep us in safety, preserve us in liberty, and maintain us in prosperity,
by the tower, the rock, the strength, and the shield of his temporary
salvation, and give us the comfort, peace, joy, riches, glory, and in the end
the consummation, and the fullness of his eternal salvation in Jesus Christ,
blessed for ever, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

