THE RELECTION OF A CONFERENCE TOUCHING THE REAL PRESENCE.

OR A BACHELOVRS CENSVRE Of a Masters Apology for Doctor Featlie.

By L. I. B. of Art, of Oxford.

Psalm. 67.31. Jncrepa feras arundinis.

printer's or publisher's device

AT DOWAY, By LAVRENCE KELLAM,

M.DC.XXXV.

THE PREFACE.
IT was (when I lived in Oxford, and I think it is still) the custom for him
who defends in Deuinitie, to make first a Supposition, wherein such as come to
hear that exercise, may see the State of the Question which is to be disputed.
By this means the Defendant lays his Cause open to a fair trial; and diverse
Auditors not yet perfect in the knowledge of such matters, are better enabled
to understand and understanding to judge, betwixt him and his Opponent that
undertakes to persuade the contrary.

I was thinking to conceive my Preface in that manner, like a Supposition; and
it had been to good purpose, considering that some may come to see this Book
or Conference, who being catechized by Purita^s, never knew the true State of
the Question betwixt us and them in the point of the Real Presence. But those
with who^ I am to deal, will not permit such a discourse; excepting, that it
is against I know not what law.

My intention is not to write a Book of the Blessed Sacrament: that Argument
deserves a better pen; and is excellently treated by diverse worthy Catholic
Deuines: but to maintain the just honor of the defenders of it, traduced and
scornefullie jeered by a Precisian, on the behalf and by the consent of Doctor
Featlie. Whose nicenes shall not hinder me from doing that which does
confessedlie appertain to the Sustentants part.

And yet I mean withal, to keep my self punctuallie to the matter, without
running out into new; for that were to make the business infinite: or, bringing
Arguments for our tenet; for they with who^ I deal would then report that I
chang parts, and pretending to be a Defendant come a Disputant.

Doctor Featlie in a Challeng of his, In his Challe^g to M. Fisher.
resembles a Controuertist to a Sawier, who, till he has gonne thorough,
keeps himself to the same line: and imputes unto his Adversary that he never
pierced into the heart of any Controversy. Whereas himself (Master Featlie I
mean) was the man that moved the saw out of the line; and ran into an other
distinct matter, when he was not able to give satisfaction in the former, which
had been the Controversy betwixt the^ 2. Their disputation was, of a
Catalogue of Protestants in all ages; and he, leaving that, challenges his
Adversary to dispute of Communion in both kinds. Which is a way to run over
Controversies; but not to make an end of Controversies. Logicians number it
amongst the faults of a Disputant. It is a tacit yielding of the cause.

I have taken (a Ministers imporportunitie made me,) the Saw into my hands;
and am, if we regard the Controversy, upon the upper side: my Adversaries
(being still in error) be in the pit. The lines, Featlie drew: they be his
Arguments; deliberatlie chosen, by him, for the best; these, which I am to
meddle in. If they do not leave pulling, we shall in time come to the heart of
this Controversy. So they keep themselves to their own lines.

The matter of the Conference was, not Transubstantiation, but the Real
presence only. So my Lord of Chalcedon did express Supra page 7.
himself; and Master Featlie to the same purpose, Doctor Smith, says D. Feat
in his Relat. page 288.
he, distinguishing betwixt the Questions of Real presence and
Transubstantiation, determined the point in Question to be this, whether the
body and blood of Christ were truly and substantiallie in the Sacrament under
the forms of bread and wine? My Lord Defended the affirmative: videlicet, that
it is there truly and substantiallie: that is to say, according to the
substance of the thing. Master Featlie undertook the contrary, videlicet that
it is not there truly and substantiallie, Feat. page 289
not according to the substance of our Saviors natural body and blood.

The words of Institution, which Featlie did object, be these, This is my
body; Matt. 26
this is my blood etc. which words he says, must needs be taken in a sense
that makes against the Real presence.

In this proposition or enunciation, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body; (It
is the like of the other words, Hic est sanguis meus, this is my blood) there
is to be considered, the subject; the predicate, or attribute; the
determination of the predicate; and the copula or note of ide^titie. Four
things, in the four words. The Subject is, Hoc; the Predicate is Corpus; the
determination of it, Meum; the copula, the verb Est.

The Subject or first word, Hoc; does not of it self, import bread rather then
body; or body, rather then bread, it is indifferent. Significat (says the
Doctor of the Schools) substantiam in communi, sinc qualitate: id est, forma
determinata. It signifies a substance in common without the quality, that is,
the determinate form. Suppose a chalice before me, and that I point toward
it, saying This is -- I may, to make up the proposition, say gold, or wine, or
blood; without changing the first word This. If I add, blood; it contracts and
determines the subject, This, (which before was vncontracted and undetermined,)
to one particular thing. if I say wine, it contracts it to an other. if I say
gold, it is contracted to a third. This is blood. this is wine. this is gold.

The word Est is a verb substantive, that signifies identitie, or connection;
which connection or identitie cannot be conceived without the extremes
identified or connected, which be the things signified by the subject and the
predicate. And the references of the subject to the attribute, and the
attribute to the subject, be founded it it. Whence it comes, that it is not
possible to know what the Subject determinatlie relates unto, (being of it self
indetermined,) till the predicate or attribute be also known because until
then, neither the terminus, nor the ratio fundandi (the connection,) is known.
The same verb or copula, does also consignifie the time for which the
connection is exercised; which time presupposing the connection, for it is the
modus of it, (and may vary, the connection perseuering, Petrus, est, fuit,
erit, albus.) does presuppose likewise both the extremes. This is manifest,
(to him that looks well on it,) because it presupposes the connection; which
connection does presuppose the said extremes as before has been observed.
Ipsu^ Est (says the Ipsa igitur secundum se dicta verba, nomina sunt, and
significant aliquid: constituit enim qui dicit, intellectum; and qui audit
quiescit. Sed si est, vel non est, nondum significat: neque enim signum est
rei, esse vel non esse. Nec si hoc ipsum Est purum dixeris; ipsum enim nihil
est. Consignificat autem compositionem quandam, quam sine compositis non est
intelligere. Arist. 1. de Interp. c. 3. Vide Commentatorem, Ibidem.
Philosopher) consignificat compositionem quandam, quam sine compositis non est
intelligere. the word Est, Is, does consignifie a certain composition, which
cannot be understood without the things compounded. So then, by the intention
of Art, the copula de praesenti does signify the co^nexion of the subject and
attribute Infra page 484.
for that instant wherein both extremes are so uttered, that both (not one
only) may be conceived.

The word Corpus signifies a Vide S. Thom. de Ente and Essent. c. 3.
body; and by the word meum, it is determined to the speakers, our Saviors,
body. so likewise in the other form, Hic est sanguis meus, the word sanguis
signifies blood, and by meus, is determined to signify our Saviors. Moreover,
this ^redicate corpus is here taken pro^erlie, and sanguis in like manner; as
^he text it self preventing the cauills ^f Heretics has declared by ad^ing
to it that whereby it differs from ^ignes or mere figures: or, other blood, or
other bodies. 1. Cor 1^.
(...) and Ibidem.
(...). Luc. 22
This is my own bo^ie, that very body which is given, bro^en, sacrificed,
crucificed, for you. and ^his was, doubtless, his true, real body. Mat. 26.
(...). and Ibide^.
(...) and Ibid.
(...). and Luc. 22.
(...). This is my own blood, the blood of the new testament: that blood which
is shed for many, this thing in the cup is the very thing shed for you. Which
was blood properly. The thing is so plain, and so cleerelie expressed, that
Li. 10. c. 2.
Chamier the Caluinist, coming to the Quaeritur, Quid sit corpus meum, sanguis
meus; what is that, my body, my blood? answers roundly, Nos candide and
libere, ac libenter respondemus (...) interpretandum: it is litterallie*
properly, to be interpreted, and understood. So far concerning the parts of
the Proposition, in several*

Now to reflect upon it all together; upon the whole Proposition* The verity
or falsitie of a proposition* does suppose the connection and entire essence,
which essence includes the subject the predicate and the copula. A^ properties,
you know, do presuppos^ the natures whose properties they be* Wherefore you be
not to look for the verity of this Proposition when you have heard only Hoc:
that is no^ a proposition nor in, Hoc est: that is not yet the proposition. But
when al^ is uttered, Hoc est corpus meum: there is a proposition, and a true
proposition: for he speaks it that cannot lie. In this proposition, the
subject Hoc, relates unto the predicate Corpus, and the predicate Corpus
relates unto the subject Hoc, the ground of which reciprocal reference is the
copula, or verb Est.

When your soul came into your bo^^e, your matter had thereby a relation ^o
your form (being of it self according ^o the substance, indifferent to that,
^r any other;) and your form, a rela^^on to your matter, which reciprocal
^elation is founded in the union or ^onnexion, that is inuolued in your
^ubstance; and is antecedent to those ^ccidentes, which be in alio genere. ^ut
whilst you were yet in fieri, before ^he generation was ended, the forsaid
^^lation of matter to your form deter^inatlie, was not, it was to early to
^^oke for it before the terminus or the ^^tio fundandi were in being.

And, as now, your matter being a^uallie related to your form, a Philo^^pher
may consider it (by way of ab^^raction) without that order, and se^^ndum se, in
which consideration, it is ^^determined and indifferent to all ^^rmes: so
likewise in the Proposition which we speak of, Hoc est corpus ^eum: though
that Hoc, be there de^^rminatlie related to Corpus, in manner above specified;
yet, a Divine man consider it (by way of abstractio^ without that order, and
secundum s^ in which consideration, it is indifferent to stand for, or relate
unto, t^^ body, bread, or any thing else, th^^ might (by Gods omnipotent power^
be in that form, it signifying of (...) self, only, contentum sub hac
visibili fo^ma; non specifica^do qualitatem veluti substantialem; not
determining particularly and in specie what that thing is as before was noted.
Neither it is an^ great matter, whether this indetermination be declared by
vagum, as some do: or by confusum, or commune, as others. They be but several
ways of v^derstanding the same thing, to wi^^ the indetermination of that
pronoun^^ conceived secundum se.

This is sufficient for the Reader a^ this present, touching the words o^
Institution, in which the Controuersi^ cheeflie does consist. And by it, h^
will be able to understand those objections which hereafter are brough^ against
the Supposition, and reference, of the word Hoc: the time, consigni^^ed by the
Verb, est: and the like. As ^lso, that vain pretense of Tautologie ^o often
repeated by the Doctor, and his Apo^ogist. The subject, Hoc, does signify (as
I said) substantiam indeterminate: ^he predicate corpus meum, signifies a
particular kind of substance; a man's body, our Saviors body; speciem, si^e
qualitatem, determinat. so that, one conceit answers in the mind, to the
subject, an other conceit or apprehension, far more distinct and explicit,
answers to the predicate, and therefore it is not (as the Doctor pretends)
nugatorie to say This is my body. And had it been indeed idle tautologie, it
must of necessity have been true (let the Doctor note this,) whosoever had
spoken it, and said over a piece of bread, This is my body, which is far
other wise. Our Savior, being God, spoke it: and it was verified, he could not
lie. A Priest speaks it, and it is verified in virtue of the Institution of
our Savior, who has engaged his omnipotency for the verification of it in
that case. But you speak it, being no Priest, and it is false. Whence it
appears further, that the proposition of the Priest is practick: able in it is
kind, to infer what it signifies, (which is an other point cauilled at by the
Apologist:) and yours which is not able to do so, speculatiue only. Thus far
touching the words in Question. I come now to our Adversaries construction and
Interpretation.

The Pamphlet which I am to refute, is written in behalf and Defense of Doctor
Featlie, and dedicated by Waferer to his Lord of Couentrie: who seem to be in
two several Opinions touching the interpretation of the foresaid words:
though both of the^ would have them figurative. His Lord, D. Morton (who comes
thundering into the Controversy, as if he would make us for fear believe the
Sacrament, whateuer God told us, to be for substance, nothing else but bakers
bread, and wine properly,) puts the figure in the word est, which here (says
he) has the same se^ce as, signifies: as if Christ had said expreslie of the
bread, This signifies my body. So he, l. 2. cap. 2. and Chamier, lib. 10.
cap. 4. (...) intelligimus: vt sit positum, est, pro significat. In which way,
the words are thus to be interpreted: Hoc this thing: est, does signify;
corpus meum, my body. A construction so absurd, that the very Authors are
ashamed of it, and therefore cover it under metaphors and clouds of obscure
speeches: that it appear not to the Reader. D. Mortons pretense for it, is
this, that the subject is proper bread: which bread, says he, does signify,
but is not, the body. That it is bread, he persuades himself, because our
Savior took bread, and the Fathers sometimes call it bread. Which is no good
Argument: for, the Greg. Nyss. orat. catec. c. 37. Ser. de Coen. apud. Cypr.
Gaudent in exodus tr. 2 Cyril. Hier. Catech. 4. Cyrill. Alex Epist. ad Calos.
Aug. Sermon 28. de verb, Dom. lib. 2. con. aduers. leg. c. 9. Hier. Epist. ad
Hedib q. 2 Ambros. Mist. init. c. 9. Chrysostom. Hom. 83, in Mat. and 24. in Pri.
ad Cor.
Fathers when they speak of that, which is here after consecration, expound
themselves, as you will see hereafter, (for Doctor Featlie does object the
same,) of bread which is changed, by the power of Omnipote^cie, not in shape,
but in nature; of supersubstantiall, heavenly, not proper bread. in which
sense our Savior calls his flesh, meat: and himself, bread: Ioh. 6. Whereupon
when they take the word properly, they say that it is not bread; not that
which nature made, no sensible thing: but the flesh of Christ, the body which
was crucified; the mediator; the Lord of all.

Neither does it follow that it is bread properly, because he took such bread
into his hands: for he changed it by his omnipotence Panis omnipotentia Verbi
factus est caro. Oblata conuertons in Veritatem propriae carnis. In illud (quod
est immortale) transelementata little quae apparent natura.
into flesh as they likewise teach us. and our Saviors words according to
their native proper sense do D. Morton. Instit. of the Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 1.
page 72.
confessedlie import as much: for they signify that his body is now in that
exterior form, wherein before there was bread. Which does inuolue a change.
In a corporal feast, suppose a Prince makes it, that which was bought alive,
is served in before the guests, And consequently it is not rigorously
speaking, the same thing; though it be vulgarly esteemed the same. Homo
mortuus quanquam figurae formam habet eandem, tamen homo non est, says the
Philosopher, lib. 1. de Part: Anim. c. 1. And elsewhere he tells us Homo mortuus,
dicitur aequiuoce. Living and dead things have not the same form, and
therefore, if you believe him, be not the same things. Vide eundem lib. 1. de
Gener. t 23.
not alive. In this spiritual feast, exhibited by the Prince of heaven, that
which was brought into the Church not alive, is (he is the Creators Son and
himself omnipotent that makes it,) presented to the communicants, his guests,
alive Influit oblatis vim vitae, S. Cyril. Alex. Epist. ad Calos.
co^uertens ea in veritatem propriae carnis. He does flow in to the things
offered the power of life, converting them into the verity of his own flesh.
Neither was he long about it: but, said the word, and Statim per verbum in
corpus mutatur, vt dictum est a Verbo, hoc est corpus meum. S. Greg. Nyssen
Orat. catech. c. 37.
suddenly the thing was done.

Whereupon this ensued, that his body was at once in two places: In the one
situallie, as other bodies are in the other sacramentallie, and according to
the manner of a spirit.

This, as our greatest Adversaries confess, does vnauoideablie follow upon the
native and proper sense of our Saviors words. And Antiquity so understood and
believed it, affirming that very body which was crucified for our sins, to
be under the S Aug. Conc 1. in Psalm. 33. l. 9. Conf. c. 13. and Sermon. ad Neoph.
apud Bed. in c. 10. ad Cor. In the 4. Argu. one place will be discussed. S.
Chrysostom. Hom, 24. in Epist. ad Cor. S. Cyrill Catec. 4 S. Ansel. in c. 11 ad Cor.
form or shape of bread: and that blood which issued out of our Saviors side,
the very price of our Redemption, to be in S. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Epist. ad
Cor. S. Aug. Epist. 162. Sermon. ad Neoph. S. Leo Sermon. 7. de ieiunio men's.
sept.. S. Greg. mag. lib. 4. Dial c. 58. S. Cyrill. Catec 4.
the chalice; and thence powered into the mouths of the Communicants. They
believed that the most precious body in heaven, was at the same S. Chrysostom. l
3. de Sacerd. Hom. 24. in Epist. ad Cor. Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Heb. S. Greg.
Nyss. Orat. Catech c 17. S. Cyrill. Alex. anathem. 11. in Conc Ephesians and lib.
11 in Joan. c 27. Conc. Nicen. 1. in Act. Vatic. S. Cyrill. Hieros. catech 4.
time, in many places, here on earth: that they had Jesus, the Mediator, God
and man, (he being at the same time in heaven,) here in their S. Cyrill.
Catech. mist. 5. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. ad Cor. lib. 3. de Sacerd. Hom. 46. in Joan.
hands; and received him with their S. Aug. l. 2. con. Aduers. leg. c. 9.
Tract. 59. in Joan. Origin. Hom. 5. in diuersa S. Cyrill. Alex. lib. 10. in
Joan. c. 13 S. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. 4. S. Leo. Sermon. 7. de ieiunio men's.
Sept.
mouth. The ground of which belief were the foresaid words and asseueration of
our blessed Savior (to whose Authority they had submitted their
understandings,) Take, eat, this is my body.

They did not presume to dispute with Him, about the nature of quantity, or
substance, or Or repute it absurd he should be in a man's belly. What is
better, what purer, what more glorious the^ the blessed Trinity? and is not
the blessed Trinity in every place, and (now you stop your nose) in every
thing? The body of our blessed Savior is immortal, impassible, and existeth
in the Sacrament, according to the manner of a Spirit.
place: (they were sure he knew these things better then they did,) or, by that
little which man knows or seems to know, define his Power and Art: but
ingenuouslie honored and willingly heard Him, as the Master of men and
Angels; in Coloss. 2.
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

To fear least the body, which is substantiallie individual, should be
distracted into two bodies by this accidental and superuenient manner of
existencie, is a fault in the brain liable to the name, rather then any sign
of a good and sincere judgment. It is in the Sacrament according to the manner
of a Spirit as before has been observed, and Spirits are not subject to
distraction by quantity, When a man is beheded, is his soul cut in two?
though that happen (and whilst they are in it) to be divided. One Angel is
able to move (and so to be Vide Caiet. Baun. Nazar. etc. in 1. p. q. 52. a. 2.
in) two bodies at once: and though the bodies be distinct he still remains
the same. Neither is he continued by the continuitie of bodies, if those he
moves (suppose two drops of water) become one. A Spirit in extended things is
not extended; in continued things, not continued: in distinct things, not
distinguished. He is in another order, far above. God, is neither multiplied in
himself, by the great multitude of things wherein he is: nor by their quantity
extended. Were there at once many worlds, he would be in them all Saint
Augustine had an apprehension that the soul of Martyrs were perchance, at once
in diverse places. Quanquam ista quaestio vires intelligentiae meae vincat,
quemadmodum opitulentur Martyrs iis quos per eos certum est adiuuari: Vtrum
ipsi per seipsos assint vno tempore tam diuersis locis, and tanta inter se
longinquitate discretis, sieve vbi sunt eorum memoriae, sieve praeter suas
memorias vbicunque adesse senti untur: an ipsis in loco suis meritis conguo ab
omni mortaliu^ conuersatione remotis, etc. Res haec altior est quam vt a me
possit attingi, and abstrusior quam vt a me valeat persetutari: and ideo quid
horum duorum sit, an vero fortassis vtrumque sit, etc. S Augustine. lib. de cura
pro mort. c. 16.
vndistracted.

That it is the fault of men ouerhastie and vndiscreetlie rash, to determine
the supposition of the Pronowne Hoc, before the Neither does Hoc, of it self
determine that precise instant wherein it is uttered. The thing demonstrated
may follow that instant or moment, when the proposition is speculatiue, much
more when it is practick and is cause of the thing signified. Nomen and
Pronomen secundum Grammaticos non consignificat tempus, sed Verbo id competit:
quare demonstratio per se Pronominis abstrahit a tempore: scilicet and quo
prosertur Pronomen and quo terminatur totius orationis prolatio; says, Soto,
cited in the Censure, p. 501. In the Relation of S. F. page 80. there is a
place of Scripture brought to show that the thing demo^strated, may follow the
Pronoune Hoc, Hoc est praeceptum meum, vt etc. There be diverse other examples
of it in holy Scripture: whereof some are noted also by your Chamier l. 10. de
Euchar. c. 21. Et hoc vobis signum, inuenietis infantem. Luc. 2. Hoc scientes,
quod vetus homo. Romans 6. Hoc est pactum meum -- vt circumcidatur. Genesis 17. Haec
sunt nomina -- Ruben, Simeon, Exodi 1. And the Prophets otherwhile begin with
Haec dicit Dominus. He adds that sometimes Hoc, and Hic, demonstrate things
past, Hoc totum factum est. Matthew. 1. and sometimes that which the eye cannot
at all perceive, Haec eo cogitante. Mat. 1. Falsum est, says he, c. 18. etiam
in Pronomine, aduerbioue demonstrandi requiri rem praesentem. Non enim est
perpetuu^. and, Omnia, tam praesentia quam praeterita, sensui sunt
demonstrabilia: quia in sensibus aures sunt, quibus per verba nihil non
demonstrari potest. To which purpose he cites S. Aug. l 2. de Doct. Christ. c.
3.
predicate be known, it appears by that I have already said about it. If it
be considered secundum se (as it is before the rest is uttered) it is
indetermined and he must make a new Dictionarie that will have it in that
acception to signify bread. Or, Hic, (in the other form,) determinatlie and
ex vi sua, to signify wine: into which new Dictionarie should the same
compilers put Haec, for meat, which it does signify as determinatlie of it
self, the young Scholars in Hic, Haec, Hoc, would have a feast.

If Hoc does not, being taken secundum se, determinatlie signify bread (as it
is manifest it does not,) then D. Morto^s whole building, without more ado, D.
Vshers arguments for bread, are answered by F. Mallon.
falls unto the ground. Yet least it should not easily enough be ruined this
way, he does another way himself vndetermine it, whilst he brings in an Army
of Witnesses to force his Reader to believe that the Sacrament is consecrated
by prayer and benedictio^ distinct from these words (Hoc est etc.) which he
says be not words of invocation and prayer, but of declaration. It is in the
second Chapter of his first book, in his Challeng; where he says, The
Archbishop of Caesarea comes in, compassed about with a cloud of witnesses
and reasons to prove that the consecration used by our Savior was performed by
that blessing by prayer which preceded the pronouncing of those words Hoc est
corpus meum. Were this so, the chiefest of his (D. Mortons) cauils, which is
about the supposition of of the word Hoc, were cut of by it. When the water at
Cana was changed, and wine standing upon the table, what cavil could then be
raised against these words Hoc est vinum, This is wine.

He thinks he gets the Cause, if he ca^, out of the words of any of ours,
deduce the contrary to the common tenet of the Church. Which manner of
disputing in him is notoriously If the Church-authoritie be overthrown by
authority, it must be done by a greater. The authority of private men, is
far, yea infinitely less: in regard of the Divine Assistance which the
Church, by promise, has He shall teach you. Joan. 14. and 16. It has seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and to us. Act. 15.
insufficient. The Writers themselves were still ready to retract whateuer
could be found in their books any way repugnant unto Church-doctrine: they
knew they might mistake: and therefore submitted their writings and opinions
and judgment to the judgment and Censure of the Church, which they believed to
be secured from error, by the providence of the holy Ghost her Master.

Should a man in the Schools of Deuinitie step up and say, The definition of
the Council of Trent, approved by the Church, is repugnant (in consequence at
least) to the Opinion of, suppose, Bellarmine, Ergo the definition is false; He
would be thought either to deride the Cardinal, or to want something which
commonly men have. This I say in general, touching the manner: and for the
matter, it is well known, the Cardinal (I mean the same of others) was able
to defend, both, Universal tenets, and his own private Answers and opinions,
against a better Scholar then D. Morton.

Doctor Featlie, as it appears by his Argument out of Tertullians words, puts
the figure in the word Corpus: Conference of Cathol. and Prot. doct. l. 1. c.
10. a 1.
for he would have the words to run thus, Hoc est figura corporis mei, which
is the opinion of Oecolampadius, favored also by Calvin. And according to this
way, the words, Hoc ^st corpus meum, are thus interpreted: Hoc, this thing, est
is, corpus meum the figure of my body. Whence it will presently follow (if
you consider the ^ext well: this is my () which is broken, delivered, for you;)
that the figure of our Saviors body suffered for us.

His Arguments are in the Relation where you will see their Answers. He agrees
with D. Morton in excluding the verity of the body, and in expounding Hoc,
this bread; which is more then the word signifies. And the determination of it
to bread properly taken, is begd: as has been showed before; and shall
appear more fully hereafter in the Solution of his Objections. Neither does
it determinatlie import or signify a thing distinct from Corpus. If it did, it
were false to say pointing at you, Hoc est corpus; because the proposition does
affirm Identitie betwixt the significata of the two extremes, which Identitie
were not, if Hoc determinatlie signified a thing distinct from that which is
signified by Corpus. And by the same reason it appears manifestly that the
extremes are not, ex vi terminoru^, disparata. If they were, Hoc must import a
nature or thing distinct from that which Corpus does import: which is not only
against Theology, but also against Logic and the general notion of men that
know Latin, agreeing that hoc, of it self, determines no nature.

I note here further that both these, D. Morton and D. Featlie, do make the
blessed Sacrament to be in it self nothing else but bread properly, with a
relation to grace, and to the body now in heaven (which relation being founded
in the institution, is rationis, in the mind only,) and consequently, how
ever in words they repugne, they make it a mere sign or figure. This appears
by their interpretation of the words; Hoc this bread, est D. Morton
does signify, Corpus meum my body, it does signify; there is all: or, Hoc
this bread, est is, Corpus meum the D. Featlie
figure of my body, the figure, not the substance, not the verity. They tell
you there is more, but if you ask what it is, they cannot find it. Grace is
not the Sacrament, but the This writing is the effect of my pen as the
isntrumental cause: but it is not my pen that still remains a mere pen.
effect of it. Gods omnipotency, is not the Sacrament, nor any part of the
Sacrament properly. Neither is his decree to give us grace when we receive
worthily, the thing here meant by this word, Sacrament. Nor the faith and
devotion of the receauer: faith is not the Sacrament. Nor the body of our
Savior in Heaven, or on the Cross. What then is it? Nothing but the sign:
that is, bread properly, with a dubble reference, one to the body or death of
Christ; another, to grace, nothing else. This reallie is their tenet; though
they be ashamed, many of the^, to profess it. Pretending a great feast, they
serve in dishes; and in them the picture or figure of meat; but the meat it
self, the body, is, they say, in heaven only, never nearer.

The Catholics interpret the words plainly and properly, Hoc this, est,
is, Corpus meum my body. In which sense it is confessed by our adversaries
themselves that they importe such a real presence as we believe and defend.
So that, My Lord, sitting down to defend, had this advantage on his side, that
the Scripture does in plain terms avouch his tenet. And M. Featlie on the
contrary, this disadvantage, that he was to dispute against the proper sense
of holy Scripture. Which proper sense, was, when Luther began, Hic error (so
the Sacramentarians do style it) apud totius orbis Christianos inualuit. Bucer.
lib. de Concord. page 660. Missae abominatio omnes reges and populos a summo
vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit, vt etc. Calu. l; 4. Instit. c. 18
generally believed and abbetted: and that confessedlie for Libenter concedo
Idolomaniam Pontificiam, cuius est verum sacrificium Missaticum, totum paene
terrarum orbem inuasisse, praesertim superiore proxime millenario. Hutter, de
sacrif. Misl. page 377.
many hundred years together. Si veru^ est quod de Corpore Christi (he speaks
to Bere^garius) tu credis and astruis, falsum est quod ab Ecclesia vbique
gentium, de eadem (...) creditur and astruitur. Omnes enim qui Christianos se
and esse and dici laetantur, veram Christi carnem verumque eius sanguinem,
vtraque sumpta de Virgin in hoc Sacramento se percipere gloriantur. Interroga
vniuer os qui Latinae linguae, nostrarum ne litterarum notitiam perceperu^t,
interroga Graecos, Armenios, seu cuiuslibet nationis quoscuncunque Christianos
homines vno ore hanc fidem se testantur habere. Lanfran. Archiep. Cantuar. l.
de Euchar con. Bereng. See the Censure. page 331.
All Nations as many as believed that our Savior has true Those who following
the error of Eutiches, said the flesh of our Savior was turned into his
Divinity, said consequently to their error that here was reallie present
the body of the Divinity. Sacrificium panis carnis Christi, negant esse
corpus Christi, sed diuinitatis corpus esse dicunt. Euthym. in Panoplia. par.
2. ti^. 20. Whence it appears how vnskilfullie they be, by some brought for
the Sacramentarian heresy.
flesh and blood, have believed it: and amongst them, our cuntry See the
Prudentiall Balance.
England. And Luther himself wrote a Defensio (...) verborum coenae.
book in defense of it, telling the Sacramentarians, the text of Scripture is
to In defens. verb. coenae. He is large in examining the places objected out of
S. Augustine, Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarious, and Irenaeus. Hereafter I shall
have occasion to bring some of his words touching the place of Tertullian which
Featlie stands upon: and as for Irenaeus whom Birckbeck does allege, he
demonstrates plainly that he held a real presence of our Saviors body to
our bodies. Pugnabat (Irenaeus) contra Valentinum Haereticum, eiusque socios
qui asserebant Christum non esse filium Dei, and non fore resurrectionem
carnis, nec corpus saluati, sed animam. Contra hoc scribit and affirmat
Irenaeus quod corpus etiam saluetur, and quod resurrectio carnis futura sit,
secundum Symbolum Apostolicum. Inter caetera autem hoc contra ipsos producit
argumentum: Si corpus non saluatur, quid ergo cibatur corpore in coena? si ibi
aeterno cibo vescitur, vt in aeternum viuat necesse est. Referamus autem
propria ipsius verba. Quemadmodum enim qui a terra panis percipiens vocationem
Dei etc. Luther. in Def. verb. coenae. p. 408. See the place, for he is very
large. Paulus dilucide nos docet quid sit Dei vocare seu nominare, vbi ait,
Deus vocat seu nominat ea quae non sunt, vt sint. Eodem modo Irenaeus loquitur
de Dei vocare seu nominare. Item Moses Genesis 1. testatur Deum per suum vocare
seu nominare, quod est per verbum suum, omnia creare. Si tibi (Oecolampadium
alloquitur) haec definitio non placet, age, praesta te Magistrum, and nos doce
quid aliud vocatio Dei esse possit, quando Deus vocat, dicit, appellat,
nominat. Hoc verbum Dei est cum inquit Hoc est corpus meum, sicut in Genesi ait
Fiat lux, and fit lux. Deus est qui nominat seu vocat, and quicquid nominat id
illico praesto est, vt Psalm 33 testatur, dixit and facta sunt. Ibidem. Item,
Irenaeus ait. Quomodo autem rursus dicunt carnem in corruptionem deuenire, and
non percipere vitam, quae a corpore and sanguine Domini alitur? Hic iterum
audimus, corpus nostrum eo cibari corpore and sanguine Domini, vt in aeternum
viuat, and non corrumpatur vt Haeretici somniabant. Irenaeus loquitur de
corporali manducatione and cibatione corporis, and tamen vult cibum illum esse
corpus and sanguinem Domini. Ibidem He brings there also the Sacramentarians
Euasions, and refutes them out of Irenaeus words.
clear and plain, in so much that it cannot Si quispiam mihi persuadere
potuisset in sacrame^to praeter pane^ -- verum ego captum me video, nulla
euadendi via relicta: textus enim Euangelij nimis apereus est and potens.
Epist. ad Argentin. habetur tomo 7. in Epist. Farrag.
be avoided: and auouching withal that it was the Fathers tenet. So likewise
does Melancthon, Melancth l. de Ver. Corp. Quid fiet in tentatione cum
disputabit conscientia quam habuerit caussam dissentiendi a recepta sententia
in Ecclesia* Tunc verba ista, hoc est corpus meum* fulmina erunt. Ibidem.
Sequor, says he, veteris ecclesiae sententiam quae affirmat adesse corpus in
coena: ac iudico hanc habere Scripturae testimonium. I follow the sentence of
the ancient Church which affirms the body to be present in the supper; and I
judge it to have the testimony of Scripture.

Those who stood on Featlies side, were such as by Apostacy had gonne out of
the true Church. Archidiaconus Andegauensis. anno 1035. Docuit paruulos non
esse baptizandos, test Guit mundo eiusdem temporis scriptore. Hanc autem
Haeresim esse constat vniuersalis ecclesiae testimonio: idemque fatentur Angli
Protestants.
Berengarius, (who Malmesb. l. 3.
recanted;) Sacerdos and Pastor de Lutterworth. anno 1371.
Wickleff, Archidiaconus VVittembergensis, and Lutheri discipulus.
Carolstadius, Pastor Tigurinus.
Swinglius. Ex monacho Apostata.
Oecolampadius, and Nouiodunensis. Deus adeo hunc Haereticum percussit, vt
desperata salute, daemonibus inuocatis, iurans, execrans, and blasphemans,
miserrime animam malignam exhalarit. Schlussel in Theol. Calu. fol. 72. idemque
testatur Hieron. Bolsecus in eius vita.

That Luther, Calvin, Swinglius, Carolstadius, Oecolampadius, had been
Papists, (as they speak) before they fell into their Heresies, is declared out
of their own authors in the book de Auth. Prot. eccles. l. 2. c. 11.


Calvin: See the Censure, page 274.
Judas, and that great Apostata the Sea the Censure, page 274.
Devil. I do not mention Touching this Bertrame read the Plea for the Real
Presence, against Sir Humfrey Linde. by I. O.
Bertram, because he that makes any speech in him Caluinisticallie Protestant
in this matter, does withal make him co^tradict himself, (it is the same of
that Concerning this Homily, and the Author, see the Prudentiall Balance l. 1.
c, 19. in Odo, and Alfrick. etc. 22. n. 4.
Homily which is cited as Elfricks,) and thereby casts him of.

The Judge of Controversies, is, according to our Adversaries themselves,
either the scripture, or the Spirit. If we go with the Controversy to the
Scripture, and to our Savior speaking in it, the cause is ours; This is my
body which is broken for you. Which words, if they be certainly true in a
proper and literal sense, then we are to yield the whole cause [reall
Presence, propitiatory Sacrifice, and Adoration) says D. Morto^, the last who
wrote in England before Waferer of this subject. I have said often, and now
repeat the same again, that the litterall sense or letter cannot be retained
in these words of Christ, Cited p. 293.
This is my body, without establishing the Papisticall transubstantiation,
says Beza.

If we go with the Controversy to the Spirit in the Church, we gain the Cause
too, for all known Churches in Luthers time did believe and profess it. If to
the Spirit in the first Protestants, Luther and his Disciples, the Cause is
ours.

If we consider diligently the circumstances of the text, (...) and (...),
and (...), my own body, that which is delivered, broken, crucified, for you:
and of the blood in like manner, ( vt supra page 11. we are more and more
confirmed in our tenet.

If we read the Fathers, we find the^ to be ours, the Lord of Plessis
Mornay, had objected out of them, by the help of his Ministers, what he could:
but he is fully answered by the worthy Cardinal Peron, in a just tome of
this subject only, which book he were to refute, that would lay claim to
Antiquity in behalf of the Sacramentarian Heresy.

Moreover that our tenet of the Real presence of our Saviors body under the
signs, was the tenet of Antiquity, the Church tells us, the Church I say; in
Luthers days, and before, a thousand years together: in which Church there
have been innumerable great Scholars, examining Records, reading the
Fathers, comparing and considering the text of Scripture; and this Church tells
us, the Fathers, their predecessors, taught them as they teach us. Why should
we not believe them, and in a matter so plainly delivered in the Scripture;
rather then Daniel Featlie, or Oecolampadius, or John Calvin?

If you will move us with Authority, bring greater Authority. If you will
move us with Scripture, bring plainer Scripture; and more worlds openly, in
plain terms interpreting it, against us. The Authority of one Divine, of a
Nation, will not serve against a world.

The Doctor obiecteth S. Augustine; but, against S. Augustine: as hereafter
will appear. He obiecteth Tertullian and Origin; and, against Tertullian, and
Origin they, in this point, were not divided from the world. But, had Origin,
or Tertullian been opposite in their opinion, who so mad as to follow them,
against so great an authority as the Church?

To oppose a less Authority to a greater, and thereby to think to win the
cause, is absurd. If Authority can move, the greater it is the more it moves.

To urge against the Church, the words of any, in As, when a man speaks of the
practical dictio or vocatio, which is a making of the thing by saying it is or
calling it by the name, (Ipse dixit and facta sunt; Lazare veni for as:
Adolescens tibi dieo surge;) to interpret h^s words of a mere speculatiue
dictio or vocatio. Qui est a terra panis, percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non
communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and
coelesti. Irenaeus l 4 c 34. and l. 5. c 2. Quando ergo and mixtus calix and
fractus panis percipit verbu^ Dei fit Eucharistia etc. The words are
operatoria, practical: as you will see more at large in the solution of the
fifth Arg p. 479. and seqq. S. Ierom upon those words of S, Matthew Surgens
imperauit ventis -- venti and mar^ obediunt ei. Ex hoc loco, says he,
intelligimus quod omnes creaturae sentiant creatorem. Quas enim increpauit, and
quibus imperauit, sentiunt, imperantem: non errore Hareticorum, qui omnia
putant animantia, sed maiestate conditoris: quae apud nos insensibilia, illi
sensibilia sunt. In c. 8. Matt.
another sense then they did utter them; or to build an advantage upon a
mistake in some For example, what the word Hoc, does preciselie demonstrate. S.
Bonauenture did avouch the real presence and transubstantiation, as all
Scholars know; though he did expound Hoc, of bread. Wherefore your deduction
from the like interpretation, (could you find it in one more ancient,) to the
man's belief of a mere sign, would not hold. The sequel faild, in him, a
Divine. And you, though you know not peradventure whether S. Peter when he said
Tabitha rise, did address his speech to the dead body, calling that Tabitha,
(Conuersus ad corpus dixit, Tabitha surge,) or to the live Person which upon
his word appeared; or whether it did in the beginning of the speech stand
indeterminatlie: will grant, notwithstanding, that in the end of the speech,
there was not a dead corse, as in the beginning: but a live woman, and this by
virtue of his words instrumentallie, and principally by the operation of Gods
omnipotency; which does also work here, as the Fathers tell us.

In these propositions, Coeci vident: mortui resurgunt; qui in monumentis sunt
audient votem etc. there is (as the Deuines say) sensus diuisus.


nice point or subtilitie, wherein, with co^se^t in the mystery The thing
imported by our Saviors words properly understood.
it self there might be diversity of opinions; is an evident sign of
Heretical pertinacie. The Church, by continual exercise, does profit in the
knowledge of such matters. And, as now amongst the modern Deuines, some do
better interpret Gods word in obscure places, and deliver the truth in more
accurate and proper terms, then others: so was it, if we believe the S. Aug.
de Praed. Sanct. c. 14. Hier. Apol. adu. Ruff.
Fathers, in the times primitive; wherein some did speak of matters, by
Protestants now believed, less Fieri potest vt -- vel certe antequam in
Alexandria quasi Daemonium meridianum Arius na ceretur, innocenter quaedam and
minus caute loquuti sunt, and quae non possint peruersorum hominum calumniam
declinare. S. Hier, Apol. aduers. Ruff. lib. 2.
warily then others did.

It is well known also, that the best Scholars and greatest Saints were ever
ready to submit themselves and their judgment to the Judgment of the Church:
with whom the Spirit of truth remains, to teach all truth, forever. Wherefore,
if it should have happened that any of them had been mistaken in this matter,
(as S. Cyprian was in the point Baptism,) he could not without open wrong be
objected against the Church. Especially, considering that, in that his
general submission of his judgment he virtuallie retracted whateuer should be
found in his writings contrary to any determination of Hers.

S. Aug. l 5. de Bapt. c. 17. l. 2 c. 4.
You know S. Augustines Apology for the Saint but now mentioned, whose opinion
he rejected because it was against the definition of a General Council.
Neither do I prefer my own opinion before his, but the judgment or sentence
of the Holy Catholic Church, all which he was not. and again Neither durst
we affirm any such thing if we were not well grounded upon the most
co^senting or agreeable Authority of the Universal Church, unto which
undoubtedly he (S. Cyprian) would have yielded if as then, the truth of this
Question, being cleared and declared, had been established by a General
Council. So far touching the state of the Controversy Disputed in the
Conference.

The Apologist, who does address himself against Qua^do minora maioribus
coaequantur; inferioris comparatio, superioris iniuria est. S. Hier. ad^.
Iouin. l. 1.
my Lord, is bitter: and without any cause given him. The title over every
leaf is, An Apology for Doctor Featlie against the Bishop of Chalcedon. The
Object of my Censure is this Apology, which labors to discredit the Catholic
Relation: and does many times misreport and corrupt it: which makes me
represent it again to the Reader entirely. I shall have much ado whilst I
blott out Waferers Errors to keep my pen from touching him that lies amongst
his lies and heresies. But, the field of combat is no place of complement.
Flattery, ever a fault, when it is practiced to the disadvantage of Religion
becomes a crime.

APPROBATIO.
IN hoc libro, cui titulus A RELECTION etc. nihil est fidei Catholicae, aut
bonis moribus contrarium, sed multa quae veritatem Catholicam de Reali
praesentia confirmant. Quapropter dignum censui qui praelo co^mittatur.

Actum Duaci, 22. Maij. 1635. Georgius Coluenerius Sac. Theologiae Doct. and
eiusdem regius ordinariusque Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri
Praepositus, Vniuersitatis Duacensis Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

THE ERRATA.
In the Praef. (...). page 29. is my. p. 90. import it. p. 93. where you. p
103. (...). p. 112. (...). p. 116. are two -- so you shall have. p. 117. marg.
108. p. 132. desca^t. p. 151. So now we. p. 160. So much. p. 163. the body is
pres. p. 172. perceive. p. 186. the figure the. p. 201. it is not bread. (...),
p. 205. Chamier. l. 10. de Euch. c. 2. p. 210. he gave to be. p, 132. or a
proper speech a negation of. p. 248. call our. p. 260. S. Tho. 2. 2. qu. 173.
ar. 2. p. 273, as black. a. the conclusion. p. 284. and tra^ssubst. p. 300.
thereby. p. 306. speak. p. 322. page 301. p. 349. returnest. p. 396. and adm.
p. 410. visibile body. p. 419. later. -- immolation: affirming. p. 421. bread.
Moreover. p. 443. pronoune. p. 147. (...) p. 459. his chair. p. 482. is conf.
p. 505. the words of consecration Hoc est corpus meum. p. 516. refer his
confession, to sacrificing; not to unbloody. p. 519. Jesus, was. page 527. of
lies. 544. (g) p. 546. no other name. p. 547. Pane and vino deficiente, licet
in coena ijs vti quibus pro potu and cibo communiter vtimur, says Scarpius
cont. 3. de Euch. q. 1. p. 1411. p. 569. to write them. p. 587. whether M. T.
G. B. p 588. merry. b. (...) etc. p. 184. peronatus.

M. Featlies Conference with D. Bagshaw seems by his Relation page 301. to
have been before this. His Refusal to meet my Lord, whereof S. E. makes
mention page 10. (E. H. M. W. the Doctor can spell these letters,) was when
the Prince, our now Sovereign, was in Spain. I have the Relation by me, but
forbear to print it unless I be further called upon.

THE SVMME OF A CONFERENCE BETWIXT M. D. SMITH NOW B. OF CHALCEDON, AND M.
DAN. FEATLY MINISTER. ABOUT THE REAL PRESENCE.

WITH THE NOTES of S. E.

Facile est vt quisque Augustinum vincat, quanto magis vt vicisse videatur: aut
si non videatur, vicisse dicatur, facile est.

S. Aug. Epist. 174. TO THE READER.
IT is now more the^ a year, COURTEOUS READER, since first I saw the Sacrilege
of M. Featlie, whereunto he has adjoined a Conference or Disputation had in
Paris long ago with my Lord of Chalcedon. This Conference being short I
presently read it over, and liked so well some fragme^ts of my Lords Answer
which the Minister has imparted, that I desired to see the whole: but could
not then get a coppie.

Having lighted now at leingth on a Latin one, and liking it exceeding well, I
have thought good to translate it, and impart it unto others by the print:
partly because it is not easily found by such as do seek after it, the
Conference being past almost twenty years ago; and partly also because the
Minister (who would seem to have a Coppie) does cite imperfectlie my Lords
answers, putting words or pieces together at his pleasure, and sometimes
adding: and obscuring the sense which in the Relation it self I find to be
distinct and clear.

He has also striuen to make good his former Arguments; and inuoluing them in
a new discourse, has thrust in, here and there, what he thought good:
wherefore for their sakes that are unlearned, I will, as often as there is cause,
add a note; and taking of the new mask of words, will let the Reader see,
that after all his washing, those Ethiopians have not changed their complexion:
and that now this second time of their coming on his Errand, they need not
any other Answer then that was given them before.

In one of his Epistles before the book I mentioned, he demands to see another
leap; which may be showed him in good time, mean while you may be pleased to
measure this, which the minister would not have begun himself to chronicle,
had he not thought it to be extraordinary.

(...) Here Is Rhodes.
IN the year 1612. Master Daniel Featlie being in France, Chaplain to the
Ambassador of our Late Sovereign, there came to Paris one M. Kneuet,
halfe-brother to M. John Foord, an honest and virtuous Gentleman the living in
that City. This M. Kneuet, being, upon his arrival there, put in mind, that
he was mistaken in the matter of Religion, which is the thing a man should
principally attend unto; and that before Luther all known Churches did
believe that which he saw there in France openly professed; told his brother
(M. Foord) he would see one of ours defend it before M. Featlie, whom he did
esteem a great Scholar. Withal he acquainted. M. Featlie with the business,
and with the point he meant should be discussed. M. Featlie thinking himself
alone hard enough for the whole Church of Rome, undertook it: and to perform
it with the more applause, did provide himself diligently for encounter. At
leingth, upon the third of September, word was sent to M. D. Smith (who being
then in town was entreated to undertake the cause,) that he should provide
himself for the morrow.

On the 4. of September there met at M. Kneuets chamber, M. D. Smith, and M.
Featly. With M. D. Smith came his cozen M. Since Doctor of Divinity.
Rainer; and with M. Featly came one M. John Porie, who had been a burgeois
(as it was said) in the first Parliament, in King James his time. There were
also present M. John Foord, M. Thomas Rant, M. Ben: Johnson, M. Henry
Constable, and others; not English only, but also, French: for M Featly
presuming the victory, had made the matter known. The conference began at
noone: and by agreement, M. D. Smith was this time to defend, M. Featly to
dispute. Afterward upon another day, M. D. Smith was to dispute, and M.
Featly to defend: the rest, not to entermedle.

THE RELATION.
THE conditions of this Conference Master Featlie did not observe; for whereas
it was to have been private before it M. Kneuet (for whose sake it was
undertaken) and his brother, only; Master Featlie brought to pass that it was
public; there being many called unto it, not English only, but also French.
Secondly whereas the conference according to appointment was to be betwixt them
two only, M. Featlie called M. Moulins thither also, though this Minister
afterward changing his mind, did not come. Thirdly, he let not M. D. Smith
know of the time of Conference but one day before they were to meet, whereas
he (as we may justly believe) had provided himself long before. Whence one
of his frinds said the conference would be exact and elaborate.

Before they began to dispute. D, Smith said the conference was to be, not of
transubstatiation, but of the real presence only, which by order of
disputation ought to be first. He said also that he was content to grant unto
M. Featlie the opponents part for this day, so that M. Featlie would promise
to let him have it another day; otherwise he would by lots try who that day
should be opponent. And M. Featlie promising that another day he should
propose arguments for the Catholic tenet, he willingly undertook the
defendants part. But when according to the manner of Oxford he began to declare
the state of the question, and to show whitall the grounds of the Catholic
tenet, Featlie cried out that he would in no case give way thereunto. D. Smith
told him that himself was a Doctor of Oxford, and that he (M. Featlie) was a
Graduate of the same University, wherefore there was reason they should
observe their university manner. But M. Featlie took this in so ill part,
that he said openly he would rather omit the conference then permit it: So
that D. Smith was forced herein to let him have his will, least the expectation
of the auditorie should heerevpon have been frustrate: or they take occasion to
suspect that he sought to decline the cumbat. Wherefore leaving that his fort
wherein he might have justly staid, and coming out into the open field, he
bad M. Featlie bring out his arguments, such as might suffice to justify
before God and men his departure both from the Roman Church and all other
ancient whatsoever, yea and from the Lutheran too in this point; which need to
be demonstrations without doubt; for there be not wanting probable arguments to
impugn a truth most evident.

THE NOTES OF S. E.
D. Featlie in his Relation does acknowledge that he would not permit my Lord
of Chalcedon to set down the confirmations, or show the grounds, of our tenet,
and for excuse pretends that it was against the laws of the disputation,
wherein it was agreed, as he relates, that Master Featlie at that time should
only oppose and D. Smith only He should have added that M. Featlie should
answer another day: for this was likewise agreed upon; but he could not be
brought to do it.
answer. Whereas it was told him the^, that it has been and still is the
custom in Oxford for the Defendant to do that which my Lord would have done;
and the University has conceived it to appertain (as indeed it does) to the
Defendants part: which M. Featlie cauilling at, in the beginning, showed
himself not willing to enter in to the combat with my Lord of Chalcedon if he
could have put it of; and therefore (being conscious of the weakness of his
cause) thought the very sight of our tenet as it appears to Scholars, would
overthrow his, utterly; and that every word by way of preface, was an
argument to convince it. The same fear and in the experience of the first
conflict much augmented, he betrayed again afterward when he was called upon
to be defendant according to promise, as appears by the end of the relation,
where the Reader will see with what tergiuersation he did shift it of. And
since that time also, in England it self, twice to my knowledge, (I can put the
particulars down when time serves) he has refused to meet my Lord, in
dispute.

Being himself in his Relation to tell the state of the Question, he puts
down a discourse to make the simple Reader giddie, to the end he see not on
which side the truth stands, and which of the Disputants have the upper hand;
whereas the state of the Controversy is in it self clear and plain. The
Catholics hold and believe that in the holy Eucharist, there is the body and
blood of our blessed Savior truly, reallie, and substantiallie. Conc. Trid.
Sess. 13. can. 1. condemning such as hold it to be there only as in a sign,
or in a figure, or in virtue. Ibidem. Joan. 6. v. 55.56 1. Cor. 11. v. 24.25.
Co^c. Trid. sess 7. can. 6. and sess 1^ cap. 1. S. Tho. 3. p. q. 83 a 1. ad 2.
and a 2 ad. 2 Decret. de Consec. Did. 2. c. 48. and 72.
We do not deny that it is there virtute, in virtue and efficacy; it has
virtue and power there, to work in the Soul; neither do we deny that it is
there as in a figure, for the Eucharist is an image of the passion: or that it
is there as in a sign, the exterior species are a sign of that which is
within. It is a Sacrament also, and a Sacrament is a sign. But we deny
tatummodo vt in sign, vel in figura, aut virtute, ex Can. 1.
that the body and blood are there only so; believing that they are there
according to the verity and substance of body and blood.

The Sacramentarians, for whom D. Featlie disputed against our tenet, hold the
contrary: vzt, that the body and blood of our Savior be not in the Eucharist
truly according to the verity and substance of the thing signified by those
names, Cited by my Lord of Chalcedon in the Conference of Cath. and Protest.
doct. c. 10. a. 1.

The Son of God is by the mystical benediction united to us corporally, as
man: but as God, spiritually, with the grace of his spirit renewing our spirit
to new life and participatio^ of the divine nature. S. Cyrill. Alexa^d. li. 11.
in Io. c 27. See Cardinal Pero^ again S. Ples. Mornay Paris 1622.


but that the Eucharist is a sign and figure of it only. Jewel, it is not
indeed Christ's body. Peter Martyr, it is not properly the body of Christ.
Musculus, it is not the very body. Cartwright, it is only a sign. Perkins,
it is only a sign and seal of the body. Zuinglius, it is only a figure.
Beza, it was mere bread and wine which our Savior gave with his hands.
Calvin, the body is exhibited according to the virtue, not according to the
substance. And Featlie in his Relation page 3. Christ is not therein according
to the substance of his natural body. and page 4. the words of institution
are to be construed figuratiuelie, and not properly according to the rigor of
the letter. And a little before; not in the proper sense.

Against this Heresy of the Sacramentarians, we oppose plain Scripture, and
the direct affirmation of Jesus Christ, whith the unanimous interpretation of
Antiquity, and general consent of the Church, in whom the holy Ghost
determines controversies appertaining to divine faith; and has determined
this, which was believed in all ages, and generally professed in all Christian
Countreies, when Luther (who feign would, but in conscience as Epist. ad
Argentin.
he said could not contradict it) did begin to divide himself from the
Church.

D. Featlie opponent, is to prove the Catholic tenet to be false; and that in
the Eucharist there is not flesh and blood, according to the substance of the
thing, but a sign or figure of it only.

THE FIRST ARGUMENT.
DAn. Featly. The words of Christ This is my body, are understood of a
figure, therefore not of the body it self.


Doctor Smith. I distinguish your antecedent- 1.
Of a mere figure, such as were the legal figures, which the Apostle calls
egena elementa, Gal. 4.
poor elements, or such as statuaes are in regard of the things they do
represent; I deny your Antecedent. 2.
Of a figure which has the verity joined together with it, in which kind the
Son according to the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 1.
is the figure of his Fathers substance: and a King showing in triumph how he
did behave himself in the war, is, in this later action, a figure of
himself as in the former; and bread, exposed in the shop, is a figure of it
self as to be sold: So I grant your antecedent, and deny your consequence.


D. Featly. Tertulian lib. 4. contr. Marc. c. 40. says: Acceptum panem, and
distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est Corpus meum dicendo,
id est figura corporis mei. The bread taken and distributed unto his
disciples, he made it his body, saying this is my body, that is, the figure
of my body. Therefore according to Tertullian those words are understood of
a mere figure.


D. Smith. You pass quickly from Scripture to the Fathers, yet you are wont
to say, Collat. li. 2. ca. 22.
that the Fathers though conspiring all together) be not authentical and
infallible expositors of the Scripture. wherefore your argument relying upon
the Fathers exposition, is weakly grounded according to the tenet of your own
men. To the place objected I Answer, Lactan. Instit. divine. li. 5. c. 1.
Hieron. li. de Instit. mon. ad Paul.
that Tertullian (as Lactantius and S. Hierome have well observed) speaks very
obscurelie, and sometimes places his words so that it is hard to discern
amongst them which to which is referd. In the place alleged, he does not
refer those words, id est figura Corporis mei, to Corpus meum, but to Hoc.
And the sense or meaning of them is, This, which once was an old figure of my
body, is now my body. And when Master Doctor Smith said he could bring out
of Tertullian himself in the same place, four reasons proving this was
Tertullians meaning, and withal cited other words of Tertullian, wherein he
does after the same manner disorder the composition of the words, Master
Featlie would not suffer him to bring those reasons, neither did he say any
thing to the places wherein Tertullian had in like sort inuerted the order of
the words: but only said the order of the words (alleged) was unusual; and
that it follows not they are here disordered by this Author, because he had
done the like elsewhere. Doctor Smith answered that this kind of confusion
of words, and difficulty in expounding himself, was not unusual in
Tertullianus creber est in sentetijs sed difficilis in eloquendo. S. Hieron
loc. cit.
Tertullian; bringing instance thereof: and said withal that he did not
infer that Tertullian here did speak so because he had done the like in
other places, but because he does afford in this very place four several
reasons why he must be so understood: whereof one he produced presently out of
the words objected. For, quoth he, since Tertullian says that our Savior made
bread his own body, he was not so forgetful as immediately to add, that
the Eucharist is a mere figure of his body. This he seconded with another, as
that Tertullian presently after the foresaid words, says, it had not been a
figure etc. figura autem non fuisset, by which words he shows that he speaks
of the figure which was before our Savior said hoc est corpus meum, this is my
body. And the book of Tertullian being brought he showed a third reason out
of other words ensuing. Vt autem and sanguinis veterem figuram in vino
recognoscas, aderit Esaias etc. and that thou may acknowledge in the wine an
old figure of blood, Esaie etc. Out of which words he proved that when
Tertullian spoke of bread, he spoke of an old figure; because he says of the
wine plainly that it was an old figure of blood; and connecting this his
proof, videlicet, that wine had been an old figure of blood, with the former
of bread, he says vt autem and sanguinis veterem etc. Where the particles
autem and and, show that in both he speaks of a like (that is to say, an old
legal) figure: and that he mea^t, that both wine was an old figure of our
Saviors blood, and bread an old figure of his body. Now if Tertullian
speak (as has been proved) of an old legal figure, it is certain he could
not refer the word figure, to the attribute or praedicatum, Corpus meum my
body: (for our Savior did not say that the Eucharisticall bread was an old
and legal figure of his body) but only to the subject. He was ready to urge
also, had D. Feat. permitted, that which immediately follows in the same
place. Cur autem panem Corpus suum appellat, and non magis peponem quem Marcion
cordis loco habuit, non intelligens veterem fuisse istam figuram Corporis
Christi, dicentis per Hieremiam, aduersum me cogitauerunt cogitatum dicentes
venite conijciamus lignum in panem eius, scilicet crucem in corpus eius. Itaque
illuminator antiquitatum quid tunc voluerit significasse panem satis
declarauit, corpus suum vocans panem. But why he calls bread his body and
not a po^pio^ rather, which Marcion had in place of a heart, not understanding
that it was an old figure of the body of Christ, saying by Jeremy they have
conspired against me, saying come let us cast wood on his bread, to wit, the
cross on his body. The Illuminator therefore of antiquities has declared
sufficiently what he would have bread the^ to have signified, calling his
body bread. In which words Tertullian speaks plainly of an old figure as
appears by veterem, and tunc. Moreover Tertullian in all that book proves
that our Savior did fulfill diverse figures of the old Testament; and amongst
others these of bread and wine, which in the old law were figures of his
body and blood. Therefore when he speaks of them (of bread and wine) as
figures, he speaks of old figures: and so would not say that our Savior made
bread to be a figure of his body (for it is certain that he did not make
bread an old legal figure) but that he made bread (which was an old legal
figure) his body as Tertullian himself there speaks.


In fine Master D. Smith told Master Featley that of courtesy he would admit
the word figura figure, to be referd to the word Corpus body, that his
argument might run on, and he make the best he could of it: but the minister
would not make use of this his free offer. And this was the issue of the first
argument.

THE NOTES OF S. E.
BY this discourse it does appear manifestly that Tertullian in the words
objected does not oppose but approve our doctrine; auouching a change in that
which of old was a figure of our Saviors body (to wit, bread) into the same
body; our Savior by this means, making it present in the shape of the figure
which it does fulfill; and even to the mouth and Caro Corpore Christi vescitur.
De Resur. carnis.
flesh, according to the same author, in another place. Master Featleyes
discourse of S. Cyprian calling Tertullian Master, putts me in mind of some
words after cited by my Lord in his answer to the 5. argument which the reader
may take from one of the same age, (to let Antiquity interpret Antiquity,)
as a further Comment upon the meaning of Tertullian. Sermon. de Coena apud Cyp.
Panis iste non effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro:
and sicut in persona Christi, humanitas apparebat, and latebat diuinitas, ita
Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter diuina se infundit essentia. That bread being
changed not in shape but in nature, is by the omnipotence of the Word made
flesh: and as in the Person of Christ the humanity did appear and the
divinity lie hid, so (here) a divine essence does vnspeakeablie pour it self
into a visible Sacrament. Behold a presence brought about by change of the
Substance or nature of that which was before (according to Scripture) a figure,
into the flesh or body; the exterior shape of the figure (bread) remaining,
and containing in it the foresaid holy substance: as in our Savior, God who is
invisible, is really in the shape of man. Neither is our cause any thing hurt
by the placing of those words, id est figura Corporis mei; whether they be,
joined in construction to the subject hoc, or to Corpus the praedicatum: since
he whose words they be does admit and teach a change whereby the figure is
fulfild; and therefore is no more an empty figure, according to that which was
answered in the beginning of this argument.

Now to come to D. Featleyes relation: first he demaundes a place for the
figurative Protestant exposition, out of any Protestant, more pregnant then is
this of Tertullian: and upon the sight thereof he will (if you take a Ministers
word) yield the better. Answ. Tertullian does not exclude the presence of the
body to the mouth, or to the signs: but does teach it, even here in this
place which you think is against it, as has been showed already. But your
men exclude it, as you may remember by that which you were told in the
beginning. Confessio Czingerina. Signa no^ sunt substantia signatorum, sed
tantum accipiunt nomina. The signs (Eucharisticall bread and wine,) are not
the substance of the things signed (body and blood) but take their names
only. The Heluetians, Panis non est ipsummet Corpus Christi, sed eius signum
dumtaxat. The Eucharisticall bread is not the very body of Christ, but a
sign of it only. Zuinglius, Panis figura tantummodo est. the Eucharisticall
bread is a figure only. And, Praeter panem non est quicquam amplius. There is
not any thing besides bread. These and many other of this kind, and out of
English authors too, be cited by my Lord of Chalcedon. Collat. Doct. Cath. li.
1. c. 10. ar. 1.

Secondly he says, the Words id est figura, are to be referd to the
praedicatum, as all men do in the like. It was answered that Tertullian
himself, did not always refer to the praedicatum what follows in that
manner; much less could it be truly said, Mar. 9.17.

Dicendo denique Christus mortuus est, id est vnctus: id quod vnctum est
mortuum ostendit, id est carnem.

Aduersus Praxean c. 29.


that all without exception, do. And to give you an example in Tertullian; he
in his book Aduersus Praxean speaks in the same form, saying: Christus
mortuus est, id est vnctus. Where, that part of the speech, id est vnctus, is
an explication of the subject, Christus. And; that the words, id est figura, in
the other speech are so to be referd, it was then proved out of Tertullian
himself, (who questionles is a good interpretor of his own mind) and out of
this very place, by diverse reasons; Which reasons D. Featley was not able to
disprove. But the reader will say, be it so: let the words be ordered as you
say, hoc, id est figura corporis mei, est corpus meum; what reason have you to
add more words in the proposition, as, quae fuit vetus; making the sense to
be, This which was an old figure of my body, is my body. Answer. In the
proposition no words are added, but in the explication of the proposition, the
word figure is determined according to the mind of Tertullian, by the words
vetus, and quae fuit; that you may know of what figure he speaks: veterem
istam fuisse figuram. It is Tertullian does tell the sense of Tertullian.

Thirdly, Tertullian (says D. Featly) could not be so dull as to think our
Savior meant the bread Which Was in the old Law a figure of his body, is noW
his body. Answer. He says expressly that he, our Savior, made it his body;
Wherefore now, bread, (according to Tertullian,) not remaining bread, but
changed, is his body. This Tertullian did believe, and teach, there, in that
place, telling us that bread was of old, a figure of our Saviors body, (non
intelligens veterem fuisse istam figuram corporis etc.) which he proves out of
Jeremy: and that this old figure, bread, was by our Savior made his body,
acceptum panem Corpus suum illum fecit, The bread taken, he made it his body.
So now it was no more bread in substance, but another thing. It was Sermon. de
Coen.
changed in nature, Greg. Nyss. orat. Catech.
transelemented, Cyrill. Hier. Catech. mist. 4. Itaque illuminator
Antiquitatum, etc. Cited p. 20.
not bread (in substance,) but the body.

To show that our Savior in assuming those elements (bread and wine) to
consecrate therein his body and blood, did intend to fulfill two old figures,
is the very scope and drift of Tertullian in that place* and the partial Scope
of his book; as all may know that can read and understand latin. and this
according to Tertullian is the sense of our Saviors words: this thing in my
hand, made of bread, (an Ierem. 11.19.
old figure of my body) is my body.

Out of this D. Featley in his relation, strives to prove that the words of
institution be figurative: for (says he) this proposition, this figure is my
body, cannot be true but by a figure: since neither the substance of bread,
nor the accidents are properly the body of our Savior. Answer. The question
is not whether there be any figure or no, but whether here be a figure
excluding the verity, as you were told in the beginning, and your self
undertook to prove. Neither are those words you speak of (this figure in my
body,) the words of institution, wherefore if there were a figure in them it
would not follow there is a figure in the words of institution. And if there
were a figure in the words of institution, it would not yet follow that it is a
mere figure, such a one as does Vide Tertull. l. 5. co^tr. Marc. c. 20. Plane
de substantia etc.
exclude the verity for which kind of figure you dispute. This the reader may
conceive, if he call to mind those other words, hic est calix, etc. Where
Catholics do grant a figure indeed, but such a one as does consist with the
verity of the blood.

To that expounding proposition, made out of Tertullians comment upon the word
hoc, which comment is this, id est figura. I answer that the word figure, is
there extended to signify the thing made of a figure: as in scripture the word
Genesis 3.
dust, is sometimes used to signify the thing made of dust, Ioh. 2.
water, to signify the thing made of water, and Exodus 7.
rod, to signify the thing made of a rod. Puluis es. Virga deuorauit. Gustauit
aquam, etc. And in this sense the proposition is true* for, the thing made of
bread (an old figure) is our Saviors body, and properly too for substance. To
the proof, videlicet neither the accidents of bread, nor the substance of
bread is properly called the body. I answer that it is true, and withal it is
true that the thing made of bread is properly the body: Tertul. l. 4. contr.
Marc.
Acceptum panem Corpus suum illum fecit; the bread taken, he made it his (not
another, but his own,) body. Sermon. de Coen. Cyp.
Panis iste non effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro.
That bread, being changed, not in shape but in nature, by the omnipotency of
the word is made flesh. Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. ad Ant. Imp. Those words in S.
Iustine, ex quo carnes nostrae per mutatione^ aluntur, be a description of the
bread before consecration: as in Tertullian, those, vetus figura.
(...) We are taught that the meat on food (bread and wine) made Eucharist,
by the prayers (words of consecration) of the Word of God, are his flesh and
blood. Bread and wine before consecration, but after consecration flesh and
blood. This was the doctrine of that age.

D. Featley. Here D. Smith was forced to acknowledge a figure in the words of
institution. Answer. This is false in that you say he was forced. In the very
See p.
first words of his answer, when you had only alleged the words of
institution, before you had urged any thing, he, of his own accord, told you
there was a figure, but not an empty figure: which answer you have hitherto
been impugning. And in his answer to the next argument he of himself repeated
it again, to show that he did stand upon the same ground still, which he knew
you could not undermine. Moreover in saying he was driven to it here, you make
your own tale vncoherent; for, in this place of your relation, the dispute as
you put it down, is not about our Saviors proposition as it is in the
gospel, This is my body; but, about an other made out of Tertullian, The
figure of my body, is my body: which words (whether they be figurative or
not figurative) are not the words of institution.

D. Featly. Thus they grew to an issue; M. Featly affirming that he demanded
no more then to have him grant there is a figure in these Words, hoc est
corpus meum. Answer. The issue of this argument was that you D. Featly could
not prove Tertullian said our Savior made the bread an empty figure of his
body; this Author, speaking there of an Non intellige^s veterem ista^ fuisse
figuram Corporis Christi, dicentis per Hieremiam etc. Cited page 15.
old figure before signifying our Saviors body; which figure he (our Savior)
now as Tertullian says, turned into it. Acceptum panem corpus suum illum
fecit. The bread taken he made it his body. That there is a figure in the
words, but not an empty figure, was told you in the beginning, and you did
undertake then to disprove it: if you be now contented with such an one, and
desire no more after all your labor, then was before offered you gratis, your
adversary must have the honout of making you change your mind.

D. Featly. As for your distinction, of a mere figure, and not mere in
speech, it is nothing but a mere fiction of your own brain. As if you should
say, this is a shadow, but not a You shall read in Scripture of shaddows which
were not mere shadows. And if shadows may positiuely be seen, as you will
say you have seen many, they benot mere shadows: Appare^t nobis huiusmodi
omnia nigra, a quibus rarum and paucum lumen repercutitur. Atis. Co. c. 1.
mere shadow. Answer. Here at length the Doctor gives the reader notice of
the distinction told him in the beginning, of a mere figure and not a mere
figure; which, being not able to disprove, he sleightes, calling it a mere
fiction: So leaving the reader to subsume that either the son of God, whom
the Scripture calls the figure of his Fathers substance, is a mere figure void
of being; God without divinity; or, that he is a mere fiction. Nor does he
mend the matter much by contracting it to speech; for, his reader in that kind
also will subsume and think, that either the Scripture is a mere figure, or
has no figure in it. Because, according to the Doctor, a speech cannot be
mixed: in part proper, and figurative in part. Neither is it the same reason of
a figure, image, or sign; as, of a shadow in your sense: for a sign, an
image, a figure, is not necessarily void of being as you conceive a shadow to
be. Sacraments are signs, and have some being; man is an image of God, yet a
substance: the son of God according to S. Paul is the figure of his Fathers
substance, but not an empty figure, unless that be empty which has in it a
whole infinity of perfection. He is the image of God, and yet has the
Divinity, all, in him. In like manner that whereof we speak, the Eucharist,
is an image, a figure, a Sacrament of the body; not empty, but such one as
has withal the body in it. This was said at first, since when you have but
gone a round, and are now even there where you began.

THE SECOND Argument, taken out of S. Augustine.
D. Featley. S. Augustine lib. 3. de doctrina Christ: says that speech of our
Savior, v^ses you eat the flesh of the son of man etc. is figurative,
therefore the other, this is my body, is so too.


D. Smith. I distinguish the were it denied that S. August. speaks there of
Sacrame^tall eating, the Minister could not prove it. reconde^dum in memoria
etc.
Antecedent. There is one eathing that is figurative both according to the
thing and the manner too; so the Fathers in the old law did eat Christ: an
other eating there is which is proper in regard of the thing, but figurative in
the manner, because the thing eaten, though it be taken into the mouth, and let
down into the stomach, is not bruised and cut, according to the common manner
of eating. And such a figurative eating of the body of our Savior, S.
Augustine means, and says that the speech ^oh. 6. is figurative in this
sense, to wit, according to the manner; for elsewhere he says that we
receive with faithful heart and mouth the mediator of God and man, Lib. 2.
co^t Aduers leg. ca. 9.
man Christ Jesus, giving us his body to be eaten, and his blood to be
drunk. Where it is manifest that he speaks of proper eating of the flesh of
Christ, according to the thing eaten; because he says we receive the same
flesh with the mouth, which we receive with faithful heart; and also because
he does add presently that, that our eating of the flesh of Christ and
drinking of his blood seem to be more horrible then killing, and shedding of
man's blood: whereas a mere figurative eating, wherein the flesh of Christ it
self is not eaten, but the figure only, does not seem to have any horror,
as the eating of our Saviors flesh which is received without all hurting of it
seems to have, though indeed it have not.


D. Featlie. It is horrible to eat ma^s flesh what way soever.


D. Smith. That is not true, as appears in mummie, which because it is not in
the proper shape (of flesh) is eaten without horror.


D. Featley. That is dead flesh, we speak of flesh that is alive.


D. Smith. It is not only horrible to eat man's flesh because it is alive, but
also because it is man's flesh in its proper shape, (for it were a horror to
eat, of the dead body of a man; and likewise because there is a kind of
violence offered to it, in that it is torn and mangled with the teeth, and
eaten to the end we be bodily nourished there by. But in the eating of the
flesh of Christ in the Eucharist there is no such matter, for it is not there
in its proper shape, neither is there any violence offered to it in it self,
nor is it eaten to the end our bodies be thereby nourished; and therefore there
is indeed no horror to eat it in that manner; though it seem horrible,
because in eating, one carries himself so as in eating other meat. I say
therefore with S. Augustine that our Saviors words unless you eat the flesh
etc. be figurative according to the manner of eating, because our cutting and
mangling with our teeth does not arrive unto the body of our Savior in it
self: and that it is proper in regard of the thing, because the flesh of
Christ it self is taken into the mouth, and by vital instruments let down
into the stomach. So that the fores^id speech of our Savior, unless you eat
the flesh etc. Is according to S. Augustine mixed of a proper and a figurative
speech.

Accordingly I admit that in those other words, This is my body, there is a
figure; not a mere or naked one, void of truth and propriety, but a figure
joined with truth and propriety: because although they signify that the
Eucharist is the body of Christ truly, really, and properly, according to the
thing; yet they do not affirm it to be the body of Christ after such a
corporal and natural manner as other things are the things which they are
said to be: but after a spiritual, invisible, mystical, sacrame^tall manner;
and such a one as does figuratiuelie show and represent the natural manner of
the same body in another place. Which those words of our Savior declare, do
this in remembrance of me; and those other in the foresaid Chapter of S. John,
the words which I speak unto you be Spirit and life. That is to say, as S.
Augustine does expound Expos in c. 6. Ioh.
are to be understood spirituallie. And, Co^. in Ps. 98. Sacramentum aliquod
etc.
I have commended unto you a Sacrament etc. And in another place Our L. cont.
Adima^t. c. 12.
Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.


D. Featley None of yours does acknowledge any figure in these words of our
Savior, this is my body.


D. Smith. None of us acknowledge that there is contained a naked figure void
of the truth and propriety, at the Page 25.
Protestants would have it: and yet none of us deny that there is cont^ined
such a figure as withal has with it the truth and propriety. Yea Bellarmine
does sufficiently insinuate such a one, lib. 2. de Euch. c. 24. and 8. and S.
Augustine in the place above cited, and others. Neither is it any way opposite
to the truth of the Catholic faith. Yet speaking absolutely and simpliciter,
it is not to be granted that this speech hoc est corpus meu^, this is my
body, is figurative: both both because a proposition is absolutely and simply
to be esteemed rather from the thing which it affirms then from the manner,
and therefore since that proposition is proper in regard of the thing it
affirms, it is absolutely to be said a proper speech: as also because to be
figurative, seems to have adjoined unto it a certain negation, either of the
thing, or of some manner of being of the thing: and therefore since a negation
has as Logicians term it a malignant nature, he that absolutely should say
that proposition were figurative would seem to say, at least at these times,
that it were not proper; which were false to affirm. Wherefore it will be
lawful only to say that there is in the foresaid proposition a certain
figure, in regard of the manner, as has been said before, or that it is
figurative according to the manner, but not absolutely that it is figurative.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
FOr the application of this discourse to the relation which D. Featly makes,
the learned need not any help, I will only show others how to do it, as
before in the former argument.

D. Featly. S. Augustine says those words, unless you eat the flesh of the
son of man, seem to command a sin or horrible wickedness, it is
therefore a figure. Answer. To eat it in it is proper form and shape, as some
people have done man's flesh, it is indeed horrible; and being horrible, that
sense is to be rejected: to eat it in an other form, as we do in the
Eucharist, it is not horrible, wherefore that sense is not, according to S.
Augustines rule, to be rejected.

D. Featly. Then S. Augustines argument is very weak. Answer. His discourse is
good, and shows that our Saviors speech, unless you eat etc. is not to be
taken according to the common sense of the words, but in an other wherein there
is not indeed wickedness and horror.

D. Featly. What then say you to S. Augustines conclusion, It is therefore a
figure. Answer. It is a figure in regard of the manner; for the manner of
eating man's flesh which is commo^lie apprehended, were wicked and horrible: but
not in regard of the thing; for to receive into the mouth a man's flesh existent
after another manner, that is not wicked not horrible. S. Augustine himself
graunts that we receive a live man, Lib. 2. contr. Adu. leg. c 9. lib. de
Resur. carn. c. 8.
Mediatorem D^i and hominum, the Mediator of God and men, into our mouth; And
Tertullian whom before you did object, says, Caro corpore vescitur: the flesh
eats the body.

D. Featlie. A speech figurative according to the manner of eating, and eating
of a thing not in propria forma, are Schoole-delicacies; where find you any
such thing in S. Augustine? Answer. Our Savior does feed his Church with the
delicacies which you speak of, and in that manner too. The thing in his hand,
was in the form of bread, and it was his body; So he told his disciples,
Mat. 26.
this is my body. And S. Augustine believed it, for he says that our Savior
had Conc 1. in ps 33
himself, in his own hands, when he commended his body to the Disciples, and
that he did bear in his hands his own body. This was Corpus humanum, in
aliena speeie, it was (S. Augustine says) Li. 9. Conf. c 13.
victima sancta qua d^letum est chirographum; and this, (which is also
dispensed from the Ibid.
altar,) the Disciples did eat; they did eat Tract. 59. in Joan. Mat. 26.
panem Dominum, bread our Lord; a delicacie no doubt. The thing in the chalice
in the form of wine was his blood; so he told his disciples, This is my blood;
It was sanguis humanus in aliena specie, that which Sermon. ad Neoph. cit.
Paschas. ep. ad F^ud. Idem que asserit Sa^. Chrysostom. Ho^ 24 1 Cor.
issued out of his side, though not in the same form; the very Ep. 162
price of our redemption: and the Disciples did receive it, and Ibid.
Judas (though he did not believe) drank it too. This is the Feast which our
Savior made, these be the delicacies which the best Antiquity did feed upon,
according to S. Augustine; who did well reflect on your difficulty, yet found
no difficulty in the thing it self. 2 co^t. Adu. leg. c. 9.
We receive (I repeat what you were told before) with faithful heart and
mouth the Mediator of God and man, man Christ JESUS, giving us his body to be
eaten, and his blood to be drunk; though it seem more horrible to eat man's
flesh then to kill, and to drink man's blood then to shed it.

For such as will peruse S. Augustines words I will put the^ down at leingth.
Ferebatur Christus in manibus suis quando commendans IPSVM CORPUS SVVM, ait,
Hoc est corpus meum, He that carries a man carries his soul, quodammodo. See
the Bachelours Answer to the fifth objection, and the words of the Canon, Hoc
est, in the fourth ob.
ferebat enim ILLVD Corpus in manibus suis. S. Aug. in Psalm. 33. conc. 1.
Tantummodo memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri desiderauit, VNDE sciret
dispensari VICTIMAM SANCTAM qua deletum est chirographum quod erat contrarium
nobis. lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. Illi manducabant PANEM DOMINVM, ille panem
Domine contra Dominum: illi vitam, ille poenam, Qui enim manducat indigne
iudicium sibi manducat. Tract. 59. in Joan. Hoc accipite in pane, quod pependit
in cruce: hoc accipite in calice quod manauit de Christi latere. Sermon. ad
Neophit. Tolerat ipse Dominus Iudam, diabolum, furem, venditorem suum; sinit
accipere inter innocents discipulos, quod fideles nouerunt PRECIVM NOSTRVM.
Epist. 162.

D. Featly. S Augustine by figurata locutio, meant such a one as could in no
sense be proper; for he distinguishes proper from figurative. Answer. Proper
and figurative, in the speech are distinct; and as far as the speech may be
taken properly, there it is not figurative; but it is figurative where in
propriety it imports a crime. And because part of the speech whereof we
dispute may be taken in propriety, part cannot; therefore it is mixed: as being
not purelie figurative, nor purely and entirely proper.

D. Featlie. A proper figurative speech is as a man should say a white black
color: How can that be? Answer. And a mixed speech, is as if one should say a
mingled color: may not that be? In a mixt-coloured habit, black is not white,
or white black; yet the garment has both: so a figurative sense is not
proper, nor a proper sense figurative, but in the same speech both may be. And
as S. Augustine here calls this speech figurative in regard of the manner of
eating, though the same speech in regard of the substance received be not
figurative, Com. in c^ ad Ephesians.
so does S. Jerome (who lived at the same time) call the flesh of our, Savior
in the Eucharist, Spiritual, in regard of the manner, though the Substance of
flesh be not a Spirit: and the Apostle 1. Cor. 15.44. terms the body
Spiritual in regard of the condition it shall have in the resurrection, though
for substance it consists of matter still and by corporeum differ from a Spirit
intrinsecallie, as much then as it does now. And as you cannot argue out of
that place of S. Paul, it is spiritual, therefore it is a mere Spirit; or, it
is a spiritual body, therefore it is not a body properly: no more can you
make such arguments our of S. Augustines words, and say; it is figurative
therefore it is a mere figure; or, it is figurative eating, therefore it is
not eating properly. The reason is because eating may be figurative some times
in regard of the manner of doing; as a body may be spiritual in regard of the
manner of being, though neither the substance of the one be spiritual, nor the
ess^nce of the other figurative.

The discourse about the propriety of those words, Hoc est corpus meum, this
is my body, against which you did object that none of ours acknowledge any
figure or improprietie in them at all; whereby you seem hitherto (not
reflecting on that which in the beginning was told you) to have conceived our
tenet so as if we held and believed a pure propriety for substance and manner;
gives me occasion to enlarge my self here a little by way of digression. My
Lord told you that the words are proper in regard of the thing signified; but
that in regard of the manner, there is not exact propriety; wherefore the
speech may be said to be secundum quid improper, or figurative, but not
absolute and simpliciter; for the reason by him specified. So the Logicians do
say that an Ethiopian is white secundum quid; but absolute, black. This seemed
to you strange, as if it had never been said before by any Catholic divine,
and therefore you poor he thought the Protestant cause was gained, as soon as
you did observe (which was not so soon as you might have done) that there was
an improprietie and figure in the manner; whereas all learned men do know,
and your own Masters do confess, that such an improprietie or figure is
admitted by our Deuines. And that the Controversy betwixt us and Protestants
is not about that, but about an other matter: to wit, Whether the thing in our
Saviors hand after consecration, were his body truly according to the
substance. This, (I say) and not that other, is the Controversy; for it is
certain and agreed on all sides that it was not there existent according to
the manner of a man's body; it was not locallie extended, and visible in its
own form and shape: this was and is still out of Question. So that when you
disputed you did not indeed know the state of the Question. Neither when you
were told, yea many years after, Sunt ergoea qua sunt in voce earum quae sunt
in anima passionu^ notae. A rist. li. r. periher. c. 1. Dictiones significant
primo intentiones quae sunt in anima. Co^mentat. Ibid.
have you been able (if willing) to conceive it, though the thing be plain
enough. To let you see that our Deuines do not abhor a figure or
improprietie in the manner, as if that admitted all were lost, I will put down
some of their words; but first will tell the Reader how such an improprietie,
and consequently a figure, (for improper speech is called figurative) is found
in it.

Words according to the Philosopher, do signify the conceptions of the
understanding: the co^ception is an image representing the thing we think on.
This image our understanding makes, together with the species of the thing;
which species the Object sends into the mind or understanding by the way of
Sense; as by the eye, for example. Now that which presents it self to the eye
to be seen, (it is the like in other senses) is not the pure estence or
quidditie of a thing, as they speak in schools, and you by your experience
know; but it is a thing sensible and to be perceived with this organ and
faculty, it is an extended and colored thing; which thing we do see, and
conceive, and name; agreeing that such or such a word shall be in speech a
sign of it. Looking on a man, we conceive in our mind his figure, color etc.
representing all in one image; to which image we subordinate (as a sign of it,
and of it is object also; this word, a man. So likewise in other things. Whence
it comes that an object, which is of it self sensible (had it a natural
manner of existency) if it be at any time by supernatural power and means
without that accidental form wherein that kind or species of substance does
appear to se^ce, (a man for example without color or quantity,) it does not
answer perfectly to the name; because it does not answer perfectly to the
intellectual image, whereof the name is a sign. And because it does not
answer perfectly to the name, this name cannot be attributed to it without some
kind of impropriety. For, in attributing the name to it, we do seem to say
that it has in it self all which the name does signify; that is, all which
the conception (whereunto this name was subordinated as a sign,) does
represent: which is not exactly true if the foresaid exterior form be
wanting. In so much that the Scripture does seem to deny sometimes
predication in that kind; as where it says, 1. Cor. 15.
that flesh and blood cannot possess the Kingdom of heaven; because indeed
that which enters there, shall not have wholly that manner of being which it
has here; but, a better. Our blessed Savior in regard he was disfigured much
in his passion, seems in the Prophet to deny, himself to be a man: Ps. 21.
Ego vermis and non homo. I a worm and not a man. And in the Gospel (after
his resurrection) he seems to deny his corporal presence, Cum essem
vobiscum, Luc. vlt.
when I was with you. S. Augustine because our Saviors body in the Sacrament
is not visible and extended as commonly men's bodies are, In ps. 98 Negare certe
noluit quin idem corpus quod in sacrificiu^ crucis obtulit in coena porrigatur.
Calvin. l. 4. Inst. c 17. Dupliciter caro and sanguis intelligitur; vel
spiritualis ^ila atque diuina de qua ipse dixit caro mea ve^e est eibus and
sanguis meus vere est potus: vel caro and sanguis quae crucifixa est, qui
militis effusus est lancea, etc. S. Hier. in Ep. ad Ephesians. cap. 1.
and as our Saviors was when he spoke of eating his flesh, says in his name,
non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis. You are not to eat * this body
which you see. And if I should present unto you in a cup a piece of ice, and
bid you drink this water, you would be ready to deny that it is water, or
that you can drink it; or wash your mouth or hands with it. Why? because it is
in a strange accidental form, not in the common form of water; which form
if it had in exterior appearance, (as it has indeed the substantial form,
and inner essence,) you would not then stick to confess that it is truly
water. Thus far touching the ground or reason: you are expecting now to hear
what our Deuines have said of the matter, whether they will admit any figure,
any improprietie; or abhor it rather, as overthrowing utterly (so you would
have the reader think) the real presence we believe.

That they fear not any such hurt by a figure as you pretend, it is manifest
by their explication of S. Lukes Words, c. 22. this is the Chalice etc. whereby
generally they do prove and indeed convince openly the real presence of the
blood; and yet admit a figure, one at least in the same words. This did
suffice to my purpose; but for your better information, I will tell you more,
and about the body too.

Bellarmine lib. 1. de Eucharistia c. 11. answering Calvin who said the
Catholics must needs admit in the words of Christ, Resp. ad 7.
This is my body, that figure which is called intellection, says. If we,
were forced to admit it, we would do it not unwillingly. And, if your
Danaeus does not lie, Contro. de Euch. c. 8.
he did grant one in those words. Claudius de Sanctes, Rep. 3. c. 3. goes
further, and says. Neither though we should grant that there is a Metonymie,
would the Caluinists get that which they desire, to wit, that the thing
signified is not present with the figure. And he said well in the opinion of
your own Masters, who did penetrate into the Controversy further then you
do: For, says Peter Martyr, Cont. Gardin. Col. 1197.
A figure as far forth as it is a figure, does not repugne to the presence of
the thing. The bodies assumed by Angels were figures of them present. And
Calvin. Admon. vlt page 813. Cont. Hessus. p. 849.
A figure does not exclude the thing figured. And, Nego (says he,) in eo verti
quaestionem, sumanturne haec verba, Hoc est etc. in proprio sensu, an
Metonymice. I deny that the question does consist in this, wheter the words,
this etc. be taken in the proper sense, or metonymicallie. Bucer in Hospinian.
It is manifest that out of this speech, part 2. fol. 108.
in which bread is called a figure of Christ's body, it follows not that
therefore Christ's body is not here. The like have Beza, and other of your
men: As also Luther and his Lutherans, Vide Hosp. p. 2 f. 130.
who do grant a figure in the words, yet hold a real presence. But I come to
Catholic Deuines again.

Ruardus Tapper Deane of Louaine. a. 13. It is not inconvenient to admit
figures in this speech of Christ, this is my body: so they exclude not the
verity of Christ his presence. And, we must not therefore here exclude every
figure; for the consecration of the chalice does necessarily require some, but
especially (we must exclude) that figure which excludes the real presence
of Christ's body under the Sacrament. Again, And according to this figure, did
Tertullian and S. Augustine speak when they did expound our Lords words, This
is my body, thus, this is a figure of my body. Cardinal Allen li. 1. de
Euchar. c. 32. declaring the sense of S. Augustine in these words, the
Sacrament of Christ's body is in some sort Christ's body etc. He said so, quoth
the Cardinal, because a thing being put out of its natural manner of being,
and out of all natural conditions and sensible proprieties agreeing to such a
name, and endued with strange accidents, although it keep it is substance, yet
because it wants the conditions of subsisting which together with the
substance come to the sense and coceipt of man, and are comprehended under the
proper name, it almost leeseth its proper name; or if it keep it, yet not so
provertie as if it kept its proper manner of being etc. in so much as the body
of Christ under the form of bread is called and is the body of Christ by a
certain figure. In which words he admitreth, yea and in all that book
defends the real presence; yet withal, in regard of the manner of being, he
does admit an impropriate or figure. Suar. 3. p. disp. 46. Sect 4. I add
says he, out of S. Anselme, and out of that which I said before, that albeit
Christ's body be truly and substantiallie in this Sacrament, yet in the
manner of being it differs from the natural being of bodies, which manner
Christ has in his proper form; and therefore according to this manner Christ
may be said to be in this Sacrament either incorporallie or invisibly, or
less properly, or figuratiuelie. And so the words which fignifie Christ to be
here, are in a manner sometimes said to contain a figure, beeause according to
this manner they have an other sense, then without this mystery they should
have. Gordon Controu. 3. cap. 9. There are two kinds of figures; some that
wholly take a way the verity of the thing which Christ promised; and these we
admit not: others there are that take not a way the true presence of Christ's
body, but rather confirm it; and these we most willingly embrace: for there
is scarce any speech so proper in which there may not be found some figure,
either of word or speech, where upon the Council of Trent sess. 13. c. 1.
disallo weth not all figures, but only such as deny the truth of Christ flesh
and blood. Pitigianis in 4. did. 10. q. 1. ar. 1. ad. 2. We do not exclude
from the form of this Sacrament all figurative and improper speeches; for
without doubt some are to be admitted, especially in the form of the blood:
but we reject only those which suffer not with them the real presence of the
body and blood in the Eucharist. To spend time in citing more of these, it is
needles. These had read the rest, and he that is conversant in our writers can
presently turn to more.

Of old, when Berengarius had broached your heresy, our Deuines then living,
taught the same. When Frudegardus objected to Paschasius that according to S.
Augustine it is a figurative speech when the Eucharist is called the body and
blood of Christ, Paschas. epist. ad Frudeg.
he answers thus; These are Mystical things, in which is the verity of
flesh and blood, and none others the^ Christ's, yet in a mystery and figure.
Neither is it marvel if this mystery be a figure, and the words of this
mystery be called a figurative speech; seeing Christ himself is called of the
Apostle Paul a Character or figure though he be the Verity. And Lanfranke
Archbishop of Canterbury, answering to Berengarius (that objected S.
Augustines words, the Sacrament of Christ's body is in some sort the body of
Christ) The flesh, Li. cont. Bereng.
says he, and blood, with which we are daily nourished for to obtain Gods
mercy for our sins, are called Christ's body and blood, not only because
they are the^ in substance, though differing much in qualities; but also after
that manner of speech where with a figure is termed by the name of the thing
which it signifies. To the same purpose Suarez 3. p. tom. 3. disp 46. Sect. 4.
and Sanctes Repet. 3. c. 4. do cite these words of S. Anselme, Christi
benedictione panis fit corpus eius, non significatiue tantum, sed etiam
substantive: neque enim ab hoc Sacramento figura^ omnino excludimus, neque eam
fola^ admittimus. By the benediction of Christ bread is made his body, not
significantly only but also substantially: for we do neither wholly exclude a
figure from this Sacrament, nor admit a bare figure. Before these again, the
Fathers also did, whith the real presence to the mouth, admit a figure, in the
manner; calling the Eucharist an image, an antitype, a figure: which speeches
your selves (not understanding them) object many times.

The reason of all is, because our Saviors body and blood have not here
their natural, but a Sacramental manner of existencie, which manner of
existence or being is not the proper being of such things: And the forms under
which they be, do signify (and therefore are, significatiue,) the same as
existent in their proper manner. This came to pass by our Saviors
institution, It is all one, to signify, and to be significatiue: to represe^t
and to be, representative,
who could order all as he thought good Hoc est corpus meu^ quod pro vobis
tradetur; Hic est sanguis meus qui pro vobis fundetur.

If you should further ask me why our Savior were so delighted with signs or
figures as to mixed then with propriety in this his great work, and Sacrament
of the Church; and this kind of figure or image principally, wherein the same
for substance is in the representing and the represented, I remit you to some
greater cleark for an answer; unless this will serve, that himself is the
figure and image of his Father, and in substance all one with him. VERBVM est
DEVS substantialiter, and DEVS representative: the eternal word is God
substantially, and God representatiuely, Yea; it self, does represent, it
self: since it represents all that the Father does understand.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT.
D. Featly. Origin Hom. 7. in Leuit: says if you follow the letter in these
words unless you eat the flesh etc. that letter kills: therefore the words
of Christ concerning this Sacrament, are not to he expounded according to the
letter.


D. Smith. Origin speaks according to the Capharnaiticall letter, that is to
say, according to that literal sense wherein the Capharnaits did understand
those words; who (as S. Augustine says in Psalm. 4. and in c. 6. Ioa. and S.
Cyprian. sermon. de Coena, we do not say the Capharnaiticall sense is indeed
the se^ce of those words: but they, mistaking, thought it was.
) understood those words of our Savior so as if we were to eat the flesh of
Christ after the same manner, as we do eat the flesh of beasts, boiled or
roasted, and cut and mangled. In which sense if the letter be understood, it
does kill as Origin says; and as S. Augustine in the place above cited, it
imports a crime. But seeing our Savior says his flesh is truly meat, Joan.
6.
and that his words are Spirit and life, they are to be understood so that they
be expounded both properly and also Spirituallie, or mystically. Which thing
we rightly do when we say they are to be expounded properly according to
the substance of the thing eaten, because that substance which in the Eucharist
we eat is the very substance of the body of Christ: and also spirituallie
according to the manner, because we do not eat, cutting and mangling it, but
without hurting it at all, no otherwise then if it were a Spirit.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
Here D. Featly without taking notice of what was told him out of S.
Augustine and S. Cyprian, repeates again that the Capharnaiticall manner of
eating was the same with our eating of the flesh in the Sacrament: whereas the
difference is most clear S. Au. enar. in Psalm 98.
They thought our Savior would cut of some pieces from his body and give them
to eat. Ser. de coena, Cyp.
They imagined they were taught to eat it boild or roasted and cut in pieces.
We believe and teach that it is received (c) work, entire, under the form of
bread. And, that Origin did admit and believe this our manner of receiving it,
these his words declare plainly. When thou take that holy and uncorrupted
banquet, Origin. Hom. 5. in diuersa loca Euang. See D. Andr. Sermon p. 476.
Every Man carries one of these houses about with him; and the M^ster of it is
his soul.
when thou do enjoy the bread and cup of life, eatest and drinkest the body
and blood of our Lord, then our Lord does enter under they roof: wherefore
humbling thy self imitate the Centurion and say, Lord I am not worthey that
thou come under my roof. For where he enters unworthily, there he goes in to
judgment to the receauer. Here Origin declares that he believed our Savior all
to be in the blessed Sacrament, and will have us speak unto him there, as the
Church does in the Mass; Domine non sum dignus etc. Lord, I am not worthy thou
enter under my roof. He does not call bread, Lord; acknowledging himself
unworthy it enter: but Him that is in the exterior form of bread. And herein
he does consent with S. Augustine before alleged, who says that we receive
the Mediator with our month; and whith Tertullian, Supra p. 78.
Caro vescitur Christi corpore, Flesh eats the Body of Christ. Moreover,
suppose the soul be wicked: notwistanding, He, Christ, goes in, this Author
says. but in, whither? not into the soul by means of faith; that way you
have shut up: therefore you must confess he goes in to the body at the mouth,
as S. Augustine told you. Who said also that Judas received the price of our
Redemption; not with the mind sure, Supr ap. 79.
(he was then a Traitor) but with the mouth.

D. Featly. Should we eat with the mouth the flesh of man, we should run
upon the point of S. Cyrills reproof, In expos. anath. 11.
Do thou pronunce this Sacrament to be man-eating? and do thou
irreligiousty urge the minds of the faithful with gross and carnal
imaginations? Answer. The gross and carnal conceit of eating man's flesh, he
reiects; the Sacramental manner we speak of, he did believe. Eue^ in that
anathematisme which you mention, A (...) 1^
and which he there defe^ds, he says, the thing proposed on the altar, (...),
that which is before the Priest, is our Saviors (...), his own body. So near
he tnought our Saviors body was to the communicant. Again he says, that by
means of the benediction (consecration) the Son of God, as man, is united to
v^ (...) corporally. Li. 11. in Joan. c. 27. Ibid. Li. 10. c. 13.
And that We do receive the Son of God corporally and substantially. In an
other place he says the power of benediction does bring to pass that Jesus
Christ dwells in us corporally with the communication of the flesh of
Christ. And the manner of compassing it, is, as he does also teach, Epist. ad
Calo. In Answer to your marginall note about Bereng. See the Answer to Bells
challe^g, ar. 2. c. 5.
by converting bread and wine into the verity of flesh and blood.

D. Featly. Do those words, nisi manducaueritis carnem, unless you eat the
flesh, sound after the Capharnaiticall strain? Answer. To flesh and blood they
did, and do: but the holy Ghost has taught the Church an other way of eating
flesh; not in the proper, but in another shape. Mat. 26.
Do but harken, and you shall hear the Gospel mention eating a man's body
in the form of bread; Take and eat, this (in my hand) is my body.

THE FOVRTH ARGUMENT.
D. Featlie. S. Augustine in Gratian, did. 2. can. hoc est. says; As the
heavenly bread which is Christ's flesh, is after a sort called the body of
Christ, when as in truth it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ; the Gloss
adds, The heavenly Sacrament which truly does represent the flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperlie, wherefore it is said,
in a sort; but not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery.


D. Smith. Gratian first, See Bellar. Descriptor. Eccles.
is not an authentical Author amongst us; much less the Gloss Secondly I
oppose other words of S. Augustine in the same place of Gratian, where he says
that the Sacrifice of the Church does consist of two things, the visible form
of elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of Christ: both, of a Sacrament,
and re Sacramenti, that is to say; the body of Christ: as the person of
Christ does consist and is made of God and man. Thirdly I answer that S.
Augustine in those words understood that which is Sacramentum tantum, a
Sacrament only.


D. Featlie. S. Augustine speaks of that bread which he says is the flesh of
Christ, but that which is Sacramentum tantum is not the flesh of Christ,
therefore he does not speak of that which is Sacramentum tantum.


D. Smith. The words of S. Augustine are not cited entirely, for epist. 23.
(if that be the place Gratian means, This place is quoted in the margin of
Gratian.
) he says that the Sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of Christ
after a certain manner: and it is not inconvenient to say that, that which is
Sacramentum tantum, is the body of Christ after a certain manner; according
to which manner he says baptism is faith.


D. Featley. Indeed Gratian I confess contradicts himself.


D. Smith. Why then do you rely on such authority? let us on to sure
testimonies.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
TO clear this discourse wherein D. Featlie has urged two Authorities
together, I will speak of each apart. That Gratian held the real presence,
it is out of question. In that Distinction which you cite, he brings diverse
places out of the Fathers to show the manner of it, as, that the body is there
indiuisiblie by chang of bread into it: citing to this purpose S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Ierom, S. Hilarie, and others. See can. 35 41. 55. 69. 74. 77.
79. 82. 87. and not six lines before the place objected, he has these words
out of Prosper and S. Augustine, directly opposite to your tenet, as p. 3, you
put it down. Caro eius (Christi) est qua^ forma panis operta^ in Sacrame^mento
accipimus. It is the flesh of Christ which we receive in the Sacrament covered
with the form of bread.

The words objected were imperfectlie cited, and them selves being read at
large expound their authors meaning. They be these. As the heavenly bread
which is the flesh of Christ is after a sort called the body of Christ,
whereas indeed it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, I mean of that
which being visible, palpable, mortal, was put upon the Cross, and (as) that
immolation of the flesh which is done by the hands of the Priest is called the
passion, death, and crucifixion, not rei veritate, in verity of the thing, but
significante mysterio in signif^ing mystery: So the Sacrament of faith,
Baptism I mean, is faith The sum of Which analogy or co^pariso^ is this:
As the Eucharist is after a manner; to wit, mystice, significatiue,
mystically, significantlie, the body crucified as crucified: so Baptism is
faith, after a manner, that is, mystice, significatiue, mystically,
significantlie. Also, as the actio^ of unbloody immolation, S Ambr. de Sacr.
l. 4 c. 4. and 5.
videlicet consecration, is the passion, mystice, significatiue; so the
Sacramental actio^, Baptizing, is faith, mystice, significatiue. He might have
added too, S. Chry. Ho^ de prod. Iud. and Hom. 2. in 2 Ep. ad Tim. S. Hier. Ep.
ad Heliod. Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 7. and sess. 7. can. 6.
that as the co^secratorie action is signum practicum corporis sub aliena
specie praesentis, a practical sign of the body present under another form;
as making it so to be: so the baptizing actio^ is signum practicum fidei
praesentis in baptizato, a practical sign of faith present in the baptized,
as making it so to be, according to the fathers doctrine, and belief of the
Catholic Church.

Against this discourse it might be objected that one and the same thing cannot
represent it The Manna as kept in the arc, was a sign of it self as it fell
in the desert.
self: wherefore the body in the Eucharist cannot represent it self upon the
Cross: But this (supposing the doctrine of the Gospel) is not hard to be
conceived. It being not hard to understand how one and the same thing being
within two several forms, by the one may represent it self, as in the other;
these references being not founded in the substance immediately, but in the
exterior forms subject to the eye, which forms are distinct. And in this
case, the form, wherein the reference of representation is founded, is one
with the other form, representative, in representation: but the substance
under the two forms is one and the same entitatiue in entitie or being. The
same individual body, being reallie under both.

According to this discourse the sense of Gratians words as they are in him at
leingth, is this: the heavenly bread, videlicet, the flesh of Christ in the
Eucharist, is after a certain manner, videlicet, representative, the body of
Christ as visible: and it is also the same flesh identice, covered with the
form of bread. And if against this you should object that he denies the
heavenly bread to be the body of Christ in truth, rei veritate; I would tell
you that you mistake him; for his words are, the immolation of the flesh by the
hands of the Priest, (that is to say, Consecration, and the rest which the
Priest does at Mass unto the host, as, breaking of it,) is called the
passion, non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio, not indeed, but in
signifying mystery. And certainly, Consecration is not the passion of Christ
rei veritate, indeed and truly.

Neither was the Author of the Gloss of your opinion, but contrary; for he
held also the real presence to the signs, effected by transubstantiation. In
proof whereof take these places out of him. Ad prolationem istius, hoc est
corpus meum, transubstantiatur panis in corpus. Glossa. de Consec. did. 2. in
can. 35. Upon the utterance of these words This is my body, the bread is
transsubsta^tiated into the body. Vbi erat verus panis ante and verum vinum,
modo sunt tantum accidendia. Ad can. 41. where there was before true bread and
true wine, now there are only accidents, of bread and wine. Ad prolationem
verborum, panis fit Corpus Christi and vinum sanguis, remanent tamen, species
panis and vini sub quibus latent and operiuntur caro and sanguis, ne in sumendo
esset horror si species crudae and viuae carnis, and crudi sanguinis appareret.
Ad can. 55. At the uttering of the words, the bread is made the body of
Christ, and wine the blood; but the species of bread and wine do remain; under
which species the flesh and blood do lie hid and are covered, least there might
be horror in receiving if the species or shape of raw and live flesh, and of
raw blood should appear. All these are the words of the Gloss whose authority
you cited for your opinion: with what conscience let the reader judge.

In the words which are objected he meant as the text, which I have expounded
allreadie; (a Comme^tatours aim is the meaning of his Author:) though there
be some thing therein also as appears by what I have said in this place,
which he, a Canonist, did not accuratlie observe.

My Lord Bishop in his answer to the words of S. Augustine whereunto Gratian
pointed, Epist 23.
secundum quemdam modum Sacramentum Corporis, Christi Corpus Christi est: the
Sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of Christ after a certain manner:
said, the Saint understood them of that which is sacramentum tantum, a
sacrament or sign only. Against this Answer the Minister replied again, He
had yet another explication ready, and out of S Augustine too, which the reader
by this time does reflecton.
grounding his argument on the words as he finds them in Gratian. And it was
answered (and by comparing you shall find it true) that Saint Augustines words
are not in Gratian cited entirely. But suppose they were; what then? wherein
do those Authors (whom we have declared to be auouchers of chang of bread,
and transubstantiation) seem to favor you?

D. Featlie. Mere accidents of bread which are Sacramentum tantum, cannot be
termed heavenly bread: this which the Gloss and Gratian speak of, is called
heavenly bread; wherefore they do not speak of mere accide^ts, or that which
is Sacramentum tantum. I Answer to the mayor; they cannot be called heavenly
bread, properly; but they may be so called, as the Gloss told you,
improperlie: and as S. Augustine speaks with a restriction, secundum quemdam
modum, after a certain manner. For, after Consecration they are signa Corporis
Christi As the same Authors teach in the same place.
praesentis, signs of the body of Christ present: and so are heavenly bread
and Christ's flesh in their kind, that is, significatiue. But you will ask me,
how they can be called, coeleste Sacramentum, a heavenly Sacrament? I answer
that they may be so called in regard of their reference to our Saviors body
which they cover; which reference is founded in a supernatural and heavenly
action, to wit, consecration. A relation, you know, takes it is nature or
species from the terminus, the thing which it relates unto, and from that which
is ratio fundandi, the reason of founding it: if those be sacred or heavenly
the relation is esteemed so too.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT.
D. Featlie. In those words hoc est corpus meum, the subject Hoc, stands for
bread, therefore the speech cannot be proper.


D. Smith. I deny the Antecedent.


D. Featlie. I prove it first out of the Fathers that say bread is the body
of Christ.


D. Smith. I answer that they understand it as they interpret themselves of
super-substantiall bread; S. Aug. sermon. 28 de verbis Domin. Sermon. de Caen.
Cypr.
of bread which being changed not in shape but in nature, is by the
omnipotency of the word made flesh; of bread whereinto the divine essence
does ineffablie pour it self, Ibid.
even as in Christ under humane nature the divinity lay hid. finally of
bread which, says our Savior, Joan. 6.
is my flesh for the life of the world. Now this bread, is bread only in
name and exterior shape; but in substance it is our Saviors body.


D. Featley. Secondly I prove it: by reason: for when hoc signifies, the
body of Christ is not there, therefore as then it cannot stand for it.


D. Smith. I answer that hoc does signify, and suppose, when it is uttered,
yet not As in this proposition, This is my precept that you love one another
etc. Joan. 15.12. the pronoune this, does relate unto the precept (not as then,
extant, because not vtteded,) and demonstrate it. And was to be verified by it:
not before.
for that instant, but for the end of the proposition, when the praedicatum is
in being: for, subjects are such as their attributes permit then to be. And in
the end of the proposition there is our Saviors body. That bread is bread
before the Sacrame^tall words; when Consecration comes, of bread there is made
the flesh of Christ. S. Ambr. l. 4. de Sacra^. c. 4. wherefore that I may
answer thee, it was not the body of Christ before Consecration: but after
Consecration I tell thee that it is now the body of Christ. Ibidem.
As when I say This a Cross, and make it withal: the word, this, does
suppose for the Cross, not which is when the word this, is uttered; but which
is, within the whole time that I speak. So when I say taceo, I do not
signify that I speak not while I am uttering this word but that I am silent
when I have done uttering it. And if our Savior had changed water into wine
by saying this is wine, the pronoune this, had signified and supposed for wine,
not which was whilst the said pronoune was uttering, but which was within the
whole time of the proposition.


D. Featley. Christ could not change water into wine by saying, this is wine.


D. Smith. That ^s strange, he having made the world of nothing, with a word.
Howbeit this is another business. I brought it only for examples sake.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
Iren. l. 4. cont. Haer. c. 34. Tert. l. 4. co^t Marc c. 40. Hier. ep. ad
Hedib. q 2. August sermon. 28 verb Dom. Epiph. in Anc. (...). Cyril. Hier. at cc.
4
THe Authors which D. Featlie cites to prove the Eucharist is ordinary and
common bread, are Ireneus, Tertullian, Athanasius (so he names the work,)
Ierom, Austen, Epiphanius, Cyrill, Theodoret and Gerson; but these will not
admit of his interpretation as you may see by their own words. S. Irenaeus, It
is not common bread. Tertullian, he made it his own body. S. Jerome, it is
panis qui de caelo descendis, bread which came from heaven. Saint Augustine, it
is (...) supersubstantiall, bread, S. Epiphauius, though for the exterior
form there be no similitude yet he that believes it not to be as our Savior
said (his body) (...) falls from salvation. Theod. dial. 1. and 2. Gers. l
Sermon. de coen. Dom. It is not Eucharist till the co^nsecration be co^pleate:
and the^ it is no more bakers bread: omnipotency has turned it to verify our
saviors words Hocest, etc. Conc. Nic. can 14. Theop. in c 6. Joan. and 26. Mat.
S Cyril^, (...) etc. that which seems bread, is not bread, notwithstanding
that the taste esteems it so; but the body of Christ. Theodoret, there is
(...), a change, made by grace or supernaturallie. The mystical signs are
adored, as being (reallie according to the inner substance) the things which
they are believed to be: videlicet the flesh and blood of Christ. Gerson, bread
is transubstantiated into the true body of Christ. I omitted to bring the
testimony of S. Athanasius (whose mind is known well enough out of the
Council of Nice wherein he was,) because the Commentaries which you cited are
not his, but Theophilact's, who would be coming in, too, with his (...) and
(...), if he were called upon. The reason why the Fathers call the body of
our Savior as being in Sacrament, bread, but supersubstantiall and heavenly;
you had given you before: videlicet because it is in that exterior form, and
by consecration made of bread. Joan. 6. 1. Co. 10 Mar. 16. Gen 3. Joan. 2.
Exodus 7.
So you find in Scripture Angels called men; man called dust; wine called
water; and a serpent, then when it was indeed a serpent, called a rod.

D. Featlie. Corpus Christi cannot properly be affirmed of bread, for they be
substantiae disparatae. Answer. Of common bread, it cannot: of consecrated and
super-substantiall bread, it may. These are not disparata, sundry things.
(...) super-substantiall bread, and Caro Christi, the flesh of Christ, are in
substance all one.

D. Featlie. Is their meaning this, bread not being bread, is Christ's body?
(...) S. Just. Supra p. 45.
Answer. They mean that the thing under the form of bread, (which indeed is
not bakers bread,) is his body. And so did our Savior mean too, when he
said, the bread which I will give is my flesh, Ioh. 6. if it were flesh, it was
not properly bread; but improperlie. And that bread, improperlie so called,
was a man's body, properly. Wherefore our Savior could not say as you would
ridiculouslie have him say, it is my body, that is to say it is not my
body. Neither is the sense of an affirmative proposition, suppose it improper,
to be re^dred as you do. As, where God said to Adam, putuis es, thou art dust;
it is not to be glossed after your manner, thou art dust, that is to say thou
art not dust. Sermon: de Coena. Ambr. de Mist. init. c. 9. Gregor. Nysl. or.
Catec. c. 37. August. Supra. Eo nomine appellata res, vnde versa est, no^ in
quo versa est. S. Aug. q. 21 in Exodus
God does there avouch something truly; wherefore you must study for his
meaning, and not blasphemouslie impose a ridiculous sense upon his words. The
Fathers (as I have showed) have declared their own meaning; it is bread
changed, not in shape but in nature: transelemented: super-substantiall bread:
and such, is not indeed bread. As the rod changed, was not indeed a rod; but a
serpent; and water changed was not indeed water, but wine. The name was used to
signify another thing.

The Doctors other proof, whereby he Would feign show that Hoc, stands for
bread, is an ordinary objection, borrowed from our School deuines, who
propose it for the better explication of the terms, and may be, and is by
them, diverse ways answered. I am to defend here that answer which my Lord
gave, omitting what the Minister impertinentlie has thrust in; and giving the
Reader before notice, that, there are some propositions meerelie speculatiue;
as this, God is wise; or this, a man is a reasonable creature. And these do
not make but suppose what they signify. Others are operative or practicke; as
this, I do baptize thee; and this, Tabitha arise; and these do work what
they signify. The proposition which is here in question, Hoc est corpus meum,
this is my body, is of the later kind, practicke.

D. Featlie. This pronoune demonstratiue hoc, this, must needs signify some
thing, that In the instant when that word was uttered.
then was existent, to which Christ pointed, sayingh This. Answer. It must not:
for the proposition being practical, it does signify, and demonstrate, not
that which is supposed already being, but that which it makes to be. The
proposition (I do not say the subject or the attribute, but the whole entire
proposition) is the cause; and the thing signified, is the effect: which effect
the foresaid proposition demonstrating does make, and making does withal
demonstrate it. Now the effect you know (if you know any thing in Philosophy)
does suppose the whole cause, and follows it. So in these operative speeches
of our Savior, Lazarus come forth: young man arife: the words Lazarus and young
man, did not signify persons existent then preciselie when they were uttered;
Cyrill. Catena.
but when the speeches were complete. The words did signify then, (when they
were) but not things existent then: for when the words were, the persons by
them signified were not.

D. Featlie. That hoc, the first word of the proposition, when it is uttered
does it signify, or no? Answer. Nomen significat sine tempore. Arist. li. 1.
Periher. c. 3.
It does signify; and by way of demonstration: and having done that office
goes away, for words (you know) cannot stay; nor can the speaker utter all at
once. Neither can you determine preciselie, having heard it, what it did
demonstrate, It relates to the substantive which follows.
but must harken to the rest for to know. I point, for example, toward that
before your eyes, and say This is -- And you see and hear me; but know not
preciselie what I mean by the word this, till you hear the praedicatum. If I
say whitenes or color, there is one subject of the speech; if I say paper,
there is another; if English, there is a third. The pronoune this, is yet
undetermined, it does not of it self point at color, or paper, Paper is not
whitenes: nor whitenes paper.
or any other thing. If it did, it would still show the same; and so were not
a fit instrument or sign to show indifferently the one or the other. And
being of it self indifferent and undetermined, if you will know determinatelie
what it stands for, you must stay till the praedicatum come; for before you
cannot understand it preciselie by that Hoc; nor by the second word which is
est. But having heard the whole speech or sign, you will easily then perceive
what I mean. Haec est -- What? albedo? charta? I point at the Chalice and say
This is -- and till you do hear more, you know not whether I demonstrate the
cup or the thing in the cup.
scriptura? you know not what I mean by that Haec; nor whether it be made as
yet; or metaphysicallie present, ( mo^allie at least it is,) When I speak; or
no. Perhaps I mean the word or letter which I make whilst speak; perhaps I
mean the paper whereupon I write; perhaps I mean the superficies only; or
the whitenes; or the light upon it. The praedicatum when it comes will
determine. And If it be uncertain to the hearer until then, in speculatiue
propositions; much more in such as are practike: where by the speakers
intention the demonstratiue this concurres to make what by the same intention
it does relate unto.

D. Featlie. If hoc, do signify the body of Christ or transubsta^tiated
bread, you make a false proposition: for when hoc preciselie is uttered, there
is not transubstantiated bread or the body of Christ. Answer. Who told you
that hoc is a proposition? stay till the proposition be uttered, all, and then
there is the body of Christ: because Gods words must needs be true; (his
omnipotency does verify them): and if they be true, the thing in that form
is his body; for his words do signify and importit. 1. Reply. Hoc signifies
it seems, that it is then the body when the word hoc is pronunced. Answer.
No; that one word hoc does not signify all this. When all are uttered, then
there is that body present under the species which you see: for so much is
imported. Not by any part of the proposition preciselie, (no part is a perfect
sign of the body now present in this form,) but by the whole, as I told you
before. It works, instrumentallie, the thing signified; and in this thing the
proposition, with all it is parts, is verified. the verity of a proposition
being nothing else but the conformity of it to that which it does signify. 2.
Reply. When is this operative proposition verified? Answer. In that instant
wherein the effect or thing signified is in being, for then there is the
terminus or extreme whereunro the conformitic does relate, and whereby it is
defined: not before. Neither was the proposition before wholly uttered, and
therefore could not have effect before. Motus. temp. (Generatio.) Forma.
instant.
When was the form of your baptism, think you verified, Ego te baptizo? when
it was, or when it was not? When the Parson said Ego, or when he said te, bap.
or ti. or Zo. Had he stopped when he came to bap. you know what I would infer:
yet then, te, was past and gonne. Esse consignificat compositionem qua^dam,
qua^ sine compositis non est intelligere. Arist. 1. Periher. c. 3.


To put a figure in the copula (which thing you speak of by the way) there is
no need: for it is natural to union or composition in it is exercise, to
suppose the extremes; and consequently the copula may by institution
(directed according to nature) signify for that instant wherein both extremes
are uttered, and the speech complete: and especially in a practical
proposition, which is to verisie it self.

D. Featlie. If Hoc stands for corpus, body, it would be tautologie. Answer.
No more then this, This is paper; Featlie is a man; God is wise. Reply. There
is identitie. Answer. There is indeed identitie of the thing signified by the
subject and the attribute: but there is not identitie in the manner of
signifying. And if identitie of the thing did suffice to tautologie and
battologie as you pretend, -- sub illis Montibus inquit era^t, and erant sub
montibusillis.
this were tautologie and battologie, God is wise, just, omnipotent, and
eternal; and were to be resolved after your new mannner, thus, God is God,
God, God, and God. And whereas hitherto it has been taught in Schools and and
with great reason too, that the Superior predicamentall degrees are more
universal then the inferiou^ and therefore not to be confounded though they
signify the same thing, now hereafter Universities must all neglect art in
speech and read your predicament, which before times has been Featlaeus,
homo, animal, viuens, corpus, substantia; thus in English according to your
Logic, Featly, Featlie, Featlie, Featlie, Featlie, FEATLY. Where you the
supreme genus of your new predicament, are in predication to be common to other
animals, and bodies, and substances; for so the supreme genus ought to be.
This must be granted if (as you would teach us) the difference of formalities
be not to be regarded in speech; and if the distinction of a double identicall
predication or acception be now to be rejected.

D. Featlie. Belike the Apostles were ignorant that Christ's body was his
body: and by virtue of those words, he made his body his body. Answer. They
did not know (till they were told) that, that thing in our Saviors hand
under the shape of bread, was his body: neither did he by those words make
his body to be his body; but he by them made his body to be under the shape
of bread, his omnipotency (to verify them) turning the substance of bread
into it.

D. Featlie. A proposition meerelie identicall, quoad significatum, proves
nothing. Answer. That which is meerelie identicall, is so for matter and manner
too; quoad significatum, and quoad modum significandi: this, is not; as you
were told, and could not contradict it. For matter, a proposition may be
identicall, and prove too; and such are those which define the Subject: as
this; a man is a reasonable creature. And he that denies it can prove any
thing, shows himself ignorant in the principles of science, and knows not
what a demonstration is. But why do you talk here of proof? our Saviors
proposition did not suppose what it signified, videlicet, his body under the
form of bread, but did cause it; and so did verify it self. If yours
cannot, what wonder? you neither are omnipotent, nor are used in such actions
by him that is.

D. Featlie. If I point at our Saviors body in heaven, and say, this body is
Christ's body, will it follow that bread is turned. Answer. No; but something
else (it seems) is; how else could your mouth utter such an impertinent
discourse?

THE SIXTH. ARGUMENT.
D. Featlie. There is as much figure in the words of Christ consecrating the
bread, as in his words of the cup; but in the later there is a manifest
figure; therefore in the former also.


D. Smith. I deny the mayor. For in the later the chalice is said the blood of
Christ, which must be a figure, because a chalice and blood, are two distinct
things; and one thing cannot properly be another thing. In the former, there
are not signified two things and one of them said to be the other; but the same
thing is predicated upon it self; as if I should say (pointing at the table,)
This is wood.


D. Featlie. I speak not of the word calix, but of that whith follows,
testamentum, testament.

Bellar. li. 1. de Euchat. c. 11.. quantum ad alterum. and l. 1. de Missa. c. 8.
D. Smith. I answer that the word testamentum, is there taken properly enough:
for, not only the last Will of the testatour, but every authentical sign of
that Will is also called a testament. So we call the Bible a testament. Now
the blood of Christ is an authentical sign of his Will.


D. Featley. No part of the Testatour can be called his testament, but the
blood of Christ is a part of Christ, ergo.


D. Smith. I answer that a part as the blood) of the Testatour may be his
testament, if it be shed to signify his last will. As among barbarous people
who did confirm their covenants or leagues with shedding their own blood,
Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. li. 5 cap. 3. Salust. Bell. Catil.
this their blood shed in sign of the covenant or league was an authentike
testimony of their said league. And our Savior pouring his blood into the
mouths of the Apostles did confirm a covenant, and authenticallie testify
his last Will; Heb. 9.
as Moses sprinkling the blood of a calfe upon the Israelites, did confirm
the old testament.


D. Featlie. If by testamentum in the words of the cup, the blood of Christ be
understood, it will make this ridiculous sense, This cup is my new blood in my
blood. And in like manner, if the body be understood by the word Hoc, the
sense will be, The body of Christ is the body of Christ.


D. Smith. It will not follow that the sense is as you say, for though
identitie in the thing signified be necessary in every true proposition
wherein it is said said This is This, yet there must be diversity in the
mannrr of signifying, else it would be nugatorie. And hence although homo, a
man, and animal rationale, a reasonable creature, be reallie all one, and the
same thing signified by the subiectum which is signified by the praedicatum,
when I say homo est animal rationale, a man is a reasonable creature; yet the
sense is not this, homo est homo, a man is a man. Because the manner of
signifying is diverse, and the thing is conceived and signified another way by
the praedicatum, then it was signified and conceived by the subiectum; though
the thing signified be the same. wherefore the sense of the proposition, This
is my body, is this, This thing is my body; and the sense of the other, This
calice etc. is this, This drink is an authentical sign of my last VVil in my
blood. Which sense though it be identicall according to the thing signified, as
the sense of every true proposition wherein it is said, This is this, ought to
be; yet is it not identicall according to the manner of signifying: for the
same thing is signified, but under another conceit, which diverse conceit does
not suffer it to be resolved into such a proposition as is identicall both
according to the manner of signif^ing, and according to the thing signified
too, as that is, the body of Christ is the body of Christ.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
THe dispute here is not about that inner sentence or decree whereby our
blessed Savior disposed to such as persevere, In calicis mentione testamentum
constituens sanguine suo obsignatum, substantiam corporis confirmauit. Tertull.
li. 4. co^ Marc. c. 40.
a Kingdom, (Luc. 22. 29.) that of heaven: but about an exterior sign of the
foresaid inner Will; and the question is, Whether the mystical cup be such a
testament or no. Not, whether it be our Saviors inner will; that is not in
question, but whether it be a sign of it, and such a sign as may be called a
testament, as a man's Will written in parchment, is commonly called by that
name, testamentum. Other propriety then is there, we look not after.

Doctor Featly strives to prove it is not: which if he Lice^ metaphora non sit
admitte^da in verbis consecrationis circa substantiam eius quod Deus in eo esse
voluit; tame^ in aliis verbis quae potius sunt epitheta ipsius sa^guinis
metaphoram admittere nullum incommo^ dum est. Si enim semel co^stiterit verum
sanguinem suum in sacramento nobis reliquisse, quid poterit obesse hunc
sanguinem vocare nouum testamentum vel quid aliud per metaphoram? Vasq. 3. p.
Disp. 199. n. 42. Where he has another answer to this argument And you
remember what has been said above, to this purpose, p. 54. etc.
could do, the tenet he undertook to disprove, would notwithstanding subsist:
and still might be confirmed, yea proved unanswerably, out of this place of
Saint Luke here objected; wherein we are told that this thing in the chalice
was shed FOR US; and if FOR US, it was not wine but blood. The name also,
testamentum, taken and understood in the sense above mentioned, agrees unto
this thing very well; For, that authentical sign or instrument whereby the
Testator does signify his last Will, is in that acception or sense well and
fitly called testamentum; and this is such a sign or instrument, ordained by
our Savior to signify his last Will. Moreover he, our blessed Savior, as S.
Luke, cap. 22. and S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. do testify, (and their testimony is
true) did affirm it to be the new testament; wherefore since the speech may be
understood properly in the sense above specified, we must understand it so.

The Doctor first is discontented as it seems for having any figure at all
granted him: as it was granted in the answer.

D. Featly. What privilege have you more to set a figure upon the words of
consecration of the cup, then we upon the like of the bread? Answer. That of
calix is a figure, expounded in the same place by funditur, is shed, and
elswere the thing is delivered in proper terms hic est sanguis meus, This is
my blood. Marc. 14. Neither did we put it there; the Evangelist did put it. On
the other words which are plain and proper, you say you put a figure, and it
is such a one as takes away the verity. We may not be so bold with
Scripture. The word testamentum, is taken properly in the sense above
mentioned; and because that is not the first signification, but a secondarie,
it was told you it is taken satis proprie properly enough.

D. Featlie. No substantial part of any testator is properly his testament:
blood is a substantial part of Christ: ergo. Answer. The Mayor is contrary to
the Gospel: This drink is my testament, which drink is shed for you. Is shed
FOR US, it was blood, blood a testament: and blood is a part, you confess. 1.
Reply. Luc. 22
That in the calice was not blood. Answer. Even now I proved it was, for it was
the thing shed for us: wherefore in substance it was not wine, (wine was not
shed for us,) but it was blood. If you conceive not this argument which is
clear, take the thing immediately on our Saviors word, he is God and cannot
lie: This in the chalice is my blood. Mar. 14.2. Reply. That in the chalice
which our Savior said was blood, is not a testament. Answer. Our Savior says
it is; and I believe Him.

(...), This cup is the n^w testament. 1. Cor. 11. Here therefore is blood a
testament: blood; not in form of blood, in propria specie: but in aliena
specie, in form of wine.

D. Featlie. Will you say that Christ's blood needed his blood to sign it.
Answer. Blood in propria specie in it is own form, was not the testament, nor
to be confirmed with the blood, that is, with the real death of the testator:
Blood in aliena specie in form of wine, was our Saviors testament, and to be
confirmed with the blood, that is, with the real death of him, the testatour.

D. Featlie. It is tautologie, if that which is the testament be blood. Answer.
No more then this, Featlie is a man; though that which the subiectum does
signify be the same reallie with that which is signified by the praedicatum;
unless I be mistaken, and you be not reallie a man. Neither is it all one to
say Featlie is a man; and to say, a man is a man; or Featlie is Featlie. He
has not yet understood Logic that cannot distinguish one of these
propositions from the other.

D. Featlie. The sign of Christ's will is no more his will, If testamentum be
taken for the inner decree, it is calix and sanguis testamenti: if it be taken
for an instrument and sign of that decree, it is calix testamentu^.
then the sign of his body is his body. Answer. The dispute is here about
our Saviors words; and he did not say of that in his hand, this is a sign or
figure of my body; but, this is my body: howbeit the Eucharist being (and by
our Saviors institution) a Sacrament and a Sacrifice commemoratiue, it is also
a sign; and a representation of his body as existent in propria specie, in it
own shape, as above you were told. But of the cup he said, This chalice is
the new testament. And since we may, we must also, take the word properly;
not for his inner Will or decree; it is that only significatiue,
significantlie: but for an authentike sign of it, as has been said before.

THE SEVENTH ARGUMENT.
D. Featlie. Christ, Math. 26. said the chalice is the fruit of the vine, even
after consecration, therefore the consecrated chalice is wine indeed.


D. Smith. Those words were spoken by our Savior of the legal cup, which he
and his disciples drank before consecration, as S. Luke does teach cleerelie,
cap. 22. And since it does not appear that our Savior repeated the same words
of the Eucharisticall cup, which he had said before of the Legal, (though S.
Matthew relates them after he had related the consecration of the Eucharisticall
cup, (there is more reason to say that S. Matthew did not observe order in
relating our Saviors words, then to understand those of the Eucharisticall cup
which S. Luke does teach plainly to have been spoken of the Legal or common
cup; and S. Matthew tells not expressie of which they were spoken, but only
relates them (as I said) after he had related the consecration of the
Eucharisticall cup. Compare these Evangelists together and you w^ll see that
one of the two in diverse other things does not observe the order in the
relation.
Since therefore (as I did insinuate before) it is not very likely that the
same words were spoken of both cups, and since that S. Luke teaches plainly
that they were spoken of the common cup whereof S. Matthew makes no mention, it
is more likely they were spoken of the common cup only, and related by S.
Matthew out of order.


D. Featlie. Innocentius, the Council of Worms, and others expound the
words, of the Eucharisticall cup.


D. Smith. I answer that for the authority of some Fathers, that opinion is
probable: and according to their exposition, those words are to be understood
in the same manner as above we have expounded some Fathers that say, In the
answer to the 5. arg.
bread is the body: to wit, bread changed in nature, etc. and so we say, the
fruit of the vine is the blood of Christ; but the fruit changed, not in shape
but in nature, the supersubstantiall fruit, etc. Moreover many Fathers expound
it of the common cup as S. Ierom, S. Hier. in c. 26. Mat. Beda and Theophil. in
c. 22. Luc.
S. Bid, and Theophilact.

He added afterward that it was much to be admired why we should gather what
the Eucharist is, out of words which it is uncertain whether our Savior spoke
of the Eucharist or no, rather the^ out of those words which it is most
certain he did speak of the Eucharist; as these, This is my body, this the
cup, etc. As also, out of those words which he did not utter to tell us what
the Eucharist was, but that he would not drink any more either of that or of
the common cup, rather then out of those which he spoke to no other end but to
Practice, simul efficie^do: neither did they or could they signify the
Eucharist is the body, but making it withal; for, before the body was not in
that form or species.
signify what the Eucharist is. How much better do Catholics who out of
words which it is certain Christ spoke of the Eucharist, and spoke them to the
end only to signify (practice) what the Eucharist is; rather then out of
other words which he spoke to another end, and which it is not altogether
certain he spoke of the Eucharist; do gather what the Eucharist is, and make
these words the rule of expounding all others about the Question of the
Eucharist.


THE NOTES OF S. E.
HEre are two clear solutions of D. Featlies argument, according to the two
several opinions about the cup our Savior spoke of. Against the later he does
not make any new reply, but amplifies only what he had objected. The former,
he says, he did, that is, he thinks he can, in fringe, as follows.

D. Featly. In those words in S. Matthew, this fruit of the vine, the
demonstratiue this, must have relation to the cup, of which S. Matthew spoke
before. Answer. It cannot, if the fruit of the vine be taken for wine
properly: the reason whereof is evident by the words spoken of the
Eucharisticall cup which immediately go before, this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many unto remission of sins; wine properly, was
not shed to remisssion of sins; the eucharisticall cup was, as the Evangelist
(after our blessed Savior) does here affirm; Quotidie in Sacrificits eius
(Christi Domini,) de genimine verae vitis, and vinea Sorec quae interpretatur
electa, rubentia musta calcamus. S. Hierom. Epist. ad Hedib. q. 2.
and another yet more expressly. (...), This the chalice which is shed FOR
you. Therefore the Eucharisticall cup was not wine properly.

D. Featly. Should I take a cup, and after I had drunk of it, say, I would
drink no more of this, you would understand me of that which I drank of last.
Answer. Did I see the whole action, I should judge according to that I saw; no
doubt; and S. Matthew seeing our Saviors action, did conceive it well enough.
But should one or two tell me that D. Featly at the table having drunk beer
and wine, said, he would drink no more of this beer; I had no reason to
think he meant wine, though wine were mentioned last before. Now, by the
relation of S. Matthew and S. Luke (if you attend unto it well, and remember all
which they as the Organs of one infallible speaker, the Holy Ghost, deliver,
(it appears that our blessed Savior drank of two several cups; and that he
called the one of them the fruit of the vine; the other, his blood, and his
testament; auouching it to be shed for men. Both were on the table before him;
and he did in one speech demonstrate the one, telling what it was; a strange
cup for the contents, S. Chrysostom calls it (...), the twice dreadful
chalice; THIS the chalice the new testament in my blood etc. in the other
speech he demonstrated the other; telling what that also was, and
distinguishing it by a short description from the other, which was his
testament and his blood; saying, I will not drink from hence forth of THIS
fruit of the vine.

D. Featly. Will you make S. Matthew to write non sense; to relate Christ's words
I will drink no more of this; and no where to express of what he spoke, or to
what this this is to be referd? Answer. It is to be referd to the fruit of the
vine; I will not drink from hence forth of this fruit of the vine; and he is
senceles that cannot see this reference, it is so plain. If you desire to
know more of this cup, read S. Luke where the thing is more at large. You are
wont to say, Scripture must expound Scripture; here it does so: why do not
you believe what it tells you?

D. Featlie. All the Fathers generally understand those words, I will not
drink etc. of the Sacrament. Answer. You were told that some do; and had
answer given you according to that opinion, which answer you have not impugned:
and that some do not, as S. Ierom, S. Beade, S. Anselme, and Theophilact,
whose opinion is better grounded, as has been showed. Wherefore you did
amplify when you said all generally understood it of the Sacramental cup.
And when you come to verify your words by naming those all, you find only
five in all, with one particular Council: all which, held the real presence,
and were opposite unto you in the cause. Let us look on them severally.
Clement, Cyprian, Chrysostom, the Author de dogmatibus, Pope Innocent, and
the Council of Worms. First, the Bishops in the Council of Worms were
known Papists in communion with the Sea of Rome, and at that time when by your
own confession the whole world believed the real presence and Sacrifice of
the Mass; which they also profess even in the Canon whence you would dispute:
and throroughout they show themselves Papists, acknowledging Confirmation,
Monks, Penance or Sacramental Confession etc. together with the Popes
authority in calling Counsels, and determining controversies appertaining to
Religion. The treatise de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus which you cite as S.
Augustines, is not his; and you have been told already what saint Augustine
said was in the Cup: Ep. 162.
even the price of our Redemption. He taught also that the holy victime
whereby we were redeemed, l. 9.
was dispensed from the Altar: that Christ had his own body in his own
hands, Conf. c. 13. supra page 45.
and so carried it after such a strange manner, as no man ever before did, or
could bear himself: that we receive the Mediator Jesus Christ with our
mouth; Conc. 1. in Psalm. 33. l. 2. con^. Adu. leg. c. 9.
and with our mouth drink blood notwithstanding the seeming horror. Clement
says (...) etc* as our Savior in the Gospel I am the true vine. Io. 15. if
he a vine, his blood (and especially as in the chalice) may be called See S.
Jerome. cited p. 111. m.
wine. S. Chrysostom says in the place objected that our Savior does chang
the things proposed; that he does nourish us with his own body, that we
receive him, and touch him, and have him in us; that Angels tremble when they
see the thing wherewith we are fed: and exhorts us to believe it is as our
Savior told us, his body, and not to trust our sense. He says also that is
in the cup which did issue out of the side of our Savior. S. Cyprian did
openly profess unbloody Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine, Epist.
63. Neither can all your glosses obscure those words before alleged, Panis
iste quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus,
omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. suppose I say the same of the wine, genimen
istud non effigy sed natura mutatum, omnipotentia Verbi factum est sanguis.
That fruit of the vine being changed not in shape but in nature, is by the
OMNIPOTENCE of the WORD made blood. Innocentius tertius, in the book you cite,
expounds the Mass, defends the real presence, and teaches expreslie
transubstantiation; which he did also define in the great and general
Laterane Council.

D. Featlie. What answer you to so many Fathers, a Council, and your Pope?
Answer. I might as you see, turn the demand back, to ask of you, what you
say to so many Fathers, and a Pope in a General Council. But to forbear
making thrusts, because you think that is not fair play in a defendant: as
there aret two Controversies, so you shall have for answer, two things: first,
that all are against you in the matter of the Real presence against which you
are disputing: which matter is defined by the Church; openly delivered in the
Scripture; generally acknowledged in Antiquity; and those whose authority is
objected did all believe it, as we do: wherefore themselves were to answer
your scruple; and would do it easily, in manner above In my Lords answer page
165.
specified. Secondly, the other Controversy is not determined by the Church;
neither did the Council that you speak of, (a National Council only,)
determine and define it; nor Innocentius propose it as matter of belief, but
only as a private Doctor makes his use of it: nor the Fathers generally
consent in it; nor the Scripture openly deliver it; but rather the contrary.
Wherefore admitting it to be probable, you are to thank those Authors for the
courtesy: for you cannot get so much by way of argument. And he that could,
should not be contradicted on our part: for, persisting in the belief of the
real presence, we might indifferently defend, The Reader may perceive by the
Ministers words, more then the Minister would have him to believe, touching the
event of the conference.
either that it was, or that it was not, the consecrated cup, which is meant by
those words in S. Matthew.

D. Featlie. D. Smith triumphed as if he had gotten the day, saying are these
your demonstrations? are these sufficient causes why you should separate your
selves from our Church, and from your brethren the Lutherans? Answer. Had he
not reason, when your oppositions were all answered; and the Dispute at an end?
The reasons moving to leave THE COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN WORLD should be
vnauoidablie conuincing: but hitherto there have appeared none such; nor ever
will do, from the mouth of any Protestant.

THE BREAKING UP of the conference, and the Ministers terguiersation.
ANd here the conference ended, having lasted near seven hours; from noone
till it was almost night. Some days after, D. Smith hoping according to M.
Featlies promise he should also have a day to propose the arguments for the
Catholic tenet, told M. Kneuet that he would be ready to dispute the next
Tuesdaie being the tenth of September, desiring him to give M. Featlie notice
of it the Sundaie before: but though he went thrice that day and twice the
next unto the house wherein M. Featlie did abode, he could not speak with him.
F. l. 1. d. 1. c. c. v. c. 9. 44.
At length having gotten to speak with him, he warned him to provide himself
against the day appointed: but the minister began to pretend that he was to
write letters, and that there remained yet a great part of their arguments
whereunto in equity it should be answered; or at least they should be proposed
for the space of an hour, before D. Smith should object any thing. D. Smith
answered that he thought this to be an unjust condition, as well because M.
Featlie had not permitted him when he was to defend, so much as to show the
grounds of his tenet, and therefore why would himself demand now to dispute
when his turn of defending was? as also because no such condition was agreed
upon in the treaty, but only that M. Featlie should have one day allowed him
to oppose, and D. Smith should have another.

He demanded therefore now a day wherein he only might oppose according as it
had been granted to M. Featlie before. But M. Featlie refusing to yield
thereunto, M. Kneuet provided himself for his journey, determining on Tuesday
to leave Paris. When M. Featly heard of this, hoping (as it seems) that D.
Smith would not challeng him to dispute any more after M. Kneuets departure,
late at night about nine a clock he sent M. Kneuet to him and said he would be
ready to meet him the next week, upon condition a day might be allowed him to
prosecute the rest of his arguments. D. Smith told him that could not be,
himself being the next friday to depart out of Paris; but gave him leave to
choose for the time of conference, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; for longer
he could not differ it. adding, that if M. Featlie would make choice of none of
those days, he could neither perform his promise, nor save his honor. He
said also that if M. Featly would put down under his hand that he would not
keep the first conditions of the conference, but add new conditions, he would
solicit him no more; but this he would interpret as a declining of the
conflict.

Wherefore the day following M. Featly wrote unto M. Kneuet saying he heard
that D. Smith exacted of him his promise to meet again, and that he was ready
to perform it upon Tuesday, on condition that he might have leave first to
propose all the rest of his arguments, as he said D. Smith promised. Which
thing verily was most false, for the promise was not made of all arguments, but
of a day wherein he should propose which and what arguments he listed: which
was accordingly permitted him to do. That he now declines the conflict it is
evident, both by the new conditions which he does propose, and by his own
words to one of his friends, whom he told that Catholics brought so many
Traitte du S. Sacreme^t de l' Eucharistie. par l'illust: Cardinal du Perron.
Paris, 1622.
Testimonies of Fathers to prove the real presence that there was need of many
weeks to read them over; and by the confession also of another of his
company, who said plainly that M. Featly did exceedingly fear to undertake
the part of defendant, and sought a fit occasion to save his honor.

THE NOTES OF S. E.
THus ends the Relation, which had never looked so far abroad had not the
Minister importunely called it out. It was not adorned for the print, but
plainly set down as you see; howbeit, being euocated to publik judgment it
fears not to appear, even there, where the Doctor thinks all are on his
side. It is no great matter, by the press to make a show, to triumph in
papers, and speak freely there where none may contradict: but, could the
Reader have been a Spectatour, and seen this action in the life, he would
have acknowledged what M. Kneuet hereupon did confess, that M. Featly was to
young for Doctor Smith. He is many ways to weak to undertake so great a wit,
so ready in answer so strong in argument so conversant in Scripture, Fathers,
Deuines. Much less (whateuer outrecuidance makes him think of his ability*) is
he able to ouermatch an understanding so full of light so ample so vigorous,
excellently furnished with all variety of learning; and, in a cause so clear
so common, the cause of the whole Catholic world: wherein the IVDGE of
Controversies (if the Scripture be Judge) gives the sentence openly in plain
terms on our side, and the Holy Ghost in the CHVRCH does confirm it.

By the Ministers carriage in the business, and by his own Relation since, you
may conceive what is in him; Ex vngue you may gather what a thing the I^ ta^res
Liby^^ ruunt leones Ne sint papalionibus molesti. Featlie of himself, in his
Sacrileg^, p. 28^.
Lion is. I have heard from one that was present at the Conference, that he
brought his arguments with him written in a paper, and urged them so poorly
that M. Pory did prompt him diverse times. He reports indeed that one of the
standers by said it was vera digladiatio, and not Sorbonica velificatio;
velitatio I think he would say. I inquired of the party from whose mouth the
speech should have come, who remembers no such thing; but tells me the minister
did run over his arguments so slightly, that it deserved on his part rather
to be called leuissima velitatio, then vera dig^adiatio. And as for the Sorbone
Disputants over whom he would insult in the comparison, the Hugonots in France
do know there never wanted even of those Bachelours which he does glance at,
such as were able and ready to meet his Master Moulins when soever he durst
enter combat.

M. Kneuet upon the Ministers poor carriage in the dispute, and tergiuersation
afterward when he should have answered, disliked the Protestant Cause; (which
he saw their Champion could not make good with argument in the presence of a
Scholar, nor durst face to face appear to defend it:) and soon after was
reconciled unto the Church; and at Venice died a Catholic. So my Lord, though
he were not permitted once to put an argument, nor so much as to show the
grounds of our tenet; using the buckler only and never suffered for to draw
the sword; got the field; and bore away the prize.

(...). Here Is the leap. Here the leap.

HAEC Relatio disputationis habitae inter Reuerendissimum Dominum Richardum,
Episcopum Chalcedonensem, and Daniel^m Featlaeum Ministrum Protestanticum, de
Reali Praesentia Sacro-sancti Corporis Domini N. I. C. in Eucharistia, vna cum
notis S. E. adiunctis, nihil habet Catholicae fidei aut bonis moribus
contrarium, prout mihi constitit ex fideli relatione cuiusdam S. T. Doctoris,
qui opus totum perlegit.

Actum Duaci 9. Iunii. 1632. GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. T. Doctor, and Regius,
Ordinariusque ac primarius Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri
Praepositus, and Canonicus, Academiae Duacensis Cancellarius, and librorum
Censor.

A RELECTION OF THE PRECEDENT CONFERENCE. Wherein it is defended against the
exceptions OF MIRTH VVAFERER MASTER OF ART OF ALBAN HALL IN OXFORD.

AND HIS APOLOGY FOR DANIEL FEATLIE D.D. Censured by L. I.

Non disputare amant Haeretici, sed quoquo modo superare.

August. con. Faustum. lib. 13. c. 12. TO THE READERS OF THE TITLE.
THese (Gentle Readers) are to thank you for your pains. You have allreadie
satisfied my desire. If it be known that there is a Censure made of VVaferers
book, it is enough. It is an honor to him; more then he deserved.

There was but little in his Apology; and there is not much here in the
Censure. He is a Master of Art, and I a Bachelour of Art, of Oxford. Many of
that University, might I write my name at leingth, would know me.

VVaferers learning is not much: nor mine. Minut. Foel.
His reading little. The book he cites most, is a tome of eight or ten leaves:
and I have read a volume of that quantity, I shall have occasion to cite
Latin sometimes: pardon me if I do not still put the same in English. I was
not willing to bestow so much labor upon Mirth. And to what end should a man
english Aristotle? He that understands him not in Latin understands him not in
English. I desire no Reader but a good Interpreter. If you will read it, do
read it; and if you will not read it, do not read it. Either will content me;
and more I will not beg. what allreadie you have done was a courtesy to

The Writer. L. I.

TO MASTER MIRTH VVAFERER In oxford; or Odiham, or els-vvhere; Quocumque sub
axe; (...), More wit, and more grace.
THere is a time (Sir) as I have heard, to be merry: and when better then in
the company of Mirth? I am no good Musician, yet, for this once, to bear a
part with you (for recreations sake,) I will discant upon your base, Apology.
And because I have heard others more skillful then your self, when I see that
you are out, or sing such things as you should not, I will be, I say not, your
Monitor.
Cynthius.

I have read your elegant Pamphlet over, and am thinking to tell others what I
find in it. What hinders me? If they be good things, your commendation will be
the more; and that, if I mistake not, is the thing which you did aim at when
you made it: if they be not, the fault was yours to make them public, and
thereby to give liberty to men, without injury to your fame, to speak of
them.

He, they say, that will not be laughed at, must not play the fool upon
stage; nor he publish his weakness in print that will non endure a Censure. VVaf
page 5.
you were told before that your scriblings were childish, and full of errors.
If after this admonition you would needs come out in print, you should have
blotted out the faults (which had been to burn the coppie) and not have
added to your childishnes impudence; and obstinacy to your errors: whereby
your case is now made notorious and inexcusable.

Whilst the opinion of your weakness stood only on report, it might have been
said in your behalf that fame does not allwaies tell the truth; but if our
judgment of such a defect in you be made according to your true picture,
(drawn by your own self,) the issue of your brain, and image of your
insufficiency, your p^inted and approved book, in this case (which is yours)
the Apologist himself knows not how to make a good Apology.

The ground which a good name and fame do stand upon, and which is honors
object or motive, is worth and virtue. when we question a man's worth, we may
consider him either absolutely in all kinds, or respectiuelie to some
particular way of esteem, that is, only in one kind. That which you, in
setting out this Pamphlet, aimed at, was to be thought a good Controuertist, a
discreet Counselor in matter of Religion, an acute Apologist, Quandoque
oportet vt contumelia^ illatam repellamus, maxim propter duo. Primo quidem
propter bonum eius qui contumeliam infert, vt videlicet eius audacia reprimatur
and de caetero talianon atte^ter, secundu^ illud Prouerbiorum 26. Responde
stulto iuxta stultitiam suam ne sibi sapiens videatur Alio modo propter bonum
multorum quorum profectus impeditur propter co^tumelias nobis illatas. Vnde
Gregorius etc. S. Tho. 2.2. q 72. a. 3.
and a good writer. In which kind, I tell you freely Master Waferer, you have
defamed your self (if before you had any fame in this kind) and forfaited your
honor. This I will show, without soliciting any in Oxford to come and
testify what they know, (twice, since I read your book, I have been there,
and never asked as much as what you were,) out of your own mouth, under your
own hand, by your own book.

A book that comes abroad into the world, should have nothing in it against
faith or good manners; your book offends in both. How it offe^ds in faith, and
how deficient it is in all such learning as you have undertaken to show, the
Censure will note, it is more then can be said in few words; yet this in
general. The whole scope of the book is to maintain an Heresy, against Gods
Church, and against our Blessed Saviors express words; for the maintenance of
which Heresy, you avouch many more; VVaf: page 88
and style it a mere Sophistical cauil (o heavens!) to take Christ
immediately on his word.

For manners, Every one does expect in a writer, then chiefly when he treates
of Religion, Veracitie in elocution, and tranquillity of mind, whereby his
judgment may be sincere and his words deserve credit. But your book discouers
in you great defect in both. it shows you to be borne away with passion,
wholly partial, and much addicted to the vices of calumniating and lying.

The Censure will note part of your lies, and calumnies. Here only I will put
you in mind of your comportment toward my Lord of Chalcedon, and S. E. betwixt
whom you say you divide your (bitter) language.

Your carriage toward my Lord (whom the greatest scholars in England do known
to be a great scholar) is (give me leave to call a spade a spade) malapertlie
insolent. You are a mere Punie, and he a Reverend Prelat; yet you, Good Master
Doctor take notice that -- you must be kept ad idem. But by the Doctors leave
--. For shame Father not --. not a word of this in answer to one who passes,
for a grandie. D. Smith lays down a rule that -- Rather say I e co^tra. the
comparison of eating flesh in mummie deserves no other answer but mum: yet
because it is a piece of his Lordships wisdom it shall be sifted; Then, his
Lordships singular imperfectio^s, and, O most insufferable dotage; with other
more bitter speeches, wherewith your Puritan gaul seeks to dishonor his
known worth. And for S. E. your anger scarce forbeares to annihilate him in
matter of learning.

He you say, has answered but stammeringlie and by roate. so poorlie as not
worth confutation. if as fraudulent and fabulous as his relation is illiterate
and slender, they have neither truth nor honesty in them. simple, simple,
simple, simple, simple, simple. Far below the answer of D. Featlie, a weaker
pen may foil him. every boy can tell you. Your Sophistry is slender and
boyish. your very A. B. C. of Logic will teach you. Only smile at some
passages and they are answered. He must give me leave to answer with a smile.
you do wisely to apply your self to the unlearned, for they that can sift
authors -- we will pardon his doting. you close this sentence very saucilie.
if you were not as good as cup-valiant. though you should teach the ignorant as
seldom you do (now at least in his place I am to do so; but Mercury is not
made of every stock. Pardon my interrupting of you, I was weary in gathering
those phrases out of your book. Briefly, that I may end, though you do not,
you tell him, he is) shameless and foole-bardie. that there is in h^ answer
(that Reader, which thou have but now seen,) insufficiency and obstinacy.
fallacious dealing. the spirit of contradiction. bitterness. satyrs. inuectiues.
jeeres. slanders. detractions. lies. nonsense. calumniations. and what not?
yet forsooth, if some lines may seem to gall him I 'le make (say you) no
Apology, because it can plead retaliation.

Can it so Master Waferer? and are the holy Brethren vindicatiue, indeed? It
seems.

Et Laeto sua bilis inest. I have recited part of your language which you say
you divided betwixt them two; for you deal by retaile with them; with other
Catholic Deuines you deal in gross, calling their learning iugling
Philosophy; their tenets, impious delusions; their pens, impudent, and their
doctrine such as will not stick to license the lowdest lie, so it be
aduantagious to the cause of Rome. So you.

There are some, the Philosopher tells, qui circa finem communem perverse
iudicant, who judge unto wardlie of the the common, highest end. You know their
name. The Scripture says there are an infinite company of fools, and, every
one will be meddling. you begin to be wise in your own conceit; I will answer
or censure you, this once, least that egg prove a cocatrice in your brain.
my Censure shall be your glass wherein you may examine both your learning and
your manners, and amend.

I shall be thought by some, less wise, for appearing with you upon ^he stage;
especially in the manner that I do; but, no matter; so I may do you, or any
other, good. One said, S. Paul.
to the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak. and, I am made all
things to all men, to gain all to Christ.

To deal with you, required no sad thoughts, or deep studdie: and there are
Feriae Academicae; scholars have their days of recreation. Neque semper
arcum. you came abroad, Master Waferer, as I suppose (a fit of (...)) to show
Mirth; and I, without offense may sometimes smile. congruit and veritati ridere
quia laetans: Tertull,
de suis aemulis ludere quia secura est. It appertained to the part I
undertook. Vbicumque dignus risus officium est.

Sickmens pills are lapt in sweet, some maladies be cured with music. If
mirth recover you, I shall be glad I made you merry. If upon the Censure you
grow penitent, I shall be glad I made you sorry: Not that you were made
sorry, but that you sorrowed to repentance.

To others I shall give warning to take heed of such Pa^phlets as yours, made
to spread errors. they be profane and vain bablings that increase by degrees
to more and more ungodliness. they partake in their kind the pestilent nature of
serpents; and this, (yours Master Waferer,) which raises up the head to hiss
at the doctrine of the Church, and spits venom at the Defenders of it, is one.
But I will cut it, into pieces; and with the segments will make a medicine to
cure the swelling which another of the same kind (Featlies Conference) has
made in your head.

This your Pamphlet, the gay coat of your Indiscretion, you have laced up and
down very trimly, with verses. Nunc oblita mihi tot carmina. It is longer
since I was a child. Else, out of the ruins of that kind of learning I would
hurl sometimes a piece, at the head of your Apology.

My quarrel, Master Waferer, is not with your person, but with your book. If I
touch you it is by that medium: no other, put that of, I touch not you but some
other that has scribbled it. Whether you be the man, or not; I wish to you as
to my self, and to all, that God in his mercy will please to amend what is
amiss in us; and make us eternally his servants. This is the mind and prayer
of

Your frindlie Enemy and censuring Friend. L. I.

ANSWER TO THE EPISTOLARIE PROLOGVE.
BEfore your Apology be diverse Epistles scarce worth reading: not worth
answering. In one of them which is to S. E. you quarrel with him, first for
concealing his name. you saw the first letters of it, enough to own the book.
He was not to make it further known to such as you, who vex your Antagonists
more with Pursuiuants then with Arguments. Had I been the man I might have told
you further that your prophetic wit had half speld the letters, beginning your
Epistle to him thus, Sir Refuter, in concealing your name etc. S. you read sir,
the title of a Barchelour. Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.

Secondly you quarrel with him for saying that my Lord of Calcedon is a
Doctor of Deuinitie, and of Oxford, (he told Featlie so when they met,)
whereas it is conceived, Supra page 8.
say you, that his Lordship can show no testimony of his degree taken, then
his own hand. Yet he can, Master Waferer, as good, not to say better, then
your Doctor can, for his, and derived from that Authority which is able to
erect Universities, and has established all, that indeed give degrees in
Deuinitie. The authorizing of that power which is to give publik testimony of
ability in highest learning, and to declare a man fit to teach it (teaching of
Deuinitie being a matter of great consequence in the Christian Society) does
appertain to the Sea Apostolic. And he who can erect an Academie, can make
one to be of it.

Thirdly you tax him as if he had said that my Lord, Supra page 10.
after he was Bishop, had challenged Featlie, in England. you shall have your
answer in the end of the Censure. mean while, he who reads the words of S. E.
will see that you mistake and misreport him.

In another of your Epistles you show the streingth of your fantasy which
has suddenly shrunk S. E. into the littenes of a pigmie, and magnified
Featlie into a tall Giant. (He S. E.) is, say you, far below the answer of D.
Featlie: who looks, be like, over him as the Devil did (the word is) over
Lincoln. But, if your Champion be so far above, may it not be (weigh them
again) because he is in this cause, minus habens.

You add that some weaker pen (your own) may foil him. But you begin to
crow to soon. Were you borne with a crown upon your head? if not, you must
win, before you sing your epinicia: and you must fight before you win yet
see; this Pulius Martis crows, again; the Conference, you say, is so weaklie
maintained that one who was at that time an infant is now grown strong enough
to disable it. how? strong enough? you might have left that rather to some
friend of yours; or to the judgment of the Reader: who now perhaps, hearing you
so soon commend your self before you come to trial, will have difficulty to
believe that, that Infant which you speak of, is yet come to his age of
discretion.

Neither have you omitted to insinuate the method (over and above lying and
calumniating,) which you mean to keep in putting of, those things whereunto
you cannot frame a seeming answer. Only smile, say you, at some passages and
they are answered. They be answered then, sure: for your spleen is petulant.
but, curandum plane ne risus rideatur.

-- Solutos
Qui captat risus hominu^ fama^que dicaci^^
Fingere qui non visa potest; co^missa tacere
Qui nequit; hic niger est: hunc tu Roman caueto.
Who seek occasion to laugh and Ieere: feign things that are not; babble all
they hear.

Such black ones, Roman, do not thou come near.

Thus far your Epistolarie Prologue. I come now to

THE CENSVRE OF THE APOLOGY.
THe Doctors first objection was, that in the words of Institution there was a
figure. It was Answered by the distinction of a double figure: one, has the
verity io^ned with it; and this kind of figure was admitted. Another has not
the verity joined with it, and this kind of figure was denied to be in the
words of institution.

THe Apologist. Before I answer your Doctors distinction, I can not but
challeng S. E. for smoothering our Doctors maine argument.


The Censure. I never saw your face, yet I know you. By your voice; by the
beginning of your speech, by the very opening of your mouth.


You can not but challeng. When man was first made, he was left (the Scripture
says) in manu consilii sui, fit to deliberate on his actions; with power given
him, freely to choose, and do, what in discretion he thought best. And the
wise do so still, when the they see no just occasion, they can choose and do
forbear to intrude themselves into Disputes and questions that are above their
reach, and in such matters to presume to teach and correct and challeng others
that have spent more time therein. Which wisdom and discretion be the first
things of many which I miss in you, who are at this present so disposed that
you can not forbear; you can not but challeng. A Martialist sure from your
nativity.

It were good we knew whom you mean to set upon, that others be out of fear.
In the prosecution of Which Inquiry I meet another of your indiscretions. You
know not yet the man; only you have seen two letters of his name; but were he
some Divine (though your self be but a smattrer in the Science, it matters not,
you are resolved and do challeng him.

May not the matter betwixt you (which you know was never any) be taken up? No:
by no means. Has he done you any wrong? None at all. Why then must you
challeng, and him rather then some other?

For smoothering the Doctors Argument. Are you the Doctor? No; sure you are
not; I know you by your voice. Yet me thought when I touched your book first, I
perceived Esaws hand. The more circumspect must I be, coming to deal With so
monstrouse an Adversary, that has more hands then one man.

Well: we have had a sight of your one half; we know your genus, one that
cannot but challenge. But such there may be perchance more, that are
indiscreetlie determined to challeng, What is your difference let us see that.

Ap. Before I Answer your Doctors distinction I can not but challeng. You do
not only challeng then, and that without discretion, for you can not but do
so: but you Answer distinctio^s also. This indeed every challenger does not.
It is your difference, this. Neither woods nor villages breed any such
challengers. So you we have from you, and of you, a definition, at least a
Description, taken according to the quality which here you come to show.

I desire not to take away what God has given you; your wit Master Waferer, is
not the slowest: and your understanding seems to be good enough were it out
of the bonds of error. But that humor which makes you raise your self above
the Church, and judge, and condemn and contemn it, being seconded with the
passion of a Spirit wholly Puritanicall, hat^ blinded your understanding, and
so turned your wit awry, that had your friends loved you well they should not
have let you look abroad in this publik manner. For, the condition of the
world is such that possibly some will laugh at Mirth, and say

Why, man! you in your gown and cap! be distinctions to be answered? are you
yet to learn the difference betwixt an Answer and an Argument, betwixt a
buckler and a sword, and yet can not but challeng? Ludere qui nescit -- But I
pray you Sir, will you meet at cuggels, or at sharp? not at sharp belike, for
that were dangerous; your cause might have holes made in it. no, not at sharp.
But, such as you think will strike with bucklers only, you can not but
challenge. Thus freely will they speak to your face. But, what will your
Academians do behind your back?

O Jane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit,
Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis.
The two faced man was happy in his kind*
That none did mock him; for he saw behind.

Apologist. For smothering our Doctors maine Argument.


Censure. Not he. It was choked with a distinction. All his labor was to bring
it forth into the light; which is far from smothering.


Apologist. He makes him begin to dispute at the third syllogism.


Censure. The substance of your Doctors Argument is related and answered to the
full. The preambles which you miss had rusted in the paper of Arguments he
brought with him, had he not drawn them long after, for the print. The good
soldier does not esteem a flourish amongst strokes: when his adversary comes
to strike, he stands his ground, and encounters; pede pes, densusque viro vir:
but whilst offers are made only a far of, he smiles at the folly. To beat
the air is no conquest for a man.

The sum of your Doctors flourishing (which you call the maine argument) as
far as it is pertinent to the first objection, is this. The Catholic tenet of
the real presence has no ground in Scripture, Ergo. the Antecedent is proved;
because if there were any ground in Scripture for it, it were Matthew. 26. or
Ioh. 6. but in neither of these: Ergo. The Minor proved, because these words
Matthew. 26. This is my body, are to be understood figuratiuelie. At which proof
the Catholic Relator did begin: and therein he did your Doctor more honor in
the estimation of such as might be able to distinguish a grave Scholar from a
trifling Punie, then if he had wire-drawne his discourse into more parts,
importing but the same: and for the leading Enthimeme, traced in this, with a
Coxcomb in his forhead, Positio quam defendis falsa est; Ergo falleris.

But if I mistake not your pulse, another thing it is that grieves you, which
you do not complain of. Your Doctors argument was presently cut of, with a
distinction, in so much that he was feign to take another, and from Scripture
(which only you think able to warrant a tenet in matter of faith) to pass to
the Fathers: whom notwithstanding, you do not hold to be infallible in their
Judgment, as he was told at the same time. For avoiding of which disgrace in
changing so soon and so often his Medium, he has premised a syllogism with all
kind of medium's in it; that so changing never so often, he might be said never
to change. As if I should argue thus

That doctrine which has (1) no foundation in the word of God, and is (2)
repugnant to the doctrine of the true ancient Church, and (3) overthrows the
principles of right reason, implying (4) palpable absurdities, and apparent (5)
contradictions, is to be rejected as erroneous and heretical. This is Featlies
Mayor. I subsume.

But Caluins doctrine of the Eucharist, is such. Quamuis incredibile sit in
tanta locorum distantia carnem Christi ad nos penetrare vt sit nobis in cibum,
tamen meminisse debemus quantum arcana Spiritus Sancti supra captum nostrum
emineant, and debet fides concipere quod men's non comprehendit. Though it be
incredible that the flesh of Christ should penetrate unto us in so great a
local distance, to be our meat; yet we must call to mind how much the
secrets of the holy Ghost are above our capacity; and faith must conceive what
the understanding is not able to comprehend. Caluinus lib. 4. Institut. cap. 17.

Ergo Caluins doctrine of the Eucharist is to be rejected as erroneous and
haereticall.

Let me call this, my maine argument; and I will leap from place to place, all
the Topics over; without changing my Medium: just as your Champion does.

Now touching this Argument: you will think that by denying the Minor, you do
satisfy for the present, till further proose be made: why then should not our
Defendents deny all be satisfaction enough for yours, in that which, M. Featly
barely had affirmed? and for the rest, which was one part only, (the first)
which he did undertake to prosecute, an Answer met his proof and dispatched it.
Which made you step out into the list, to do, you knew not (for fear) what, or
against whom. At last, it was resolved under your Cap, that you would answer
the distinction: but, (because it were to much for Hercules himself to deal
with two at once) you would first of all challeng S.E. for smothering the maine
Argument. Whereunto his Answer, I know, would be this, that it was fully
satisfied and dispatched, there being nothing objected which was not directly
answered, either by denial, if it were barely affirmed (even according to the
relation of your own Doctor;) or by distinction of a term in the proof of
that which was undertaken; as in his Notes you find more at large.


Apologist. Doctor Smith would father a false opinion upon us, that we hold
there is a mere figure in the words, This is my body: whereas we most plainly
affirm that the Sacramental elements are not mere empty signs of the body
and blood of Christ, but a true and lively figure of them.


Censure. First you challeng; and next you give the lie; wherein you show your
self more choleric then mindful. Are not you the man who maintain that a
proposition cannot be mixed: partly proper, and partly figurative? The
distinction of a mere figure and not mere in speech, is nothing but a mere
fiction, says your Oracle, in his Relation, page 293. and page 294. how says
he, ca^ the same speech be figurative and proper, that is proper and improper?
and a little after. what is this to prove that a speech which may not be
properly taken, such is every figurative, may be properly taken, and so
figurata, and propria both? And you, Master Waferer, to the same tune, page 17.
Since a proper speech is when words are taken in their genuine sense, and a
figurative when they are translated or taken from their genuine sense, to be
taken in their native sense and not in there native sense (besides that it is a
mere fiction) is a plain contradiction. And page 36. That there can not be a
proper and figurative sense both, in one and the same proposition I have
already proved. So you, and vitula tu dignus. Whence it follows, that the
proposition which we speak of. This is my body, is according to you, meerelie
figurative. for figurative you say it is; and, all figurative speeches are, you
say, merely figurative, the case then standing so, the thing that fawnes on
your learned Mastership, may put forth the tongue, quantum sitiat canis Apula,
ta^tum, to lick up again, this Doctor Smith would Father a false opinion upon
us, that we hold there is in the words (This is my b^die) a mere figure,
Whilst the standers by, take notice that you confess with all, Fallitur, qui
plus aliquid sibi per Sacrame^ta conferri puta^, qua^ quod verbo Dci obla tum
vera fide percipiat. Calvin. 4 Instit. c. 14.. 14 Nihil absurdius est quam
Sacramenta ^fferri supra verbum, cuius appendices sunt and sigilla. Idem in
Consensu de re Sacram. page 755. Vocatur panis sacrae Coenae, corpus Christi,
non quia sit, sed quia testatur nobis vere dar^ in^cibum. Idem in Matt. c. 3.
Et in c. 19. Eucharistiam vocat frustulum panis. Similiter frustum, crustulum,
placentam, and laganum, vocant VVittakerus, Beza, Petrus Martyr.
the opinion which your oracle, and your self, maintain, to be fal^^; for for
much is imported by those words, D.S. would impose a false opinion upon us,
(what opinion?) that we hold there is in the words a mere figur^. this opinion
you say is false, and for to maintain this false opinio you are come abroad a
polemick in print; Antycira^ some will say, and unhappily enough, melior
sorbere meracas.

In the other part of your words by me cited in this. wherein you would seem
to put down your own tenet for which your Doctor disputed, you show your self
ignorant in the cause.

The controversy, was not about the spiritual effects, which do follow upon
the receiving of this blessed Sacrament, but about the thing received into the
mouth; Whether this thing were indeed our Saviors body, according to the
verity and substance, as his words in propriety of speech import, This (in
form of bread) is my body? Whether in the holy Eucharist there be reallie
our Saviors body according to the verity and substance? The Catholic Church
takes his words (as being dogmaticall) properly, submitting her understanding
to the omnipotent verity that spoke them: and affirms what he, her God and
Savior, did affirm. Master Featlie on the other side labored to prove that
the words were not to be construed and understood properly; that the speech
was meerelie figurative; and that Christ is not there (in the Eucharist)
according to the substance of his body, or shrouded under the accidents of
bread. In which tenet, you Master Waferer, join with him, telling us, page 9.
We (these are your words) deny such corporal presence of the body and
blood, as if the thing signified and represented were according to the natural
substance thereof contained under the shapes of the outward signs. A figure
(you know) was granted; the question was whether this figure had the verity
(the body and blood of Christ) in it; or whether it were empty of it. Whether
that which the Apostles received into their mouths, were a mere empty figure
of the body and blood of Christ; or whether the thing within that Sacramental
sign or figure, were (as our Saviors words in their propriety import) his
body and his blood. The Protestants that speak their minds plainly, pretend
no more then a mere figure.

Their words are set down in the Collation (whither S. E. directed you; See
the Conference of the Catholi^k and Protestant Doctrine, with the express
word^ of Scripture. extant in English. page 266. and seqq.
) where they, your Masters, and the best learned on your side, speak of the
Eucharist, your own, thus; It is not the body of Christ, not his very body,
not his body it self, not his true body, not his substantial body: not
flesh, not Christ's true flesh; but another thing, and much different from
Christ's flesh: not the thing it self of this mystery, not our spiritual
food. It is nothing else but bread, nothing but common bread, nothing but a
bare creature, nothing but a bare sign* or figure, nothing but mere bread and
wine. Only a sign, only a seal, only a token, only a testification, only a
symbol, only a type of Christ's body. It only has the name of Christ's body,
it is only a simple ceremony. It is so the body of Christ as the Paschal
lamb was Christ, as the dove was the Holy Ghost, as the water of baptism was
the blood of Christ. It is the body of Christ only figuratiuelie, by
resemblance and no otherwise. symbolicallie, metonymicallie, tropicallie,
significantlie. no otherwise then a keie delivered, is a house. the body It is
present only by speculation, and mere imagination: as our bodies are now
present in heaven. Christ is no more communicated there in the supper then in
the Gospel: no more received in the Sacrament, then in the word; nothing more
given in the supper then at preaching; no more offersd by the Sacrament then by
the word, yea the Sacrament is inferior to the word, and the memory of
Christ, body is more fully refreshed by the word then by the Sacrament.

All this and more has been told you, out of the mouths of your greatest
Deuines and pillars of Protestancie. The words and places are cite^, in the
Conference l. 1. c. 10. a. 1. Where there is a clowd of domestical,
Protestant, witnesses against your Oracle and you, whose very names would
shadow this leaf of paper. Among them you shall find your Calvin, Beza, Peter
Martyr, and Swinglius who learned it of a Spirit, the Devil it was Luther
says; with your English, Iuel, Perkins, Whittaker, Cartwright, etc. each, as
learned, as your Featlie.

Hereunto you replye nothing: but instead of a Replye have calumniated my Lord,
and contradicted your self withal, Saying, Doctor Smith would feign father a
false opinion upon us, and goes away current with it, that we hold (as he has
proved signatis tabulis, page 159.
and your own confession above cited may be added thereunto) that there is in
the words (This is my body) a mere figure.

But now forsooth, you most plainly affirm (they be the rest of your words)
that the Sacramental elements are not mere empty signs (will you strike your
own fellows in your choler?) of the body and blood of Christ, but a true
and lively figure of them. As if a picture can not be a true picture, and a
lively picture, and yet a mere picture; or a figure be a true figure, and a
lively figure, and yet a mere figure.

The legal figures which were according to the Apostle but egena elementa,
were mere figures, yet some of them as lively, yea more lively then your
bread and wine. The blood of the Testament, and the Manna in the desert, did
signify our Saviors flesh and blood in as perfect a manner, if you consider
all the analogy to the full: and the Agnus Paschalis dicitur esse Christus
eade^ prorsus ratione qua panis ille dicitur esse corpus Christi pro nobis
traditu^. Beza (your admired pattern of Christianity, so you call him page
98.) in. 1. Corin. 5.
Pascall lamb eaten at supper was a more lively figure, flesh of flesh, blood
of blood, killing of killing; that la^be without spot, of our innocent Savior;
then bread and wine there distributed, if they were mere elements, with a
reference to the thing represented, the Passion, which was the^ future
respectiuelie to the^ both vizt* to the legal, and to the Sacramental,
supper, wherefore, since you are forced by the authority of holy Scripture to
grant that the legal figure was (not withstanding the the liuelines) a mere
figure, it remains that an other sign or figure; though lively, may be but a
mere figure. The liuelines of a picture is to represent ad viuum to the life;
and, a picture, the picture of the King, may do so, though it be nothing else
but a mere picture, which your own fellows acknowledge whilst they grant,
as before has been told you, that in the supper there is mere bread and
wine, a sign and seal only, nothing else but bread and wine, which tenet you
likewise hold in your mind, as appears in your whole pamphlet throughout: but
it is in is self, so poor a thing, so short of precedent figures, Calvin cited
above; page 156. yet the same Calvin says. cu^ signa hic in mundo sint, oculis
cerna^tur; palpentur manibut; Christus quatenus homo est, non alibi quam in
c^^lo quaerendus est Calu. in Confess. de re Sacram. art. 21.
so unworthy of the chiefest place amongst Sacraments in the new Testament, so
contrary to the proper sense of our Saviors words, and so incapable of those
high encomium's which the Fathers give, or attributes which they do
predicat^on, the blessed Sacrament; that, you are ashamed openly to profess
it: still iugling with us, and in steed of answers which you pretend, giving us
words, nothing else. as to the communicantes (after fair promises of the body
and blood of Christ present by VVafer. page 8^, Mor. p. 135.
Gods omnipotence changing the exterior elements, and penetrating into our
souls according to the substance of flesh and blood,) you give nothing but
mere bread and wine.


Apologist. Doctor Smith should have proved that the same proposition may be
true in a native, genu^ne, and proper sense, though the words be used in a
peregrine, figurative, and impropre sense.


Censure. It was ridiculous enough to challeng at buckler only, as he did who
came into the field to answer distinctions; but to be an andabatarian in such a
combat, not daring to open his eyes to behold his enemies so blunt a weapon, is
superlatiuelie absurd. His populus ridet.

The word questioned for improprietie, is corpus, in this proposition, hoc est
corpus meum. This word corpus does directly signify (if we speak as the
chiefest Science does conceive it,) the Fit conuersio totius substantiae panis
in substantiam corporis Christi, Conc. Trid. sess. 13. c. 4. Ex vt sacramenti
quantitas dime^siua corporis Christi non est in hoc sacrame^to S. Tho. 3. p. q.
76 a. 4. proinde neque ea quae sequuntur quantitatem. Ex vt realis
concomitantiae est in hoc sacramento tota quantitas dimensiua corporis Christi,
and omnia accidentia eius. Ibidem. vide eundem, 1. p. q 76. a. 4^ ad 1.
substance or part of substance, which requires three dimensions, leingth,
breadth, and thicknes, according to which notion it is, (in the words of
institution) taken properly; and the proposition proper, by the possessiue
meum, this word corpus body, was determined to a man's; not whose soever; but
our Saviors.

The same word Corpus, Body, both in the apprehension of the vulgar (as you
may learn by present experience when you please,) and according to the
Philosopher (as hereafter shall appear) does import withal, the natural
manner of being of such a substance; which manner is, to be a thing extended
according to the foresaid dimensions: and, a man's body, to be a thing figured
and visible. which manner of being naturally flows out of that kind of
substance, and usually comes into the conceit with it. And in regard of this
manner, the proposition is improper; for such an extension, imported also
commonly by the word corpus, is not there. It is improper, I say, if you
regard the manner of being, usually imported also by the word corpus, body;
but, proper, if you regard the substance of the thing directly signified by
the same word. If you regard the substance of the thing directly signified,
the words are taken in their native, genuine, and proper sense, and the
proposition is in that kind native, genuine, proper: If you regard the manner
of being (imported also usually by the word,) the attribut is not taken
properly, nor the proposition proper. Had you opened your eyes to look upon
the distinction which you answer, Relation page 39.
you might have seen that in these words, (This is my body) there is a
figure: not a mere or naked one, void of truth and propriety. because,
although they signify that the Eucharist is the body of Christ truly,
reallie and properly according to the thing, yet, they do not affirm it to
be the body of Christ after such a corporal and natural manner as other
things are the things which they are said to be: but after a spiritual,
invisible, mystical, sacramental manner; and such a one as does figuratiuelie
show and represent the natural manner of being of the same body in another
place.

Now; though for words to be taken in their native sense, and not to be taken
in their native sense, as long as it is secundum idem, be contradiction; yet,
to be taken in their native sense according to the substance of the thing
directly signified, and not to be taken in their native sense according to the
manner of being usually imported also by them, is not secundum idem, nor any
contradiction.


Apologist. Good Master Doctor take notice, that since, a prop^r speech is
when words are taken in their genuine sense; and a figurative when they are
translated or taken from their genuine sense, that to be taken in their native
sense, and not in their native sense (besides that it is a mere fiction) is a
plain contradiction, because the sense would be native and not native.


Censure. Against whom do you fight good Andabatarian? who told you that the
speech was proper absolute, simpliciter; and figurative or improper absolute
simpliciter: that the words were taken in their native sense, and that they
were not taken in their native sense? that secundum idem, they were, and were
not? This is a fiction of your brain, a chimericall goblin that your ignorance
has made for your argument to fight against. Those against who^ you pretend to
deal, have noe such thing; they do not say the speech is proper absolute,
simpliciter; and, that it is absolute, simpliciter, figurative: they say only
that, it is proper absolute, simpliciter, and figurative or improper secundum
quid. Which you will prove to be a contradiction, when you prove this to be so,
Aethiops est niger, Aethiops est albus secundum dentes: and have demonstrated
(against the logic rule) that an argument holds well from secundum quid to
simpliciter. Open your eyes (brave challenger) and read in great letters what
they defend, THE SPEECH IS ABSOLVTe TO BE SAID PROPER; AND FIGVRATIVE ONLY
SECVNDVM QVID.

By this time, having been distempered with a giddines of understanding, so
that you could hardly peceaue what you were to do, you are reeld over the
entry, into the matter of the first argument; where you begin to show your
Divinity; and will read a lesson to my Lord and S. E. before you know what it
is your self. My L. had said, figures, some, were not mere figures as were the
legal; but, had the verity joined with them, of which kind he brought 3. the
first an increated figure, the son of God, who is (according to the Apostle)
the figure of his fathers substance (...) and has it also with him, yea and in
him. heereunto M. Mirth as follows.


Apologist. I grant since the Divine essence was incarnat, that the son is
essentiallie the same with the Father, who though quoad* hypostasim in respect
of his filiation he be a distinct person from his father, yet quoad naturam
according to his essence he is equally sharer of the same godhead, and is not
an other but the same God. But I pray Sirs take notice that these words are
spoken of the Son as his Divinity manifested it self in his humanity, so
then as the Divinity of the son did manifest it self in his flesh, he had
the image of his fathers person engraven in him; so (...) signifies: tell me
then is this image the same with the father whom it represents? is God the
son God the Father? is the second person the first? or is the Divinity of
the son as manifested in his flesh the person of the Father? if not then this
instance proves not your distinction which manitaines a figure to have a
verity joined with it.


Censure. 1. Tim. 1.
Some (the Apostle says) will needs be Doctors of the law though they neither
understand what they say, nor of what thing the speak, and among these Doctors
(M. Mirth) you take a place; violating, with a profane temeritie, the sacred
mysteries of Religion, and undertake to teach divinity to graduates in
Divinity, before you can speak sense in matter of Divinity. For which reason,
this worthy specimen of your improficiencie therein (which being the first in
your book (I have transcribed,) deserves not a relation, yet since you give it
for a lesson to better then my self; and call for good attention with pray Sirs
(D. Smith. and E. S.) take notice that -- I will over it once again, with as
many pauses (for the reverence to such a Master) as there be parts in it.

Waf. I grant since the Divine essence was incarnat that the son is
essentiallie the same with the father.

The son, essentiallie the same with the father, (how? not absolutely, but
say you) since the Divine essence was incarnate. Before (it seems) he was not
(...), consubstantiall; his generation was not eternal, or if it were, the
essence which by this generation he received was not the same which God the
Father has, but another, for had he received the same, (as the Scriptures
teach, and the Catholic church believes,) he had been (...), consubstantiall,
before the incarnation, which is more then your Mastership does admit. A bad
lesson that is (Master Mirth) which can-be learned without forgetting of the
Creed.

Waf. Who though quoad hypostasim in respect of his fillation he be a distinct
person from the father, yet quoad naturam according to his essence he is
equally sharer of the same God head, and is not an other but the same God.

Hitherto it has been believed in the Church, that the son of God received
by his eternal generation the Divinity, all; the whole nature or essence,
together with all the essential attributes. That there is in him (...), Coll.
2.^
all the fullnes of the Divinity. and our Savior himself to his father; Joan.
omnia tua mea sunt, thy creatures are my creatures, thy perfections my
perfections, thy substance my substance, and thou thy self art my, Father: but
now the case is changed in M. Mirths lesson; the Divinity is divided betwixt
the Father and the son, and each has an equal portion of it. the son is a
sharer in the Godhead, and equally sharer with the Father. What part he leaves
the Holy Ghost I do not find, whether he, (the Holy Ghost,) has an equal
share with the Father and the son: or none at all, as not being incarnate;
for the Son got his share this Master thinks, since the Divine essence (in
him) was incarnate, since which time he is essenti^llie the same with the
Father.

Waf. But I pray Sirs take notice that those words (...) are spoken of the
Son as his Divinity manifested it self in his humanity.

Why not rather (if I may be so bold to speak to so great a Master) of the
Son as consubstantiall to the Father, as the Ancients have understood it?
especially, Joan. 1.
since it follows immediately, that He caries or sustaines all things (...) by
the word of his power. this he does not as man, but as God. and as God also,
the world was made by him, Hebr^ 1.
as you find immediately before. and the like in S. John, per ipsum facta sunt
omnia, all things were made by him, who was in the beginning, before the
Incarnation they were made by him, by the word which was in God, and was God,
by this intellectual, subsisting Word (which does expressly represent God the
Father, and is his lively image, Imago Dei inuisibilis, and his eternal
Son, the splendour of his glory, 2. Cor. 4 Coloss 1 Hebr 1 Sap. 7. Basil. Hom
15 de fide Epiph. in Ancor. Amb^l 2 Exam Greg. Nyss* li de diff. ess. and hyp.
the (...) of his substance, the spotles glass wherein he beholdes his own
glorious majesty, Ca^dor lucis aeternae, speculum sine macula Dei Maiestatis;
(...) and imago, totum in se monstrans pat^^m, the express image, showing the
father all within himself. by him, I say, by this Word mundus factus est,
reuolutions of ages, the whole world, was made not by him as appearing in
flesh, as man, no^ but by him, as God.

Had you rather hear a Protestant speak then me? His divine nature has no
less then three to express it, son, brightness, and character: and two to
prove it, the making, and supporting all. Agreeablie to these three we believe
of him, that he is consubstantiall as the son, coeternall as the brightness,
coequall as the character; against the new heads of the old Hydrasprung up
again in our days. Andr. Sermon. upon this text. Hebr. 1. you proceed.

Waf. So then as the Divinity of the son did manifest it self in the flesh
he had the image of his fathers person engraven in him: so (...) signifies.

Be it that it signifies to engraue an image, this grauing is not proper
(neither the Divine, not the humane nature, is carved or graued properly) but
metaphorical; signifying the expressing of an Image. And what Christian Divine
doubts but that the son of God, being Verbum aeternae mentis, is, and from
all eternity, an express image of his Father? and infinitely more express,
more lively, more clear, then the nature, or soul, or understanding, or
art, of man; as showing the whole Divinity within it, and comprehensiuelie
representing God the Father. Will you deny this Master Mirth? will you deny
that the Son of God did still represent his Father, and that he is his
eternal Image? if you do, you blaspheme: and if your words, as they are by you
intended in way of answer be well considered, you do. But we must on to your
Conclusion, which is

Waf. Tell me then, is this Image the same with the father whom it represents?
is God the son God the father? is the second person the first? or is the
Divinity of the son as manifested in his flesh the person of the Father?
Birckbeck Featlies companion, obiecteth that the sign and the thing signified
cannot be the same in that very respect and point wherein they are opposite.
If he means by that his manner of speech in that very respect and point, that
the relations be distinct or not the same, there is no question of it: one
relation is not the other* If he means that the same thing in substance cannot
(in regard of diverse accidental forms) be denominated by them both, he begs,
and cannot prove it. By his example in the Trinity, the son is not the
Father, it seems he means the former Paternitie and filiation be opposite
relations, which cannot one be affirmed upon the other, either in abstracto,
paternitas est filiatio^ or in con^reto, pater est filius, yet the minister
believes, I suppose, that both are in God; where they be subsistent. And though
the Father be not the son, yet the Father is with, and in the Son. this he
believes too, and this is enough to justify the dist^nction which I am
defending.

Those who call the Eucharist a sign, do say also that it is the body. Ex
duabus rebus constat (Eucharistia) terrena and coelesti. the body, and the
species But none ever said that, to be the body was to be the sign, or that
it was the body and the sign secundum idem. And since it includes both within
it is notion, it is easily understood how both secundum diuersa may be
verified. That which is invisibly within, (the body) is signified, it has
the one relation: that which is without, exposed to our eyes, (the species,
Sacramentum tantum,) does signify, it has the other relation attributed to
it, these things be distinct, and the relations being opposite be in their kind
distinct also.

Some too, say that it is the sign of our Saviors body as visible in it self
upon the Cross, because the species do represent that also, or bring it into
the memory of believers, as hereafter you will hear when we come to the
place which is urged out of Gratian. Here in this place it is sufficient to
note that it follows not, The Sacrament is by some called a sign or figure
Ergo they did not believe the body is within it, within it I say, this does
not follow* wherefore that part of the distinction wherein it was said, some
figure may have the verity within it, may stand.


if not then this instance proves not your distinction, which maintains a
figure to have a verity joined with it.


Cens. That the son is not the Father, or the second person the first, a
child but seven years old, could tell; and yet that instance of the eternal
son being the figure of his fathers substance does illustrate what was said
in the explication of the distinction; namely, that a figure may have the
verity joined with it; God the Father being inseparably with his son, whom
the Apostle calls the figure of his substance: and in him too, if we believe
the son himself, the Father is in me, and I in the Father, Ioh. 10. v. 38.
and afterward again, twice, in one chapter; giving motives also, to persuade
men to believe it. And if the son has the Fathers essence in him, how can
the Father be separated from the Son? can he leave his essence, and be gonne?
Again, as the Father has immensitie, so also has the Son; how then can the
Father be any where, and the Son not there also; or the Son any where
without the Father with him? He is verbum mentis, an intellectual word; and
therefore immanent, abiding in the conceauer, and so present with him.
Vnigenitus in sinu Patris. No violence can separate or divorce them, having
both, but one nature, one existence, and that, incapable of division; as being
in it self a pure act.

It may be further added, that, were the words of the Apostle understood of the
son of God as man, and only so, my Lords instance would still be good, for
God the Father is never separated from the Son; wherefore God the Son being
within that humanity, God the Father was not absent. The fullnes of the
Divinity did and does inhab^te and dwell in him corporally (...) the
Scripture says; and, Col. 2. 2 Cor. 2
Deus, erat in Christo, mundum reconcilians sibi. Do you not believe that the
Father is in me? Io. 10.


Now Sir; to return to the words again; if the place of S. Paul does not
make good what was told your Doctor, vzt, that some figure had the verity
joined with it; it is, either because the son of God is no^ (...) the figure
of his Fathers substance; and this you will not say; because S. Paul affirms
it: or, because that (...) of the Father is not with this (...) as in effect
you do say, and therein deny the (...) revealed in Scripture; which is a
foul error in Divinity. It is pity that unlearned men be permitted to vent
in writing such stuff, fit for nothing but to breed Apostasy, and undo the
simple reader.

Nauim si poscat sibi perornatus arator
Luciferi rudis, exclamet Melicerta perisse
Frontem de rebus.
If he who knows no stars, should come from plow,
And in his start-ups moderate the stern,
The Sea-god might exclaim, shame's no where now
When dunces needs will do, before they learn.

Apologist. So then this similie makes nothing against us, since it only
illustrats such a figure as to which the thing signified is present.


Censure. If it does that, it does all for which is was brought. But see your
giddines; you scarce have breathed since you said; this instance proves not
your distinction which maintains a figure to have the verity joined with it.


Apologist. The king in triumph may be the same king which overcame in the
war: but he in this solemnity represents some past actions, and postures of
his behavior in the conquest; not himself. that triumph is the figure of the
kings victory not his person.


Censure. One instance was enough to make the distinction understood; and after
much ado, you have, in fine, granted as much; vzt, that the former instance
does illustrate such a figure as to which the thing figured is present:
wherefore I need not proceed unto the second, wherein it was said that the
King showing in triumph how he did behave himself in the war, Rclat. page 15.
VVaf page 24.
is in this latter action a figure of himself as in the former. and the less
need there is, because instantly you accord and say It Is true. If it be true
then it may stand, to show that the substance of the thing signified or
represe^ted, may be in the sign or figure; for the king in the wars and the
king in the triumph is the same King, the same body, the same substance.
Whether he be in this posture or in that; whether he fight or floorish; whether
he be in this motion, or in that other; he is one and the same man: the actions
are distinct, but not the person. Moreover, as the King triumphing is the
sign, he figure, the thing represe^ting, so is the King victorious, and
subduing his enemies, the thing signified, called to mind, represe^ted. By the
glorious show at home, he would represent and bring to mind his Royal
comportment abroad; by this triumph, that war. He would have men call to mind
that He was in that action, that there He showed his valor, making it appear
how that His hand merited the scepter, and His head the crown. And whilst you
conceive it otherwise, you come short of the nature of the show. you take away
the grace of the royal action represented, in taking out of it the kings
Person, which is the life and luster in it. you take, the soul out of the
body, the diamond out of the ring, the sun out of the day. To say nothing
of your subtilitie in conceauing (by occasion of that representation or sign)
postures without members, wounds without bodies; a battle fought and a
victory obtained without thinking on a man. If your brain be the theater of
such spectakles, you must needs purge.

Nauiget --


Apologist. His last similie (or instance) is the weakest. Bread, says he,
exposed in the shop is a figure of it self as to be sold. But (by the Doctors
leave,) bread as it is to be sold is not it self, Ergo it is not the figure of
it self.


Censure. Now you are in form, and therefore your Adversary had need to look
about him, least with your Ergo, you draw the strings and shut him in the
bag. You are examining the last instance, Bread as exposed, is no^^or then
bread as vendible. A stone, or the bakers Cat in that place, is no sign of it.
wherein it was said that bread (suppose a white loaf) exposed in the bakers
shop, is not only bread but a sign, and not only a sign but bread; it is
both It is a sign of vendible bread, and it self is the very thing whereof it
is a sign, as you may presently know, if you will but agree with the baker
for it. You need not ask of him whether he will sell it or no; he signified
his mind to sell it by exposing it there. We do not say that the vendibilitie
is the sign of the vendibilitie, but that the same thing which is exposed,
(the loaf of bread) is the subject of both the denominations, for, it is the^e
vendible, you grant: and it stands there to signify that bread (even that
loaf if you like it) is there vendible. And if the same substance may be in
the sign, and the thing signified, we look no further into the similie: we
do not conte^d that to signify is to be signified; that is not in our thoughts.

I would here have left you in the bakers shop, but that you le^t ou^ into
the margin to see whether possibly the manna, as in the Arck, could be a
sign of it self, as in the desert. By that which has been said about the
two former instances it appears that it might. The same substance is,
according to several reasons, Your color has a reference to your body.
your body has a reference to your soul that is within it, why may not the
Sacramental species have a reference to the body that is invisibly within
it? See the place of Gratian, Arg 4. or to the body visiblie on the Cross?
Ibidem. where you confess as much. See also Peter Martyr, supra page 55.
capable of both denominations. I say several; because the reason founding the
one denomination, is diverse from the reason fou^ding the other. You look
perchance for a real order or relation betwixt the sign and the thing
signified; but such an order is not necessary: nor, in some cases, possible.
The King (you say) by his triumph does represent actions past: that relation
cannot be real, because those actions are past. yet, an understanding has
power to make them, or rather (as I told you before) to make the king in that
action, stand before our apprehension obiectiue: and so may compare, this to
that; or (rather) the King in th^s posture, to the king in that posture. And
reflecting again upon this comparison, finds a reference. But these nicities
which you call into the dispute, are troublesome to the Reader that never was
in schools The An est, he perceaues better then the quid; let us put that, the
An est, in an example within his reach.

Your tailor having made you new clothes, brings his bill, and bidds you cast
it up. NOW let it be supposed, that you have only shillings in your pocket,
and use them as counters in casting up this bill. It will happen that, as they,
(the shillings) stand for pounds, and pence, so they may stand for shillings
too. When all is done; and all abated that may be; be the sum rigorously
due, five pound and three shillings, which three shillings you may let the
tailour take, whilst you go into your closet to fetch the five pound: and to
study, whether those shillings were the signs of themselves. Upon the table
in the account, they were signs of shillings; and when you first took them
out of your pocket, they were shillings: if now, you will not have the same to
be the sign and the thing signified, you must give other, to the tailor: and
let those be hereafter bullion, for having once been signs.

If this case had any difficulty, yet in ours there is none. Who cannot
conceive that the species of bread may be referd to a body, as a sign of it,
if it be indeed invisibly within? He is very stupid that cannot understand
it. Well Sir, if you be resolved about your shillings, bring Tertullian out
with you: for the next business is about a place in him, Acceptum panem,
Professus itaque se concupiscentia concupisse ed^re Pascha vt suum (indignum
enim vt quid alienum concupisceret Deus) acceptum panem and distributum
discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura
corporis mei, figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus, caeterum
vacu^ res quod est phantasma (vide quod infra citatur ex li. 5. c. 20.) figuram
capere non posset* aut si propterea panem corpus sibi finx^t quia corporis
carebat veritate, ergo panem debuit tradere pro nobis. Faciebat ad v^nitatem
Marcionis vt panis crucisigeretur. cur autem panem corpus suum appellat, and
non magis peponem quem Marcion cordis loco habuit, non intelligens veterem
fuisse istam figuram corporis Christi, dicentis, per Hioremiam, aduersus me
cogitauerunt cogitatum, dicentes Venite conijciamus lignum in panem eius,
scilicet crucem in corpus eius? itaque illuminator antiquitatum quid tunc
voluerit significasse panem, satis declaruit, corpus suum vocans panem. Sic and
in cali^is mentione testamentum constituens, sanguine suo obsignatum,
substantiam corporis confirmauit, nullius enim corporis sanguis potest esse,
nisi carnis, nam and si qua corporis qualitas non carnea opponetur nobis, cerie
sanguinem nisi carnea non habebit ita consistit probatio corporis de testimonio
carnis, probatio carnis de testimonio sanguinis, vt autem and sanguinis veterem
figuram recognoscas aderit Esaias, quis inquit, qui aduenit de Edom? rubor
vestimentorum eius ex Bosor etc. multo manifestius Genesis in benedictione
Iudae, ex cuius tribu, carnis census Christi processurus, iam tunc Christum in
Judah deliniabat. ^auabit inquit, in vino stolam suam, and in sanguine vuae
amictum suumistolam and amictum carnem demonstrans, and vinum sanguinem, ita
and nunc sanguinem in vino consecrauit, quitunc vinum in sanguine figurauit,
Tertull. adu. Marcion. lib. 4. c. 40. Vide Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum
dicendo, id est, figura, corporis mei, and the rest, recited in the margent.
Out of which words M. Featlie did argue for such a sign as had not the
verity joined with it.


Apologist. It is most plain that Tertullian (in those words) means to
interpret himself against transubstantiation, for if he had held his body to
be truly and substantiallie in the bread, why would he have added to these
words, he made it his body, this interpretation, that is, the figure of his
body?


Censure. The words figura corporis mei, are not an interpretation of corpus,
in that speech corpus suum illum fecit, as you may easily know not only by
the Authors discourse, but also even by the Syntaxis of the words. Panem fecit
corpus suum, id est fecit figura corporis, is no congruitie in Latin. And
again, that mei, which follows, does repugne to the construction which you
make; panem fecit corpus suum, id est, panem fecit figura corporis mei,

Suum, id est, mei. this is so untoward that you will never be able to persuade
a man, Tertullian meant it should run so. The words id est figura corporis
mei, are an exposition of the subject, hoc, as your Doctor was told in the
Conference: and the Authors intention was to say, that our Savior by the
words of consecration hoc est corpus meum, turned an old figure, bread, into
his body. Acceptum panem, corpus suum illum fecit. Wherein he is so so far
from interpreting himself against transubstantiation, that he does avouch and
teach it.


Apologist: It Is mere Sophistry to attribute those words (that is a figure
of my body) to the subject, (this.)


Censure. This is all which is returned in answer to four several reasons,
demonstrating, and out of this Authors own words, that his meaning was, by
these words id est figura corporis mei, to interpret and declare what before,
that thing was, which our Savior now, by Consecration turned, into his body.
Some thing, he says, our Savior made; fecit; and by speaking these words,
Hoc est corpus meu^. Fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo. the thing he made it
of, was bread, Acceptu^ panem, etc. The Question is, Whether concerning this
bread Tertullia^ would say, that of no figure he made it a figure; or, Whether
he would say, that being before a figure of his body, he now turned it into
the same body. the words are Acceptum panem corpus suum illum fecit, dicendo,
hoc est corpus meum. the interpretation is, id est figura corporis mei. Which
interpretation, if you join to the subject hoc, it makes the later of the two
senses: if you join it to corpus, the predicate, it may be drawn to the
former placing it thus, hoc est figura corporis mei, this is my bodies figure,
putting instead of corpus, figura etc. Which your own men, Chamier, Hooker,
and others will not endure; (and with reason, for the word which is the
predicate, corpus, signifies the thing crucified, as appears by saint Paul
This is my () which is broken for you. you cannot put figure there, instead of
body; and say, this is my figure which is broken, for you.) whereupon they
take corpus properly (...). And allthough our tenet would suffer no prejudice
by admitting that the Eucharist is a figure, and consequently by saying that
our Savior by consecration made it so, for you were told there is a figure
though not an empty figure, and in the Conference my Lord told your Doctor
that of courtesy he would admit the word figura, page 22.
figure, to be referd to the word corpus, body, that his argument might run
on; yet certain it is that Tertullian does intend the later sense, and not the
former. For, the figure which he speaks of was before; and our Savior did
not, you you confess, make by consecration, that which was before. Figura
autem non fuisset. Non intelligens veterem istam fuisse figuram. quid tunc
voluerit significasse panem. Birkbeck page 61. does make a Syllogism, whereof
if you chang the minor puttng this, But bread was an old figure of Christ's
body, His Argument is answered. He translates there also, figura, non fuisset,
a figure it could not be, to make it serve i^ turn.
Vt autem and sanguinis veterem figuram in vino. and the rest, which you find
in the Relation.


Apologist. In other places he makes bread the subject in this proposition, as
in these panem quo ipsum corpus representat, bread by which he representes his
very body, Again panem corpus suum appellans, calling bread his body, and
presently after corporis sui figuram pani dedisse, he gave to bread to be the
figure of his body; in which places he is easelie understood to mean that
bread represents Christ's body as a figure, not to be sustantiallie the same.


Censure. It does not follow out of the affirmation of a figure that the
substance of the body is not here: Plane de substantia Christi putant and hic
Marcionitae suffragari Apostolum sibi, quod phantasma carnis fuerit in Christo
cum dicit quod in effigy co^stitutus non rapinam existimauit paria^i Deo, sed
exhausit semetipsum accepta effigy serui, non veritate. and in similitudine
hominis, non in homine; and figura inuentus homo, non substantia, id est non
carne: quasi non and figura, and similitudo, est effigies substantiae quoque
accedant. Been autem quod and alibi Christum imaginem Dei inuisibilis appellat.
Numquid ergo and hic qua in effigy eum Dei collocat? aeque non erit Deus
Christus vere, si nec homo vere fuit in effigy hominis constitutus. Vtrobique
enim veritas necesse habebit excludi, si effigies, and similitudo, and figura,
phantasmati vindicabitur. Quod si in effigy and in imagine, qua filius patris,
vere Dei praedicatus est; etiam in effigy and imagine hominis, qua filius
hominis, vere hominem inuentum. nam and inuentum, ratione posuit, id est,
certissime hominem: quod enim inuenitur, constat esse. Tertull. li. 5. aduo r.
Marc. c. 20. Facilius intelliges quod in hac sententia obscurum est, si legas
hoc modo. numquid ergo and hic quia in effigy eum Dei collocat, aeque non erit
Deus Christus? vere; si nec etc. and postea. vere Deus predicatus.
this being not a mere empty sign or figure, but such a one as has in it
the substance of the thing signified and represented, as your Doctor was told
in the beginning. And according to this Author, our Savior turning the
substance of bread into his body, did by this means put the verity within
the figure; and so left it such a figure as we speak of; not empty (as before
in Ieremies time) but full. The very same is imported by the the words which
you cite in the first place. representare, is, rem aliquam praesentem sistere,
to exhibit a thing present. And our Savior by turning the substance of bread
into his body, does thereby, exhibit his body present; under the figure of
bread: and so properly does represent it. In this signification Orators,
Lawiers, and Deuines, use the word. and Tertullian himself, very frequentlie,
as, where he says that our Savior Tertull. de Resurr. car.
represented the things foretold by the Prophets; that the Ibid.
general Judgment shall consist of a representation of all mankind; that God
li. 4 con. Marcio^. See store of testimonies of this kind in Card. Peron. page
211. 212.
representing Christ, said This is my son etc. itaque iam representans eum.
And this is the native and proper signification of the word. To exhibit a
thing present in a sign or figure, is not so properly rem sistere praesentem,
as is the other exhibition of the thing in it self; wherefore that
signification is less proper. yet in this sense also, the word is here
verified; for, the Sacrament is a sign or figure of the body; and it has
also the body in it. Our Savior himself who did institute it, was the figure
of his Fathers substance, and had his Father in him. supra page 178.

The second place you bring is this, panem corpus suum appellans. where you
suppose the word panem to be the subject, and to be taken properly, Subjection
est in Grammaticae prior nominatinus, de quo aliquid dicitur: Grammatici vocant
suppositum. vocatura nonnullis antecedens, quia in ipso sensu debet semper
antecedere, etsi in oratione interdum sequatur. Deus erat verbum (...).
nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus, Keker. ex Melancth.
which (if it could be proved) would not yet serve your turn: for we could
easily expound the words, by others of the same Author before cited: panem
corpus suum fecit dicendo hoc etc. The calling, would I then say, was
practical; such as turned the bread into his body: dicendo hoc est etc.
corpus suum illum fecit. Dixit and factum est. he made it to be so, and he made
it dicendo. Call to mind the Speaker, and you will not think the thing to him
hard or difficult. It is he, per quem omnia facta sunt. He that sends forth
light, Baruc. 3.
and it goes, calls it again, and it obeieth with trembling. The stars
have given light in their watches and rejoiced, they were called and they said
we are here, and they have shined to him with cheerfullnes that made them.

Benedict^one etiam natura ipsa mutatur. S. Ambr. de mist. init. c. 9. Ante
verba Christi Calix est viui and aequae plenus: vbi verba Christi operata
fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit. Idem Sacram. l 4. cap. 5.
Inuenimus Calicem mixtum fuisse quem Dominus obtulit; and vinum fuisse quod
sanguinem (practice) dixit. S. Cypr. li. 2. Ep. 3. Sacrificium verum and plenum
tunc offert (Sacerdos) in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre secundum
quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse. Ibidem. And had there been in this
Father any obscure speeches touching this matter, the divine Providence has
not left us without means to learn his mind: for together with his book
there is come into our hands from Antiquity, such a comment, (Sermo de Coena)
that we need not study long to find it out, Panis non effigy. etc.
Did the word panem stand for Bakers bread, I would say, that this bread was by
the words of consecration, changed, panem corpus suum fecit dicendo hoc est
etc. and so no more bakers bread after consecration, though before it were, it
is afterward, the body of Christ, supernatural, heavenly bread; the bread
of life. (...). it seems bread it is in the shape of bread; but in substance
it not bread. Cyrill. Qui est a terra panis (...) percipiens vocatione^ Dei,
iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena
etc Caelesti. the bread which has being from the earth, receiving the call or
invocation of God, is now, not common bread, but Eucharist consisting of two
things, the earthly, and the heavenly. Iren. lib. 4. c. 34.

This answer you see is ready, if that supposition of yours could be made
good. But your objection is not so far advanced as to require an answer: and
you are engaged in a further business: being to prove, that when the
consecration is done, the bakers bread remains according to this Author,
which is contrary to his words before alleged, corpus suu^ illum (panem)
fecit. the body of Christ is not (you know) bakers bread. and by consecration
our Savior did this, Hoc est corpus meum dicendo.

By the order of the words you cannot get advantage as before I did insinuate,
and now confirm it by this, that indifferently he puts either first: lib. 3.
contra Mar. c. 19. Panem corpus suum appellans. and lib. 4. cap. 40. corpus
suum vocans panem. See the margent above page 191. Wherefore omitting that
dispute, which is not here material, let us inquire what the word panem (be
it the subject or the predicate) does signify in that proposition, Whereunto
it is easelie answered out of the same Author, that it signifies, not proper,
but mystical, not earthly, but Heavenly bread. The verity of which answer
appears by the scope of his discourse. He is expounding an obscure place of
antiquity, found in Jeremy the Prophet, Mittamus lignum in panem eius: which
words are uttered in the person of the Jews. By lignum he means the Cross.
that eius is referd to our Savior of whom the Jews spoke, mittamus lignum,
let us cast wood upon, let us crucify panem eius. the word panem (and that
word only) is obscure. If it be taken for earthly, bakers bread: the sense
would be, let us crucify bakers bread. which could not be the sense. What
bread; then, is this which they threaten to crucify? it is Heavenly,
mystical, bread; not bread in substance, but the body of Jesus Christ.
Against this bread, they did afterward conspire, they did crucify, this
bread. Itaque ill. etc. page 192.


And that indeed this mystery was couched under those words in the Prophet
mittamus lignum etc. our Savior himself, best able to tell the meaning of
Antiquity, declared, in calling his own body bread, Ioh. 6. and afterward
exhibiting it (the very same that was crucified,) in the form of bread by
turning bread into it, and so giving it, Matt. 26. Lue. 22.

On the other side, if we make of the words that construction which you would
have, you I say, who contend that in the proposition before alleged, panis
stands for earthly bread, figuratiuelie representing the body; the sense
would be, that the cross was cast upon that earthly bread; that bakers bread
was crucified. which is false, and ridiculous. Si panem eo sensu corpus suum
Dominus appellauit, faciebat ad vanitatem Caluini, vt panis crucifigeretur:
Why? because the cross was to be laid upon that bread whereof our Savior did
interpret the speech or words of Jeremy, mittamus lignum in panem.

You had from me in the former place (objected) one reason why Tertullian did
not understand improperlie the predicate corpus in our Saviors words, hoc est
corpus meum. Here now you have an other out of this second place, which
declares that he understood it to be so far from a mere figure, or
bread-a-figure, that it is (he believed) the thing it self which was crucified,
which agrees well to the determination that our blessed Savior himself does
add by way of difference to distinguish it from corporal bread-a-figure. He
does not (as you would have Tertullian against his own discourse expound him)
mean to say, this is a figure, or, understand by the predicate or word corpus,
the figure of a body, the whole sense then had been this, This ^s a figure
which is crucified for you: but he says, this is (...) my very body, which
is given for you. And so much you Chamier does acknowedge against Featlie.
Quaeritur quid sit corpus meum, sanguis meus. Nos candi^e and libere ac
libenter respondemus (...) interpretandum, cum He^ychio in Leuit 22. Sancta
Sanctorum sunt proprie Christi mysteria, quia ipsius est corpus de quo Gabriel
ad Virginem dicebat, Spiritus Sanctus superuenier etc. -- Est igitur corpus
illud, id est solida substantia humanae naturae, quam assumptam in vtero
Virginis circumtulit in Hypostasi sua verbum -- Etenim omnino Christi corpus,
non nisi dupliciter nominatum est, vel proprium illud a nobis designatum, vel
mysticum quod est Ecclesia, the Question is, what is Corpus meum my body,
sanguis meus my blood. whereunto we answer ingenuouslie, openly, and
willingly with Hesichius that it is litterallie to be interpreted. The
mysteries of Christ are properly the holy things of holies, for it is his
body of whom Gabriel said to the Virgin, the Holy Ghost shall come from above
etc. It is therefore that very body, that is to say, the solid substance of
humane nature, which being assumed in the Virgins woombe the word carried about
in his Person. For Corpus Christi signifies but two things in all; the proper
body which we have now specified; and the mystical, which is the Church. so
he: a protestant, and he instar omnium; you know the man that said so, and if
it be so, then a greater scholar then he that said so, your Master Featlie.

The third place, corporis sui figuram pani dedisse, will neither yield solid
proof for you; nor us; because (omitting the cause of doubting whether they be
Tertullians words or no, which is insinuated, together with the reason, by
Pamelius out of whom you read pani) the lection (and it seems by some defect
in a copy out of which other later were transcribed) is doubtful: whether it
should be pane, as Latinius thinks; or panis as most do read with Beatus
Rhenanus; or pani, as Pamelius found in one of the three Vatican copies which
he had, and where the ground shakes, none but W -- build on it. Moreover none
of those lections do favor you, and were it pani, the sense would be that he
gave to celestial bread (his body) the figure which was before, by turning
the substance of it into the substance of his body, and with the exterior
shape which was left covering the same: so joining figure and verity together,
and by the one confirming to us the other. leaving the Church withal, a
Sacrament, consisting of them both: not the body only; that were not a
Sacrement; and the communicant would have horror to receive naked flesh: nor
the figure only, that would have been elementum egenum, futurorum vmbra, a
sign and nothing but a sign: but figure, and body to; and so, that (the time
of mere figures exspiring,) the former substance of the figure, Vt ergo in
Genesi per Melchisedeth Sacerdotem benedictio circa Abraham possit rite
celebrari, praecedit ante imago Sacrificij in pane and vino scilicet
constituta. Quam rem perficiens and adimplens Dominus, panem and calicem mixtum
vino obtulit. Et qui est plenitudo, veritatem praefiguratae imaginis
adimpleuit. S. Cypr. l 2. Ep. 3.
bread, by conversion passes into the verity, the body. thus, (were it pani)
the place would make for us; and imply a transubsta^tiation as I have declared.
neither would the words admit any other so genuine a sense, as his. for, if
you take pani for bakers bread, the construction (supposing which is a thing
manifest and above demonstrated that the figure he speaks of was an old
figure) would be, corporis sui figuram pani dedit, he gave to (bakers) bread
the (old) figure of his body, (which figure also was bakers bread) which is as
much as if he had said, he gave bread to bread, old to new; iumbling belike
both together to make one loaf of two, as some do mingle beer, old and new
together, when the one is newly made, and the other growing sour. Pane, and
panis, were further from your purpose, as I could easily show if any should
pretend it; the fittest (if you could find it in any copy) were panem; but
hitherto no such appears; and if it should in time, we should not be to seek
a solution, having allreadie said that the sacrament, called also by the name
of bread (for diverse reasons els-where specified) is a figure of the body, but
not a mere and empty figure.

I had almost forgot to take notice of your translation of the words,
corporis sui figuram pani dedisse, he gave to bread to be the figure of his
body. If he had done so, either at the supper by making of it the blesed
Sacrament, which is a figure (though not empty) of his body: or in Ieremies
time (as he was God, Tertullians word being Deus: sic enim Deus in Euangelio
etc. vt hinc iam eum (id est, Deum) intelligas corporis sui figuram pani
dedisse: mark also the preterit:) if, I say, he, as God, be said in Ieremies
time, to have given to bread to be the figure of his body: yet should you not
have translated the words so as you do. I do not speak of translating dedisse
he gave; I suppose you meant dedit: but, of translating the word, suppose
dedit, he gave to be. Which translation in other matter your self would not
endure. Sempronius Lepido dedit asinum. were this Lepidus a frinde of yours,
you would not turn dedit, he aue to be.

In the margin page 23. S. E. had cited other words of Tertullian for a
further exposition of his meaning; Caro corpore vescitur; and these next you
gloss.


Apologist. the meaning of Tertullian in those words, caro corpore and
sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur; is, that the body
receiving in the outward element (which otherwhere he calls the figure of his
body) the soul presently apprehends the thing signified, vzt, the body of
Christ.


Censure. See Masters! a golden exposition; clear, native, proper, subtle,
accurate. The body eats the flesh, that is, the soul does apprehend it. O
monstrous wit, able to make quidlibet ex quolibet* I can not sufficiently
admire, I am astonished when I consider thy streingth and perspicacitie.
Before, I knew thou could make co^tradictions: (which omnipotency it self
cannot;) and now I see thou can: find senses, where they be not. But,
Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus. Whilst you were looking beyond
the object of Gods power, to tell us what he cannot do, you did not consider
that Tertullian being in that book whence the words are cited, to defend the
Resurrection of bodies, which Heretics did impugn, chiefly out of the
baseness of flesh; and it is origin at first, and corruption at last; as appears
by the fourth ch^pter of that book: he, on the contrary, speaks much in
commendation of it. Vituperationem laudatione dep^llas. ita nos rhetoricari
quoque prouocant haeretici, etc. you may refute and repel the dispraise of a
thing by the praise and commendation of it, and Heretics prouoake us to play
the Rhethoricians in this kind. so he, ca. 5. where he beginns to praise it,
continuing to the tenth chapter. in the midst of of which discourse, having
spoken in the praise of humane flesh in common, he betakes himself to speak of
the dignity of the flesh of Christians, particularly. So much quoth he, be
said out of the publik form as it were of humane condition in the behalf of
flesh: let us consider now, how great a prerogative this frivolous (as
Heretics in contempt, style it,) and base substance has from God in as much
as it is the form of Christian men, Porro si vniuersa per carnem subiacent
anima, carni quoque subiace^t, etc. Et hac quidem velut de publica forma
humanae conditionis in suffraguim carni procurauerim: videamus nunc de propria
etiam Christiani nominis forma quanta huic subtantia (heretici.) friuolae ac
sordidae apud Deum praerogatiua sit, and si sufficeret illi quod nulla ommino
anima salutem possit adipisci, nisi dum est in carne, crediderit; adeo caro
salutis est cardo, de qua cum anima Deo allegitur, ipsa est quae efficit vt
anima allegi possit. Sed and caro abluitur, vt anima emaculetur. Caro vaguitur,
vt anima consecretur. Caro signatur, vt and anima muniatur. Caro manus
impositione adumbratur, vt and anima spiritu alluminetur. Caro corpore and
sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur. non possunt ergo
separari in mercede, quas opera coniungit. Tertullian. de Resurrect. carnis.
cap. 7. and 8. Obiter aduertet Lector quot in hac vna sententia Tertullianus
indicat sacramenta.
and there come in the words above cited; wherein, (as appears both by the
words them selves and also by the scope of his discourse) it is evident that
he means to say, the flesh even that which Heretics vilified, does receive
into it self by the mouth the body and blood of Jesus Christ, to the end the
soul by the worthy receiving of it, be diuinelie fatned: the flesh, says he,
caro, vescitur. and what does it eat? a mere sign or figure, bakers bread?
is this the great prerogative? no, vescitur corpore, the body it self: that
his sacred and divine body, his creature man, by his bodily mouth, the flesh,
does eat: and thereby the whole has benefit; the soul grace; (so he receive
woorthelie,) and in time glory: and the body, (as other ancients have more
clearlie expressed themselves) immortality. He that eats this bread shall
live for ever. In another place he says the hands also touch it: wherein he
does agree with S. Augustine, De Idol. n. 31. and 34.
out of whom the next argument was taken, who says, our Savior had his own
body (even that which was crucified) in his own hands, and that we receive it
with our mouth. Citat. inserius.



Apologist. He (D. Smith, or S. E) says he has good reason to refer that
which follows the propostion (this is my body) vzt the figure of my body, to
the subject (his,) and not to the predicate body, because it may be showed
otherwhere in him, that what follows the proposition in that manner must be
referred to the subiiect and not the predicate.


Censure. This is willfullie to mystake and misreport. when D. Featlie in the
conference had said, it did not follow that Tertullian in the place objected
had disordered his words because he had done the like elsewhere, page 17.
my Lord answered (as you find in the Relation) that he did not infer that
Tertullian did here speak so, because he had done the like in other places,
but because he does affoorde in this very place (cited) four several reasons
why he must be so understood. which thing was inculcated again by S. E. so
that you do manifestly impose, against your own knowledge, when you tell us
the author says he has good reason to refer etc. because it may be showed
other where in him that what follows etc.

In the end of this your first section, you bring a place out of the Sermon de
unction, which makes against your self, and for us; as will appear to him
that reads it: Dedit itaque D.N. in mensa in qua vltimu^ cum Apostolis
participauit conuiuium, propriis manibus panem and vinum, in cruce vero manibus
militum corpus tradidit vulnerandum, vt in Apostolis secretius impressa syncera
veritas and vera synceritas exponeret gentibus quomodo vinu^ and panis caro
esset and sanguis; and quibus rationibus causae effectibus conuenitent, and
diuersa nomina vel species ad vnam reducerentur essentiam; and significantia
and significata eisde^ vocabulis censerentur. His gratiae supernae priuilegiis,
esu sanctificati panis refecti, etc.
to which purpose I have cited the words at leingth in the margin. He speaks
of consecrated bread, esu sanctificati panis refecti, and says the bread is
flesh, and the wine blood, (vt exponeret gentibus quomodo vinum and panis, caro
esset and sanguis.) and that diverse species are reduced to one essence, which
is done by turning the bread into the body. whence it comes that this thing
has both names; it is called bread, as being made of bread: and being in the
exterior form of bread. and it is also the body it self, which body is the
thing signified by the sacrament, and is reallie (according to the substance,
in it. This change of the sign into the thing signified, and the being of the
same thing (that which was signified) now under the form of bread, is more
cleerelie delivered by the same Author in a former sermon de Coena, Panis iste
quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus,
omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro: and sicut in persona Christi humanitas
videbatur and latebat diuinitas, ita sacramento visibili ineffabiliter diuina
se infundit essentia. that bread which our Lord gave the Disciples, being
changed not in shape but in nature, is by the omnipotency of the Word made
flesh: and as in the person of Christ the humanity did appear and the
divinity lie hid, so (here) a Divine essence does vnspeakablie power it self
into a visible sacrament.

Some grave Deuines think this Author to be saint Cyprian that glorious martyr
and prelate of the Church Primitive, other writers, amongst whom is Erasmus,
esteem him at least a very learned man of that Age, and so much appears by
the work it self, Ad D. Corneliu^ Papam etc. titulus. Ego quide^ nec a meipso
neque ab alio quaero nome^, neque enim aliquid me existimo esse cum nihil sim,
qui hoc a vobis maxima supplicatione quaesiui, vt non essem quod su^, etc. in
Praefat. operis.
dedicated to Cornelius then Pope. He was a Catholic Father as all know, says
your patron, Morto^ page 125. yet you, but an infant at the time of this
Conference, page 2. (having not what to answer to the forsaid words wherein he
has expressed himself so plainly against your Heresy as nothing can be
imagined more plain and opposite,) call him before you in the peremptory
terms of a Pedant; and vouchsafing his work no better words then bastard, and
surreptitious brat, will needs give him the ferula, because he did not compound
his Orations by your Thomasius Dictionarie: or call upon you to teach him what
words were then in use, in honor vocabula; what out of date, verborum vetus
interit aetas; what had not obtained the Grammarians leave to pass, being as
yet strange and new, cinctutis non exaudita Cethegis. The best is, and it is
well for him, that he is so far of, your Master-ship cannot reach him: ferulae
manum subduxit.

Being now come to the end of this argument which you would have grounded in
Tertullian, I cannot omit to tell you that your own great Evangelist Martin
Luther, examining the same words in his book entitled Defensio (...) verborum
coenae, accipite, comedite, hoc est corpus meum, contra phanaticos
Sacramentariorum spiritus; concludes that in them Tertullian does avouch the
presence of the body it self, Debent demonstrare quod dictum Tertulliani non
tantum possit sed omnino necesse sit in eam sententiam quam ipsi
(Sacramentarii) habent, accipi. Quod si non faciunt, iure eos mendaces and
falsarios accusamus cum glorientur se suae causae certissimos esse and
manifestissimam veritatem habere. Luth. Def. verb caenae, page 406. Tertullian
is affirmat Christum in caena panem corpus suum fecisse, secundum verba sua Hoc
est corpus meum. Hic nullum verbum ambiguum aut amphibolou audias. nam panem
facere corpus suum express, clare, and signate dicitur. Ibidem. Vocabulum
figura, obscurum and ambiguum est. Ibidem. Quod si Oecolampalius demonstrare
non potest figuram hic imaginem significare, manifest deprehenditur deprauator
Tertulliani and falsarius, and cum suo corporis signo occumbit. Quando autem
demonstrauerit? ad calendas Graecas, cum cuculus in Lusciniam mutatus fuerit.
Ibidem.
in the sacrament. satis aperte videmus Tertulliani sententiam esse quod verum
and natural Christi corpus sit in pane coenae, page 407. and that the sense
which Oecolampadius then (and Featlie now) would put upon the words, is forced
and violent; Tertulliani dictum violenter in suam opinionem trahit, vt figura
hic coacte sonet signum, contra suam naturam; cum tamen nec possit nec id
Tertullianus admittat. page 406. He is large and spends diverse pages in
examining Tertullians mind; and was your Masters Master, the great light and
Evangelist, and Reformer, top-full of the Spirit Protestant. Refute him first.
If you, slight him, primarium Euangelij propugnatorem, (Swinglius
Sacramentariorum post Diabolum Princeps, Cum autem panis sit figura corporis
Christi, plane necessarium est vt verum Christi corpus vere ibi adsit vbi
figura eius est, quae ex pane per verbum figura eius facta est. (Est haec alia
verborum interpretario, qua contendit esse figuram corporis praesentis) Hanc
esse Tertulliani sententiam mihi exploratissimum est; nec verba eius quicquam
obscuritatis and perplexitatis habent. page 407. Ex his liquido constat
Tertullianum omnino velle vt in pane sit corpus quod pro nobis datum est, ne
oporteat asseuerari merum panem pro nobis esse datum. Ibidem.

Ex his omnibus luce meridiana clarius est, vt mea fert opinio, quod
Tertullianus figuram hic non eo sensu vsurpet quo Oerolampadius, pro simulachro
aut signo, sed pro re visibili, quam eo nominat figuram corporis Christi, quod
ei corpus Christi insit aut subsit. Ididem.

M. D. Smith told M. Featlie that of courtesy he would admit the word figura
to be referd to corpus that his argument might run on, and he make the best
he could of it. In the relation; supra, page 22.


in Exegesi fol, 335.) take it not in ill part if others hereafter forbear to
look more upon your scriblings, allreadie confuted and condemned by the Leader
of your Sect.


The second Argument was of Saint Augustines words of eating the flesh of the
son of man, Figura est etc. lib. 3. de doct. Christiana. And it was answered
that this eating is figurative according to the manner, for this flesh is not
divided (in the eating) in it self; as other flesh: but not figurative
according to the thing, the flesh.
In the margin of the relation, S. E. put these words, which Waferer (though
he dispute often against marginall notes, In relat. supra page 35.
) takes no notice of; Were it denied that Saint Augustine speaks there (li. 3.
de Doct. Christia. c. 16.) of Sacramental eating, the Minister could not prove
it. recondendum in memoria etc. This is another solution of this second
Argument; for the same may be answered diverse ways, as the former also might.
But, to insist upon that which was given: what has Waferer brought against it?

Apologist. I will maintane that the very body of Christ is not corporally
present under the shapes of bread and wine. And first I may deal with Doctor
Smith, as etc.


Censure. Having done with the first argument, you come now to the place of
the second, where forgetting that you came into the field as a second only, to
make good your Doctors objections, nothing else; you begin others: and will
fight against some body, (if any body please to loose time and fight with
you) with arguments out of your own learned head, and maintain that the
body of Christ is not corporally present under the shape of bread and wine.
Where, by the word corporally, if you mean the natural manner of being which
bodies co^monlie have, consisting in the extraposition of parts in order to
place; all being not in the same part of the place, but one part of the body
in one part of the place, and an other part of the body in another part of the
place; as your parts are; your eyes, your nose, your ears, your hands, your
legs, your feet: if you take the word corporally, to signify this manner of
being, I know not who does hold or avouch it in the Sacrament. Catholics do
not. If by corporally, you mean substantiallie, or, according to the
substance of the body; and in this sense understand (...), you do undertake
more then all your masters ca^ prove. And you ouermach your self in singling
out a Doctor; some Logician, that knows his Catechism, and has heard that
the Eucharist is such a sign or image as has in it the body and blood,
according to a supernatural, spiritual manner; and that the Fathers do speak
sometimes of sacramental, sometimes of spiritual receiving only: might serve
to combat with you, if perchance he did not esteem it unworthy of him to
meet one who comes tilting at him with a --.

You are provided no doubt, of a goodly sheffe of spears; had every one of
them been headed with an Ergo, they would have penetrated a brain that had
been armed double-coxcomb. And had you thought on it, you might have added in
your dedicatorie to the great Challenge. Challe^ge
Challenger, your Father in God Et nos tela, Pater, ferrumque haud
debile dextra
Spargimus, and nostro sequitur de
vulnere sanguis.


Or vinum, wine; that rather: for if your lances wound, there is no blood: if
they pierce, there is no body: but suddenly instead of a man's body, bakers
bread; and wine, instead of blood. Pectora percussit, pectus quoque -- You
look perchance that some body meet you, in this new field of your own
pitching, that with your fearful engines you may do, what Featlie could not
with his arguments. alas! poor, man! feign he would, and can not find an
adversary to prove himself upon.

How? The Church? o no. that is to great a task for you. It has been to hard
for whole Legions of furious Heretics. it has stood against all Errors that
ever were. There are in it millions, of great scholars: and you but in your
ABC yet. It is an army, castrorum acies ordinata. What, you. you, fight
against the church? as you love Mirth Waferer, talk no more of that. if you
do, men will think you be madd.

The compass, Master Waferer, wherein the battle was to be, was drawn with
your Champions own sword; the Arguments to be answered, the Scriptures to be
expounded, the Fathers to be looked into, were those, and those only, which he
brought. The subject of the writing which you will needs stickle in, was a
Conference wherein Doctor Smith, now Bishop of Chalcedon, defended against D.
Featlie. The Controversy was about the real presence. Some twenty years
after it was past, your Doctor set forth a Re^ation of that he said had passed
in it; which Relation being partial, S. E. set out an other. That which the
Reader did expect to learn here by, was to know how the matter went; what were
the Arguments, what the Answers: and which of the two Combatants had the honor
of the day. In which case it is impertinent to allege other Arguments, or
to hear you dispute four and twenty ways more, against that and other tenets.

When S. E. came to represent again what had been done before, he kept
himself within the compass which your Doctor had prescribed. He made no
discourse to show how in all ages our doctrine had been held, by the Fathers,
and Deuines, and the Christian Churches generally Which thing it had been
easy for him to do, after Garetius, and Saints and Gualterius, and
Bellarmine, Pero^ and others, he did not gather together, and urge, the texts
of Scripture with all their circumstances, ever hitherto understood, and
necessarily to be understood, properly: he did not cite any Fathers at all but
such only as your Doctor had objected, whose meaning he was to declare by
their own writing: every one knowing best his own mind, and being the best
interpreter of his own words. He did forbear to make Arguments, and kept
himself unto the matter objected by Doctor Featlie; who otherwise, would have
cried out again that the laws of answering were violated. If you would needs
undertake to represent the the other part, you should have done the like in that
kind; not have gonne out of the compass, to flourish there, where no man was:
but have set upon the Solution where you found it, and this ^oo, not by way of
answer to distinctions, as elsewhere you do for the most part, repeating still,
Doctor Smith ^oth not prove, (which if he had undertook, your Champion would
have run out of the room) but by further discovering the force of Arguments
there proposed, and the Answers insufficiency. If you think your self better
able to make choice of Arguments for your Doctors tenet ^hen he himself was,
he is not much beholding to you for your opinion of his art or judgment: And
unless you ^hought his to be of themselves to weak, what need had your wit ^o
send a new supply? This officiousnes of yours makes little for his honor.

Having given a sight of your forces, to those who please to look on them: you
displaie in the the rereward our Opinion: which is, it seems, so ^asie as any
child may conceive it, and ^er so hard as it exceedes man's capacity. Elephants
are over head and ears, and Emmets wade thorough the same water.


Apologist. Every punie can tell you that though bread seems only bread to
the eye, and in sustance be nothing else, yet in it is spiritual use and
signification it is the body of our Savior: not that Christ's body is present
under the accidental forms of the element, though it be therewith
spirituallie eaten. This I confess to be a mystery, but if you demand what
it is, I Will answer you as Octauius did Caecilius when he expected to hear what
God was, Nobis ad intellectum pectus angustum est etc. so if you expecte to
hear exactlie what this mystery is, I answer it is a Mystery; and if I could
perfectly disclose it is secrets, and show you what it were, then twere no
Mystery.


Censure. Magnum sibi fatuitas quaedam videtur esse mysterium, saint Cyrill
says. Is it not belike some Chimera you speak of, that is so clearlie dark,
and darkly clear?

But master Waferer, what difficulty were there to conceive bread-a-figure,
bread-a-signe? are you confounded at the mysteries of an Iuiebush, or a letter?
they be signs, as unlike the things they signify, as bread is unlike flesh,
or wine unlike blood. Or, if God should please to tell us, he would give him
grace that received bread the sign, worthelie; what vnconceauable matter were
there in in this? is it not easy to conceive that he is able to do so; or that
(if he promise) he will perform it? These, forsooth, you call mysteries;
inexplicable vnconceauable mysteries: least (when Catholics object the
Fathers, admiring indeed our Saviors being in the Sacrament) you be without
the fantom of an answer.


Apologist. Doctor Smith says that a figurative speech seems to have adjoined
unto it a certain negation, but there is non egation in a figurative speech as
figurative, save only the negation of, or translation from the native
signification, which helps to confirm what I said before, that a proper sense
and a figurative are as much as native and not native, proper and not proper.


Censure. Before indeed you complained of those who said you pleaded for a
mere figure in the words Hoc est corpus meum; and if you be remembered, Apol.
page 9.
you say Doctor Smith would feign father a false opinion upon you, that you
held there is in them a mere figure. which former speech of yours, is not
confirmed, but contradicted rather, if now you say that a speech any way
figurative has a negation of Do those hold the same, who say Nobis vo biscum
de obiecto conuenit?
all propriety, or a proper speech a gation of all impropreitie. For, were
that so the one of the^ were meerelie and in all respects proper: and the
other, meerelie and wholly figurative, which thing you there deny. You know
We do not say that the same speech is either purelie, or absolutely, both
proper and improper: but we say that it may be proper according to the thing
signified; and figurative, in regard of the manner of the same thing, as you
were told before. which is far from contradiction in the understanding of him
that understands what a contradiction is. as, for an Ethiopian to be absolutely
said black, and yet secundum quid, according to his teeth, white, is no
contradiction but a truth, in the judgment of every one that ever saw those
men.

That a figurative or improper speech has a negation joined to it, as far as
it is figurative or improper, it is manifest: for the word improper, signifies
a privation; and a privation does participate of a negation. Priuatio says the
Philosopher in his Metaphysick, contradictio quaedam est, lib 10. t 15.
aut impossibilitas determinata, sieve simul accepta cum susceptiuo. I said, as
far as it is figurative or improper; whence it follows that, if it be
purelie figurative, it has joined to it a perfect or whole negation of
propriety: as in this your example, Herod is a fox. if it be figurative only
as it is related or compared to the manner of the thing signified, it has not
joined to it a negation of the thing, but of the manner only. and
consequently, the speech may still remain proper as far as concerns the
substance of the thing, which substance is by it directly signified. as in our
example This is my body: which words, in as much as they signify the
substance of our Saviors body, be verified properly; though they be not
properly verified according to the manner which the same words, if they were
taken fully in their whole usual sense, would also import.

When you say that in a figurative speech as figurative, there is no negation,
save only the negation of, or translation from, the native signification, you
say true considering the force of that your as -- But from thence you can no
more infer what you pretend, vzt that it is absolutely figurative, then one
might infer of an Ethiopian, that because he is, white secundum quid,
according to his teeth, Ergo he is absolutely white.


Apologist. Doctor Smith lays down this rule, that a proposition is
absolutely and simply to be esteemed proper or figurative, rather from the
thing which i^ affirms then from the manner; which rule is absurd, for there
is the same thing affirmed in a figurative proposition which is in a proper.


Censure. Here is a trick of legerdemain, cunningly used, to steal away the
truth, before proved, and approved. The iugling will appear if your discourse
be put in form. The reason first, There is the same thing affirmed in a
figurative proposition which is in a proper, as Herodes est vulpes: Herodes est
cal^idus; they be your examples. then your inference, Ergo it is ab^urd to say
that a proposition (which is proper in regard of the thing signified by it,
and improper in regard of the manner of the same thing usually also signified
by the word) is absolutely and simply to be esteemed proper or figurative
rather from the thing which it affirms then from the manner, to wit, of the
same thing, who sees not the incohere^ce of this argument, and that you labor
to destroy one truth with an other? The Controversy was, and is, about a mixed
proposition, such a one, as in regard of the thing directly signified is
proper; and improper in regard of the manner of the thing. It was said and
maintained against Doctor Featlie, that this, Hoc est corpus meum, is such a
proposition: and your self must needs grant it to be so, unless you will
have it to be meerelie figurative, or meerelie proper; both which you disauow,
as above has been declared. If it be not meerlie figurative, nor meerlie
proper, then sure it is mixed: for a figurative speech pure, and unmixed, is
meerlie figurative. Moreover this proposition, being not meerlie figurative, is
proper as far as it regards the substance of the thing signified: according
to the tenet of the Catholic Church, which holds and believes, the body,
signified properly by those words, to be reallie and truly there, according
to the verity and substance of the thing, which, even according to your own
rule, is enough to make the speech proper, in that sense: for you say, that
proposition is proper in which the predicate does in i'ts native sense signify
that thing which agrees to the subject. and the same proposition, in as much as
it is compared to the manner of the thing, is figurative and improper; for the
body has not in the Sacrament the common manner of a body, as, extension of
parts in order to place, and visibilitie: but another manner, as your Doctor
was also told. Which being so, the Question was touching the modus loquendi,
Whether this mixed proposition, being proper in regard of the substance, and
improper in regard of the manner, (or generally, Whether a proposition which
is proper in regard of the substance, and improper in regard of the manner,) be
flatly and simply to be said proper, or improper? Whereunto it was answered,
and well, that a proposition is absolutely and simply to be esteemeed (proper
or figurative, proper or improper) rather from the thing which it affirms,
then from the manner: and consequently, since the proposition (hoc est corpus
meum) is proper in regard of the thing it affirms, it is absolutely to be
said a proper speech. The reason of the rule is manifest, for the denominatio^
is to be taken from that which is the principal; and the thing, doubtless. is
more principal then the manner of the thing: the substance, more principal
then it is accidental manner. an Ethiopian though he be white secundum quid, is
absolutely or sine addito said black.

Your own rule before cited, confirms all this, but this is not the first
time you fight against your self we know, the same thing may be signified by
diverse propositions, whereof some be proper, and others figurative: as in holy
Scripture we find the Divine perfections to be signified sometimes by proper
speeches and sometimes by metaphorical. But the Question was, Whether one, and
the same proposition, (not diverse, but one) being proper in regard of the thing
signified, and improper and figurative in regard of the manner, were to be
called absolutely, sine addito, proper; and only secundum quid, according to
the manner, figurative? As if it had been demanded, whether one that is white
only secundum dentes, and all the rest black, be flatly or simply to be said
white, or black, the Answer was, that the proposition, having in it the
foresaid mixture, was rather to be said proper; and the man, rather to be
said black, which is true, notwithstanding that there be other me^, some white
some black: and other propositions, some figurative, some proper, respecting
the same thing.


Apologist. No proposition is figurative according to the thing signified.


Censure. You mean that it has not that denomination as it is under a
reference to that thing. Before you said it, I thought otherwise, and shall do
so still, even of that which you bring for Instance, Herodes est vulpes. that
your proposition, is figurative in comparison to the thing signified, which is
Herod's Wilines. this wilines of Herod, the proposition does signify and
affirm; not properly, (it is not the proper signification of vulpes,) but
metaphoricallie, and by translating the word to signify that wherein Herod
has some kind of analogy or agreement with a fox; Orators look not for
Metaphors in things but in words. Ad vnum verbum contracta similitudo.
as you know by the nature of metaphors, out of Aristotle, Tullie, and others.
And because vulpes, the predicate, does not properly, but metaphoricallie,
signify that thing which is affirmed upon Herod, therefore is the proposition
figurative and improper, even by comparison to that thing, it is an improper
sign of that which you would have me to conceive. The word indeed has an
other signification, which is that we call proper, which your dictionarie leads
you to, but according to the thing which answers to that, it is proper
signification, the proposition is not verified. In all other pure figurative
propositions you shall find the same, and therefore you must alter your
unlearned assertion, that no proposition is figurative according to the thing
signified; and all your discourse that depends upon it, wherein, impertinentlie
to the matter in Question, you compare one material object or thing, to
several propositions: whereas you should compare one proposition to the
principal and proper, or secundarie and improper object of it is terms. The
proper object of this word or sign vulpes, is a fox. it signifies that thing,
properly, and taking it as it signifies to us that thing, the proposition is
false: the improper object whereunto by translation it is extended, is a wily
fellow; and taking it in this sense, the proposition is true. neither are
these things in this manner signified, one and the same thing: unless a wily
man perchance be properly, with you, a fox.

Moreover, the manner of signifying in words, is either proprius, native and
proper: Sensus sacrae Scripturae, literalis, mysticus, Sensus literalis,
proprius, improprius. Sensus mysticus, alleg. tropol. anagoric. vt infra.
or improprius, and translatitius, metaphorical, and improper. Every word
that has a metaphorical signification, has a proper also; as appears by the
etymology of the name. and the way to know in which sense the proposition
(wherein it stands) is verified, and consequently whether it be taken in the
proper or the metaphorical sense, is to compare it to the thing. Herod is a
fox, Mirth is a locust. If you compare the proposition in it is proper
signification, to the thing, it is improportionable, difforme, and false: if
you compare the same (material) proposition in it is metaphorical
signification, to the thing, it is proportionable, conform, true. Whereupon we
conclude the speech to be metaphorical. If the proposition be according to the
native sense verified upon, or in, the thing, we say that it is proper: as
these other. Herod is wily, Mirth is an Heretic. If it be verified according
to the substance of the thing properly signified, not according to the manner;
it will then be called proper absolute sine addito, taking the denomination
from that which is principal; For we say that a thing is white, or not white,
not because all is so, but because the greatest or most parts be so.
( Dicimus enim aliquid ess^ album aut non album, non quia totum es^ tale says
the Philosopher, 6. Phys. tex. 38. sed quia maximae parts eius, and plures,
sunt tal^s;) though not omnibus modis, in regard of the improprietie annexed,
respectiuelie to the manner. as this: hoc est corpus meum.

Before I leave this point I must put you again in mind how you do still
weaken your own opinion more and more, and fight against your fellows whilst
you contend that here corpus the predicate is taken improperlie. It is true
that if it were taken improperlie according to the thing signified by it, the
proposition were figurative or improper: but it is false, even in the judgment
of the learnedest of your own men (so ignorant you are in the cause you
undertake) that it is so taken. The word corpus, (I repeat the same again) is
not taken improperlie according to the thing by it signified not, as the word
vulpes, in your proposition (which is your great Masters instance in this very
matter) Herodes est vulpes. no. But properly, (...) for that substance quam
cruci affixam, and in sepulchro depositam Verbu^ suscitauit a mortuis, de qua
suscitata dictum est, videte manus meas and pedes meos contrectate me and
videte, nam Spiritus carnem and ossa non habet prout me conspicitis habere.
quam denique transtulit in coelos inde reddendam terris postremo aduentu.
denique quicquid dici potest ad describendu^, circumscriben du^que, suis veris
proprietatibus illud ipsum indiuiduum. for that substance which being nailed to
the Cross, and laid in the sepulcher, the Word raised from the dead; of which
(substance) it is said, See my hands and my feet, feel me and see: for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as you see I have. Moreover that substance
which h^ carried into heaven, to render it again a^ the last coming, and
finally, what eue^ can be said to describe and circumscribe the very same
individual substance with it is true property. So your Chamier, l. 10. c. 2.
confessing Corpus to be, by our Savior, taken litterallie (...) not in a
borrowed but in the native sense: howeuer you, Master waferer, will have it not
to be taken here in it is native but in a borrowed sense: and the proposition
(this which you speak of) therefore to be figurative because the word that is
the predicate is so taken.

I omit to note further how you be troubled with an equivocation of a speech
figurative according to the manner, having not wit enough to distinguish the
modus essendi, which is in the object, from the modus significandi, which is in
the word or speech: or to know under what refere^ce a word has propriety;
under what, it has not; and how, and when, these denominations be pure or
vnpermixte. But I have now given you occasion (enough for for a Scholar) to
reflect upon the matter. On you go to seek: and if you cannot find, to make,
absurdities.

Pugnantia secum
Frontibus aduersis componere.

Apologist. S. E. seeks to justify that answer of his Lords of a figure mixed
of a figurative and proper action, for he says that the same speech may be
proper and figurative, as a garment of a mingled color is white and black: but
let him know that it is not the same speech if either the signification or the
manner of signifying be changed.


Censure. you and your Doctor in his Relation, purposelie inuolue things that
in themselves are clear. My Lord had said, not of a figure, but of a speech,
(that of our Savior unless you eat the flesh etc.) that, according to S.
Augustine, it was mixed, which he declared at large in the Conference. and M.
Featlie himself takes notice of it, telling us that he said our Saviors
speech, Feat. Relat. page 294
unless you eat etc. is proper and figurative according to S. Augustine:
figurative according to the manner of eating, but according to the matter it
self, proper: and so it is a mixed speech of a proper and a figurative, thus
your Doctor himself at last relates it; obscuring the same again presently in
the accommodation of the distinction to the thing in Question.

What that is which you would teach S. E. touching the speech of our Savior,
(which is not meerelie figurative even by your own confession;) neither I, nor
you know. The Holy Bible is still the same, though there be in it both
propriety of speech, and figures. A mingled garment is still one, though there
be in it white and black, and a proposition which is verified improperlie,
according to the manner of the objects being, which is usually by the words
(consequently as it were) imported; and properly according to the substance
of the thing directly signified, is still one and the same proposition.


Apologist. Why does S. E. instance in that proposition (1. Cor. 15. it is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual,) to prove that a proper
sense, and a figurative may be in one proposition?


Censure. It had been requisite you had first been able to understand what is
said, before you began, to take upon you to refute it. S. E. brings examples to
show that it is not peculiar to S. Augustine only, to call a thing spiritual
in regard of the manner, though substantiallie, or according to the substance
it be not so; for in like manner Saint Jerome does call on Saviors flesh,
which is flesh indeed and reallie, spiritual in regard of the manner which in
the Sacrament it has; Spiritualis atque diuina caro de qua (Christus) dixit,
Caro mea vere est cibus etc. And S. Paul for the like reason does call the
body after it is risen again, spiritual, seminatur corpus animale, surgit
corpus spirituale. Confer. page 47.
His words are, And as S. Austine here calls this speech figurative in regard
of the manner, though the same speech in regard of the substance received be
not figurative, So does S. Jerome call the flesh of our Savior in the
Eucharist spiritual in regard of the manner, though the substance of flesh be
not a Spirit; and the Apostle terms the body spiritual in regard of the
condition it shall have in the Resurrection though for substance it consistes
of matter still, and by corporeum differ from a spirit intrinsicallie as much
the^ as it does now So he.

Next unto this wilful mistake, you enter into a discourse of diverse senses
in one and the same place; which discourse lays your ignorance more open: but
is little to the matter of the Conference. That there are not two senses a
figurative and a proper in one place of Scripture, you will prove, VVaf. page
36.
you say. If you meant to prove that one and the same place, cannot be
figurative secundum quid, in regard of the manner, and absolute, proper, as
has been defended before, in several occasions, you quickly forget what you
meant to do, or were not able to do what feign you would have done: for you
bring not any argument at all to make it good. Of litterall senses in
general, you write something, confusedly, and seem to deny there may be
many in one place or text of Scripture: but not one argument appears to prove
the thing which wanted proof, vzt, that one and the same place could not be
figurative, secundum quid, and proper absolute or simpliciter. If you meant to
prove that one and the same proposition could not be proper absolute,
simpliciter; and improper or figurative absolute simpliciter; your labor was
impertinent, since the proposition in Question was never said by my Lord or S.
E. to be such. neither have they said that any other proposition had the two
senses mentioned, in that manner. That the same man may be white secundum quid,
and absolute black; the same speech, improper secundum quid, and absolute
proper, has been said; and the speech objected, hoc est corpus meum, is such.
That this, or any other, is absolute proper, and absolute figurative or
improper; or the same man absolute white, and absolute black, is the meteor of
your brain, which like an Ignis fatuus leads your argument still out of the
right way.

The sense of a place of Scripture is either literal or mystical. Some places
have both; as that, Abraham It is written that Abraham had two sons, the one
by a bond-maid, the other by a freewoman. But he who was of the bondwoman was
borne after the flesh; but he of the freewoman, by promise (24.) which things
are said by an Allegory: for these are the two testaments, the one from the
mount Sina which gendreth to bondage, which is Agar. etc. (26.) But Jerusalem
which is above, is free, which is the mother of us all. etc. Now we brethren,
according as Isaac, are the children of promise. (29) but as then he that was
borne after the flesh persecuted him that was (borne) after the Spirit: even so
it is now. Ad Galat. 4.
duos filios habuit, vnam de ancilla, and vnam de libera; sed, qui de ancilla
secundum carnem natus est, qui autem de libera per repromissionem. Gal. 4. The
mystical sense is threefold, allegorical, tropologicall, and anagogicall, and
the same place may some times have all three. For example, in the place now
cited, and as it is expounded by the Apostle, there is the Allegorical, Haec
sunt duo testamenta etc. v. 24. the Anagogicall, illa autem quae sursum est
Jerusalem etc. v. 26. and the tropological, sed quomodo tunc is qui secundum
carnem natus fuerat persequebatur eum quisecundum spiritum, ita and nunc. v. 29.

Concerning literal senses, it is the tenet of S. Augustine lib. 12. Confess.
that there may be diverse; tWo three, four, or more; in the same words, and
since a word may have many significations, why might not the Holy Ghost,
understanding all verities, and all significations, of all words, use the same
words, in the same speech, (as that; in the beginning God created Heaven and
Earth,) in many significations, at once? This speech in Isaie, generationem
eius quis enarrabit, the Fathers understand sometimes of the temporal,
sometimes of the eternal generation of our Savior; and that of God the
Father, in the Psalms, Filius meus es tu, Ego hodie genui te: the Apostle
takes in one sense, Act. 13. and in an other sense, Heb. 1.

Touching the mixture of proper and figurative; it has been told you that
the same place may be proper absolute, simpliciter; and figurative secundum
quid: you cry out for one such, and do not mark that before your face you have
already two: nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis etc. and hoc est corpus
meum. That this is proper according to the substance of the thing signified, we
prove by the common rule of interpreting the Scripture, when it proposes
dogmaticallie matters of Divine belief, and the same is confirmed to us
abundantly by other places of Holy Scripture which do concern this Sacrament
and sacrifice, and by the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Catholic and
universal Church, which did ever believe it since our Savior (truth it self)
spoke these words. That the same speech is figurative and improper in regard
of and respectiuelie to the manner of the thing which manner usually the word
corpus does import, it is evident; for, the body has not in the sacrament,
extension of parts in order to place: but is there, all in every part of the
dimensio^s of bread, according to the manner of a Spirit.

When M. Mirth had come thus far, imagining (poor man) that he had got some
victory, he puts a crown upon his head; and snatching the trumpet, gives
notice of a new battle; wherein he means to set upon the little digression of
S. E. which digression he cruelly dismembers; and spurns the pieces of it
over the rest this Section, to and fro; contemptiblie. I cannot without pity
see the thing so misused; perhaps if the parts be gathered together, the
discourse may stand again; and affright him, in the midst of his triumph.


Apologist. Next I will run over again this section, and page by page will
answer the dainty subtilities of Master S. E. and justify our Doctors
discourse against his Notes.


Censure. If you will prove your tenet, you must over again, and a thousand
times again; and then will find your self (as the mill-horse does after all
his labor) even there in the end where you were in the beginning. Did not this
appear in your Doctors first argument, and in this you now prosecute, which is
the second? can you do more then he? but now, forsooth, you will answer page by
page: and in matter of Logic and Philosophy. We have lost allreadie to much
time in hearing your (...), and this (though the matter come nearer to your
cap) will (most liklie) be lost also, but you teach, and we must harken, you
will answer subtilities you say, page by page, that is, exactlie.

Fortasse cupressum
Scis simulare.

Apologist. you say words do signify conceptions, I would have you know there
is a great deal of difference betwixt conceptio, and conceptus.


Censure. Satis pro imperio. What S. E. meant by a conception you have
presently in his next words, The conceptio^ is an Image representing the thing
which we think on. This Image, vitallie proceeding in the mind, is properly
in English named a conception of the understanding. Confer. page 8.
Some name your Mastership will allow it in our language; such as may
distinguish it from the object or the thing conceived. I pray you turn your
Dictionarie and find what name this is. turn to which word you please,
conceptus, or, conceptio. S. E. used neither, but only said words do signify
the conceptions of the mind. which English, you cauilling at, should have
mended; (seeing you will needs make your self his Master:) and have taught
him, and your own Dictionarie to speak it better, in good English: and such
english as does not equally signify things objected, whether they be feigned,
or not feigned.

For proof of this Assertion, words do signify the conceptions of the mind,
he needed not your help, having cited in the margin these words of Aristotle,
(which it seems you do not understand,) sunt ergo ea quae sunt in voce, earum
quae sunt in anima passionum notae. neither had he need of Smiglecius, having
cited the Commentators interpretation, which is clear enough, dictiones
significant primo intentiones quae sunt in anima.


Apologist. you tell how the species which together with the understanding
concur to the framing of verbum mentis, are sent into the mind or
understanding by way of sense; but you are deceived; these species which
concur with the understanding to frame verbum mentis, are species
intelligibiles, and the object sends no species into the eye, or any other
sense, but sensible species, and those sensible species are not sent into the
understanding by way of sense.


Censure. It would have well become a Master, (Master Waferer,) if he finds a
fault, to show the way to mend it. and if you do not show that it is indeed a
fault, howeuer your silly Pupils may be content to believe it on your word
without evidence of reason (and will profit accordingly in their studies,)
your adversaries in the matter, will not.

If the species of paper, be not sent into your mind by paper, and by the way
of sense, how came it thither? did you know what was in this Censure before you
read it? are you able to make us a particular description of that part of the
world which is not yet discovered, and to write us their history? it seems
you can; for you gather not your knowledge by way of sense. your Intellect, by
privilege, was otherwise stored from the beginning, which is the reason why
you teach divinity before you learnd it; and talk nonsense, so familiarlie:
whilst others coming more nakedlie into the world, with their Quo omnia fieri,
the passive or possible: and quo omnia facere, the age^t; are feign to learn
before they teach, and to abstract from the phantasmes (which exterior
obiectes by the sense cause in them) the forms of things, whereby they may
conceive or understand.

Aristotle thought that the possible understanding or intellect, is, Arist. 3.
de Anima. ^. 4. and 13.
as a painters table that has yet no picture in it: and his reason does
demonstrate what he says. In this table, the Soul (whose instruments all the
powers be) does with her active intellect, as with a spiritual hand, describe
the species of that which is represented and offered to her by the fantasy:
and then does use it (the same species) to conceive intellectuallie the object
of it, Imaginatio aliud est a sensu, and arationatione. Arist. 2. de Animat. t.
153.
which object it had only imagined or by the fantasy conceived before.

The phantasme of it self was not able to describe the foresaid species or
Image in the spiritual table which the soul has, as wanting actiuitie in
this higher kind; but there is in the soul power enough to make it. A fair
picture in a transparent glasse-window, is not of it self able to make it is
species in the air, or in your eye; but light coming upon it, the species is
made: so here the picture which is in the Imagination cannot of it self work
a species in your understanding, but the spiritual light coming on it,
Species impressa,
the species is imprinted. This way, according to the Philosopher, the species
comes into our mind: and from the thing conceived. First into the exterior
sense: from thence; (not the same species numero, but in equiuale^ce the same)
into the interior sense; and still further, till at last (being purged of it is
material conditions, or abstracted from them,) it arriues in the
understanding: where it is not corporeal, as in the senses, but spiritual
according to the nature of the power wherein it is received, and is not a
sensible specie (that is, serving for the sense to know by) but an intellectiue
species, as being in the understanding, and serving it to conceive the thing
that was offered to the sense; a man, paper; Quonia^ autem vt in vniuersa
natura est aliquid, alterum materia cuique geners: quod ia^o sic est, quod
potentia est illa omnia* alterum causa and effectinum, eo quod omnia efficiat,
quae res vsu venit in art si cum materia comparetur: ita etiam in anima hae
adsint differentiae necesse est. Atque est quidam intellectus talis quod omnia
fiat, quidam quod omnia faciat, veluti habitus, perinde ac lumen: nam lumen
quoque quodammodo sacit actu colores, eos qui sunt potentia colores Arist. 3 de
Anima. t. 17. and 18. In nobis intellectus agens and possibilis est per
comparationem ad phantasmata. quae quidem comparantur ad intellectum possibilem
vt colores ad visum: ad intellectum autem agentem vt colores ad lumen, vt patet
te^tio de Anima. S. Tho. 1. p. qu. 54. a. 4.
whitenes.


Apologist. That which presents it self to the eye says S. E. is not the pure
essence or quidditie of a thing as they speak in Schools; it is an extended
colored thing, which thing we do see, and conceive, and name, agreeing that
such or such a word shall be in speech the sign of it. And do they in the
Schools indeed say that we do conceive a man as we see him, not in the pure
essence or quidditie of a man but as an extended or colored thing? and do we
agree that this word (man) shall be a sign of that extended colored thing?


Censure. Had you meant to make such a comment, you should have left out the
text by which the Reader presently sees your mistak. Does S. E. tell you that
in schools we do not conceive a man in the pure essence and quidditie of a
man? he knows well enough how a man is conceived, both in the schools of
Metaphysick, which does abstract from sensible matter; and in the Schools of
natural Philosophy which does not abstract from it, but it seems that you do
not; and therefore if you were yet to beg your grace for Master, you were in
danger to be put back, least the University in your ignorance should be
disgraced. And the rather, because you do not understand a piece of plain
English, which you take upon you to refute. In S. E. thus it is. That which
presents it self to the eye to be seen (mark that, Confer. page 51.
to the eye,) is not the pure essence or quidditie of a thing as they speak in
schools, and you by experience know it, but it is a thing sensible, and to be
perceived with this organe and faculty, (mark that also, with this organ; this
organ and this eye, is not our understanding, one would think;) it is an
extended colored thing, which thing, we do see, and conceive, and name, (I
pray you have not you a name, did your Godfather if you be Chrisned, understand
or conceive the thing he named; or did he not conceive it? how knows he you,
his God son, from an other man or woman?) agreeing that such or such a word,
shall be in speech a sign of it.


Apologist. Looking on a man, says S. E. we conceive in our mind his figure,
color etc, (you had need put in etc.) representing all in one image, we
subordinate, as a sign of it and of it is object also this word man. Now I
perceive you dream that the sensible obiectes come into the understanding;
which makes you tell us of an extended colored thing.


Censure. If S. E. can dream so well, it seems that his dreams are better
then your watchings; and that he can discourse of Philosophy in his sleep
better then you can do when you prepare your papers for the print. That which
first of all moves our understanding (whilst it is here in our body) is a
sensible thing, sending into it a species in manner above specified. Were all
such removed out of the world, and that a man by no sense at all ever perceived
any thing, his tabula picturae aptata that he brought with him into the world,
would be in the end as naked as it was in the beginning of his life. When he
has once gotten the species of some things, he can find out some others; as
by the effect he finds a cause; by Creatures, God: Romans 1.
Inuisibi ia ipsius (D i) a creatura mundi per ea quae facta sunt, intellecta a
co^spiciuntur, sempiterna quoque eius virtus and diuinitas; but first his
understanding must be moved by something that offers it self unto the sense,
whose nature it abstractes from the material or individual conditions, and so
directly conceaues it; S. Thom. 1. p. q. 84. a. 6.
being able also (by reflection at least) to conceive singulars, which the
sense perceaues directly. The parcel which you cite out of S. E. is so maimed
that it has lost all sense, but I will presently restore it.


Apologist. Hear what your own words say, this word man signifies a man is a
thing not in his pure essence and quidditie as they speak in schools, but an
extended colored, figured thing etc. Is not this a prittie brat of your own
conception, and laid at the Schools like a bastard to see who will father it?
either blush your self or give me leave to laugh: I thought before that all
that this name (homo) does import were animal rationale, sure I am the
definition does answer perfectly to the definitum, and is exactlie true
without respect had to color or figure.


Censure. The whirlewind in your brains has so confounded the species of
things, that all is now troubled which comes from you, whether you relate or
dispute: wherefore I must look upon S. E. his book, and thence transcribe his
words which you cavil at. Next unto those by me before cited, he said thus,
Looking on a man, we conceive in our mind his figure, (...) 51.
color, etc. representing all in one Image, to which Image we subordinate (as
a sign of it, and of it is object also) this word, a man. Where he says (you
see) that this word man, is imposed to signify that sensible thing whose Image
we had conceived in our mind; and to such things men use to give names. Ask
your neighbor what a calf, or a^ ox, or a bull, signifies; and he will tell
you of a sensible figured thing. and the same substance may be, successively,
all; except there be oxen with you that never were calves. and ask a
scholar, he will still tell you there is difference betwixt an ox, and a
calf; they be not synonyma. you are not a child you think; yet are a man: what
is become of your other substance, that individual substance which long ago
you had? or is it still the same?

But either S. E. must blush, or he must give you leave to laugh. What needs
the disjunctive, M. Waferer? he may blush, and you laugh too. neither need you
his leave to laugh where and when you will. Though much laughing in others be
no good cognizance, it agrees with you so well that it were inciuilitie to
deny you the use of it, your privilege, and natural property; for you are
Mirth. And he may blush, and so may Alban-Hall, and Oxford, and your Mother,
all may blush; and have cause to blush in you: the first in an adversary; the
second in a pupil; the third in a graduate, and the fourth in a son.

But whilst you laugh, do not distracte me too; for I am studying hard and
seriously, upon a Question; which your discouse has occasioned in my mind:
and my poor invention has searched all the species and forms in her little
closet to find a solution for it, and none will serve; unless peradventure
one, which she has put aside. I can not well propose it in common; but I will
softly tell it you. Sir this it is: Whether your mother were a man? S. E.
(Doctor) was not deceived. Forma dat nome^ and esse.
the reason of doubt which occurres out of your discourse (and not to do her
any wrong, I have indeed no other reason to move such a doubt, though
sometimes her son does argue without reason,) is, because, if the definition
of a man, all that the word or name does signify, do agree to her, the name
also does, and may be verified on her: now the definition of a man Animal
rationale, (which you would have your Reader to believe is all that the word
signifies,) does agree to her; for I suppose your mother was some reasonable
creature: whence it follows, unless you will divorce the definition and
definitum, that the name (which does signify that definition, and that only
if you say true, without respect had to color or figure or any other
accidens) does agree to your mother: VVaf. page 41.
and consequently this is true, that your mother is a man.

A man, I say: that is the word in Question; that was the word of S. E. in his
example; and if it be granted once that it signifies more then the substance
or quidditie, more then animal rationale (as it must do if it signifies not
your mother, as well as you:) then his discourse is current, and your exception
both unlearned, and impertinent, he did not instance in the latin word homo;
he meant to give the Readers who do not all understand latin, an example of
that he had said, in our own language, which has names also, you might have
known too, that some latin words signify more then some other, English, or
latin do that be taken some times for the same, homo, signifies more then vir.
May it please your learned Mastership to consider with your self how this
argument may be satisfied; but let none else know. The form I laid aside, was
the species of an hermaphrodite. I suppose you will make no further speech of
it. Lapidi dictum puto.


Apologist. You (S. E.) add that without color and quantity the name is not
perfectly answerable to the intellectual image; as if the understanding did
conceive man as colored: you must conceive coloratum is the proper object of
the sense of seeing, and therefore can not be the object of the understanding
formallie and qua sic.


Censure. Nullo thure litabis
Haereat in () breuis vt semiuncia recti.
If a reasonable creature, without adding more, does answer fully to the name
we speak of, (man,) your mother Master Waferer, is a man, there is no way to
escape; Laeto.
unless you say that she has not all this, and so either is no creature, no
animal; or not rationale, not reasonable; or, neither animal nor rationale; Or
that the word (man) signifies more then animal rationale that is not in your
mother, which were to retract your Apology and to let the discourse of S. E.
stand again, as first it did.

Moreover, you must acknowledge that a man's understanding can conceive, not
only substance, but also colors, and quantity, and figures: and
consequently, it may be able to conceive an extended, and figured, and
colored, living substance. How do you conceive the Predicaments, the ten
genera, and their species? whith your intellect, or with your heels? or not at
all? if your heels serve your turn, you may run over them apace without
troubling of your head: if not at all, he was forsworn that presented you for
your grace: if with your intellect, then ones understanding may conceive a man
colored, he may conceive color as well as man; and color in a man, and, for
that as, you may keep it till there be need; together with your formallie and
qua sic. Let coloratum or what else you please be the proper object of the
sight; it is all under the object of the intellectiue power, which may know
what all the senses can; and more, whereby it comes to pass, that coloratum
cannot be the proper or adequate object of this power; but some thing larger,
that includes it.


Apologist. If (homo) signify color, what color is (homo) I pray? If you say
white, then say I a black man is no man* if black then a white man is not
perfectly a man.


Censure. This is but to make way for a conceit as you think, which your head
was great withal; albus an ater (homo) sit nescio. VVaf. Ibidem.
Suppose I put color, into the place of homo; and argue (as you do,) thus; If
the latin word color does signify color, what color is (color) I pray you?
if white, black is none: if black, white is none. To Which Question your
Mastership thinks there is no other Answer possibly to be made, but this,
albus an ater sit nescio. The Philosophers are wont to say that in genere
latent aequiuocationes: do you understand this? I think not. But, to your
interrogatorie; the species or differences in color, which you speak of, are
not properties of the nature of man^ but the one, of this, the other of that,
Indiuiduum; from which the species or nature is abstracted* and no man is
without color; it is found in all and every one: An black for example.
though this or that (a) determinate color be not in every one. In the
extraction of a definition, we look wherein all agree; beginning first as we
can, with a few; The conclusion.
and still comparing more and more, till we find the notion common unto all.
Facilius est singula de finire quam universal; Arist. 2. Post. Anal. ^. 82.83.
qua propter oportet a singularibus ad ad vniuersalia transire: aequiuocationes
enim latent magis in vniuersalibus quam in indifferentibus, quemadmodum autem
in demonstrationibus oportet (a) esse ipsum, syllogizatum fuisse, ita and in
definitionibus manifestum est. hoc autem erit si per ea quae singulariter
dicuntur, sit in vnoquoque genere definire seorsum, vt simile non omne, sed
quod in coloribus and figuris, and acutum quod in voce, and ita in commune
progredi obseruantem, ne aequiuocatio incidat. Cum ad senatum rediremus, atque
vt missa in vniuersum aboleretur ageremus etc restabat aahuc non minimus
conatus quo scilicet exempla proderemus qua nulla cum parabola coniuncta forent
coepimus omnia cogitare, attamen aliud nihil exemplorum occurrebat, etc. cum
vero tredecima dies adpeteret, vera nar^o, etc. visus sum mihi in somno multo
cum taedio denuo contendere cum aduersario scriba, sicque obmutuisse vt -- ibi
tanquam e machina visus est monitor adesse, ater fuerit an albus nihil memini
(somnium enim narro) qui diceret, qum ignau^ respondeses quod in Exodo
scribitur, est enim Phase, id est, transitus Domini protinus vt hoc phasma
visum est simul expergesio, and e lecto exilio, locum apud septuaginta primum
vndique circumspicio, ac de eo coram tota concione pro virili dissero.
Swinglius lib. de subsid, Eucharist.


The acumen of your jest, albus and ater. (Wherewith you bred your self a
difficulty, your adversary suffering none, as you have seen,) has let your
cause blood (so unwary you were) in the head-veine, See the lives of Luther,
Swinglius, Corolstadius, etc. By Master Brierley.
by directing the mind of the hearer to the stories of your predecessors, the
glories of your Gospel, Luther, Caralostadius and Swinglius; who were
instructed by a black thing, the Devil; against the Mass. Luther says in
plain terms, it was Diabolus and Satan. and Swinglius ater fuerit an albus
nihil memini. But Conradus Sclusselburg (himself a Protestant) with diverse
other Protestants, affirm that, without doubt, it was tho Devil, Sole
meridiana clarius est non Deum verum, sed Diabolum ipsissimum, Swinglio per
somnium suam Haeresin Sacramentariam inspirasse. Schlu. Theop. Calvin. in
prooem,
It is more clear then sun light at midday that it was not the true God but
the very Devil himself that inspired into Swinglius in a dream his
Sacramentarian heresy. Not albus then, but ater.

Thus far touching the Philosophical part of that Digression, (the rest you
were content to let pass, as you do still the grearest part of S. E. his
Notes, without reply,) in the examen whereof you have showed your ignorance in
that kind of learning too. It is needles to examine that poor Inference which
you build upon your own mistakes. that will fall of it self* it tottered, and
was sensles when I looked on it. Next, you will needs, thrust in a dispute, of
the verity of propositions.


Apologist. A proposition is not said to true or false because it is answerable
to the intellectual image, but answerable to the thing.


Censure. That which S. E. had said, was this; that in attributing the name to
a thing (for example the name man, to your mother) we seem to say that it
has in it self, Confer. page 52.
al which the name does signify; that is, all which the conception (whereunto
this name was subordinated as a sign) does represent: which is not exactlie
true (you will swear in the example of your mother) if the forsaid exterior
form be wanting. Apolog. page 44.
Here was, you see, little cause for you to come in with your let me tell you
that a proposition is not said to be true etc.

Did we suppose a vocal proposition had formallie in it self, verity, in
comparison to the thing or object, still the discourse of S. E. does stand
good: for even in that case, you must say that words had their significations
given them by men that understand; who appointed them to be signs, not of what
things soever, but, of those which they conceived. whence it will follow that,
the word or name cannot be exactlie verified in the thing, if in the same thing
be not all, imported by the name. But, formal verity, if Aristotle may be
judge, is in the understanding; non enim est falsum and verum in rebus sed in
mente. 6. M^t. tex. 8. And vocal propositions are said true, inasmuch as they
be signs of true mental propositions. Sunt ergo ea quae in voce earum quae
sunt in mente passionum notae: and ea quae scribuntur earum quae sunt in voce.
lib. 1. de Interp. tex. 1. For the interpretation of which words we will not be
beholding to Smiglecius as you would have us. many write Philosophy, that
understand not the Philosoper: and whether he be one of those, or not, I
neither know, nor mean to look. the words are clear without a Comment.
Wherein formal verity does consist, wherein transcendentall verity, and how
the understanding whilst it does attribute the predicate to the subject does in
actu exercito know truth; are things not appertaining to this place: nor (if
one may judge of your skill in this by the rest which you have uttered) within
the sphere of your knowledge.

I had almost forgot to take notice of two other passages in this your Examen
of the Digression; the one is, how easily in the heat of your passion, you
bring a man (had it been your Adversary you might have begd a solemn
Triumph) to almost nothing. Having defined him, (you say, out of S. E.) a thing
not in his pure essence and quidditie, but extended and colored etc. first
(your Hear what your own words say, this word man signifies a thing -- so
then we will be beholding to you for perfecting the definition of a man thus,
homo est animal quantum and coloratum; as good as that of Plato Homo est animal
bipes and inplume. and as the Philosopher put a cock with his feathers plucked
of, into Plato his school and cried Ecce homo Platonicus, so might we put a
picture of a man into yours and cry Ecce homo Iesuiticus, because you will be
content with this definition Homo est quid quantum and coloratum. VVaferer page
42.43.
words are in the margin) you laugh at this man. (belike your Father was not
such a thing; but one of the naked, abstracted substances, which otherwhile
converse with women,) you first (I say) laugh at the man. and then begin to
dispoile him of his definition. the difference rationale you cut of; and define
him, animal quantum and coloratum: then you laugh at him again, and bring in
Diogenes ghost to keep you company. After this you take out animal; and so
make him sensles, thus; homo est quid quantum and coloratum. He is mangled
enough, now, one would think; having neither eyes, nor hands, nor ears: you
have made of him a lump of earth, quid quantum and coloratum. one blow more and
you may beat him into dust. but that will not satisfy your rage; you turn him
thus diffigured, this quantum and coloratum into a mere shape or picture, that
he may be without substance: and then you stab him through, with an Ecce homo
Iesuiticus; wherewith you fix him to the paper, where he hanges Page 43. till
he be torn out, to light tobacco, and so turned into smoke.

The other passage is about sucking will you say that an Ivy bush is not a
sign that wine is to be sold there, because you cannot suck sack, claret, and
white wine out of an Ivy leaf? VVafer. page 44.
wine out of an Iuie bush. you do but bungle in the application; I will help
you to do it better. It is an Emblem of your communion; wherein you suck,
blood, out of wine. your opinion is that it is nothing indeed but wine,
standing for the sign of blood; as an Iuie bush before the tavern door, is
nothing but Iuie, standing for a sign of wine. You say also, that it does
exhibit to you reallie the blood of Jesus Christ, even that which was shed
upon the cross. Is not this like sucking wine out of a sign wherein it is
not; out of a bush of Iuie? It is as fit an exposition, as apt a simile, as one
would have desired, only we must recite some of your doctrine which it does
illustrate. Page 10. you say, Though the very body and blood of Christ be
not substantiallie contained under the shapes of bread and wine, yet they are
reallie communicated by the holy Ghost unto us at and by (mark that by) the
faithful and worthy receiving of those mysteries. Page 13. bread is more then
a bare figure of the body, for it has the effectual presence of the body
joined with it, though substantiallie it be not become the same. And though the
bread be not in substance Christ, yet the faithful receauer has (since to
give him effectually and in substance is the same) the substance communicated
to his soul as verity as the bread enters his mouth. Page 62. I Will grant you
that the out ward signs are signs of Christ's body present after
consecration, but I deny that the body is there present after the manner you
define. It Is not there corporally but mystically, and sacramentallie, and yet
so as besides the intellectual presence, there is also a real and exhibitiue
presence in respect of donation on Gods part, and reception on man's part.
Here, besides the intellectual presence, (by faith) is a real exhibition;
and a real reception of the body: the very substance of it, is as reallie
communicated to the soul and as verily, as the bread (delivered by the
Minister) is received in the mouth: and all this is done by means of the
signs, exhibiting those things unto us. Is not this sucking blood out of
wine, and wine out of an Iuie bush?

To our tenet, (which is the Catholic) that emblem does not agree; for in our
Sacrament there is under the exterior signs, flesh and blood, according to
the substance and verity: the whole body, the whole humanity of our Savior,
the Mediator; he himself, with all the ornaments of his humanity, and all the
infinite perfections of his Divinity, is there: and, receiving the blessed
Sacrament into our mouths, we do receive, in it, all this. The vintners wine
be not thus in his Iuie bush, that you may suck sack from thence.

After this, M. Waferer enters into the matter of transubstantiation, which
matter was not handled in the Conference. He might have saved himself the
labor he takes, and loses, in talking of it, had he (as he might and should)
have observed (but that he was willing to confound Questions and run out of
one into another) that which my Lord in the beginni^^ gave the auditorie then
present, to understand. Confer. page 7. See also Featli Page 288
That the Conference was to be, not of Transubstantiation, but of the real
presence only, which by order of disputation ought to be first. and so it was
agreed, and nothing said of that matter. What he brings against it, is
ordinary stuff, and the manner of delivering it, worse then ordinary. The
authors which he cites are Caietan and Scotus: who notwithstanding (as is well
known to Scholars that are able to read their books) do maintain and defend,
and that, Caiet. 3. p. q 75. Scotus in 4. d. 10. and 11. The words objected
against us out of him to prove the doctrine of transsubstantiation to be new,
be these d. 11. qu. 3. where he speaks of the Lateran Council.

Quicquid ibi (in Concilio Lateranensi) dicitur esse eredendum, tenendum est
esse de substantia fidei: and hoc post illam declarationem factam ab Ecclesia.
Et si quaeras quare voluit Ecclesia elige^e istum intellectum ita difficilem
huius articuli cum verba scripturae possent saluati secundum intellectum
facilem and veriorem secundum apparentiam, de hoc articulo; Dico quod eo
Spiritu expositae sunt Scripturae, quo conditae. Et ita supponendum est quod
Ecclesia Catholica eo Spiritu exposuit quo tradita est nobis fides, spiritu
scilicet veritatis edocta; and ideo hunc intellectum elegit quia verus est. Non
enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud verum vel non verum, sed Dei
instituentis: sed intellectum a Deo traditum Ecclesia explicauit directa in hoc
vt creditur Spiritu veritatis. He that well considers these words, will easily
perceive there is in them no occasion given to pretend that he denies the
doctrine to be ancient, since he affirms it to be contained in the Scripture;
and that the Church by direction of the Holy Ghost whose assistance the
Catholics believe, found it there. Eo Spiritu expositae sunt Scripturae etc,
and, ideo hunc sensum elegit quia --. you will not I hope, accuse the Scripture
of novelty. See Saint Augustine Contra Epist. fundam. c. 4. Epist. 118. de
bapt l. 2. c. 4. and 9. l. 5. c. 17. Contra Crescon. Gram. l 1. c. 33,
Scripturarum in hac re tenetur veritas cum hoc facimus quod vniuersae iam
placuit Ecclesie etc. It is the Church that is to teach us, the meaning of the
Scripture; docete. and the holy Ghost directs her in it, docebit vos.


larglie and professedlie, both the Real^ presence, which was the matter of the
Conference; and (...) transubstantiation, which matter he would feign run
into, to make a further demonstration of his ignorance and insufficiency. Next
he says the churches of Asia and the Greek churches dissented, that is,
denied transubstantiation. He might as well have told his Reader that we do:
they having as fully declared them selves in their Profession, books and
Councels; And that very Council of Florence whence he would (against the
whole stream of authority) make good his rash assertion, in the Instruction
of faith given to the Armenians, which was made in public session, sacro
approbante concilio, that very year he speaks of, 1439. does ackowledge it,
in these words, Ipsorum verborum virtute substantia panis in corpus Christi
and substantia vini in sanguinem, conuertitur; ita tamen vt totus Christus
continetur sub specie panis, and totus sub specie vini: sub qualibet quoque
part hostiae consecratae and vini consecrati separatione facta, totus est
Christus. by virtue of those very words (of consecration) the substance of
bread is turned into the body, and the substance of wine into the blood: yet
so, that whole Christ is contained under the species of bread, and whole under
the species of wine, and also whole Christ is under every part of the
consecrated host and consecrated wine, when there is a separation or division
made. See Cardinal Peron, his book against P. Mornay, page 812. and s^qq. and
Censu. Eccles. Orient. Respons. 1. ad German. c. 13. and Responso 2. c. 4.

He says page 47. and most ignorantly, that the Churches tenet of a
substantial change under the species; which change we call
transubstantiation, was a thing not known or taught for 1215. years after
Christ. which is a lie, many times confuted, by our Deuines; Bellarmine, Peron,
Allen, Gualterius, and others, yea, and by your own too, Master Mirth, your
own men, Protestants, confess that Damascen taught it, that Gregory and
Austine brought it into England, that it entered early into the Church. Cited in
the Protest. Ap. tract. r. sect. 7. subd. 4. See also sect. 2. subd. 2.
Read the discourse of M. Brierley p. 184.

Least you should outface such as want books, some few of those which held the
change, shall (for their sakes) be represented on the by. I told you that
Protestants co^tradict your assertion; and your frind Crak^^thorps also,
(Birkberks learned kinsman,) who^ you cite in your margin. But I come nearer,
page 232.
this your Doctors frind, Birckbeck, will admit, (and with his advise,) that it
was publicly taught, in England by Lancfranc, long before the time you speak
of. So will (I come nearer yet) Master Waferer of Alban-Hall, and with the same
Doctors approbat, Who says page 48. (so soon he forgot himself) your
transubstantiation is no better then the coynage of the monk Damascen; who
lived anno 730. This I note by the way only, to show your ignorance and
temeritie in your assertions; and how little your word is to be regarded. The
point it self, I do not hear examine, because I will not leave the matter of
the Conference, as you strive to do. Non de nomine Quaestio est, sed de re;
substantiarum nempe distinctarum ordine sub iisdem accidentibus: sub quibus
ante consecrationem sit natura vel substantia panis, post consecrationem verum
D. N. corpus. Celebratum est Lateran ense Concilium saeculo 13. In ore duo^um
vel trium testium stabit omne verbum. Matthew. 18. Seculo 12. Petrus Blesensis
Epist: 140. Pane and vino transubstantiatis virtute verborum coelestrum in
corpus and sanguinem Christi, accidentia, quae prius ibi fuerant, fine subiecto
remanent and apparent. Petrus Lombard 4. d. 11 Post consecrationem non est ibi
substanitia panis vel vini; licet species remaneant, est enim ibi species panis
and vini, sicut and sapor. Vnde aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Seculo 11.
Lanfrancus, li. de Euchar Credimus terrenas substantias mitabiliter operante
superna potentia conuerti in essentiam Dominici corporis, reseruatis ipsarum
rerum speciebus and quibusdam allis qualitatibus, ne percipientes cruda and
c^uenta horrerent. Theophilactus in cap. 26 Matt. Por^o dicens, Hoc est corpus
meum, ostendit quod ipsum corpus Domini est panis qui sanctificatur in altari,
and non respondens figura; non enim dixit hoc est figura, sed, hoc est corpus
meum. ineffabili enim operatione transformatur (panis,) etiamsi nobis panis
videatur: quoniam infirmi sumus and abhorremus crudas carnes comedere, maxim
hominis carnem: and ideo panis quidem apparet, sed reuera caro est. Seculo 10.
Stephanus Eduensis de Sacram. Altar. c. 13. Oramus vt cibus hominum fiat cibus
angelorum; scilicet, vt oblatio panis and vini transsubstantietur in corpus and
sanguinem Jesus Christi, qui est oblatio benedicta, etc. 15. Sub vtriusque
speciei particula singula totus est Christus Jesus. Fulbertus Episc, Carnot.
Epist, de Euchar. ad Adeodat. Cum in omni re sint erga nos inestimabiles
diuitiae Dei, adeo vt maiestate abscondita corruptibile pro nobis corpus
induerit, contumelis and passionibus se subdiderit, quo opem ferret assumpto
homin; quid indignum Deo iudicari potest qui vterum Virginis subijt si
virginibus creaturis infunditur? quae licet simplicis naturae paulo ante
praeferrent imaginem, postmodum coelestis verbi sanctificatione inspiratis
maiestas vera infunditur, and quae substantia panis and vini apparebat exte
rius, iam corpus Christi and sanguis sit interius. and infra. Si Deum omnia
posse credas, and hoc consequitur vt credas -- creaturas (posse) in sui
corporis substantiam transfundere. Seculo 9. Remigius Episc. Antisid. in Psa.
21. Panis and vinum a Christiana veritate dicuntur, non quod naturam panis and
vini post consecrationem in se retineant, nisi quantum ad speciem and sapotem
and odorem. Illi enim -- panis and vini materiam in sui corporis and sanguinis
natutam transfer possibile est. Paschasius Corbeiensis li. de corpore Christi
c. 1. Nullus moueatur de hoc Corpore Christi and sanguine, quod in mysterio
vera sit caro, and verus sit sanguis; dum sic ille voluit qui creauit. Omnia
enim quaecumque voluit fecit. Et quia voluit, licet figura panis and vini hic
sit, tamen omnino nihil aliud quam caro Christi and sanguis post consecrationem
credenda sunt. Seculo 8. Damascenus li. 4. de fide Orthod c. 14. Quemadmodum
naturaliter panis per cibum, and vinum and aqua per per potum, in comedentis
and bibentis corpus and sanguinem immutantur, corpusque alterum fiunt atque a
priore ipsius corpore diuersum; sic propositionis panis ac vinum and aqua per
Spiritus S. inuocationem and aduentum mirabili modo in Christi corpus and
sanguinem vertuntur; nec sunt duo, sed vnum Venerab. Beda Comment. in l. Boeth.
de Trinit. Panis fit corpus Christi; transit enim substantia, panis, in corpus
Christi; non forma, (species,) nam potius hae subsistunt -- sine
substantia-Sienim hic contingat quod alibi est impossible, non est mirum: cum
etiam ipsum corpus Christi ineffabili modo conceptum sit. Samonas Ga^ae
Archiepisc. in Disceptat. cum Achmed. Spiritus sanctus descendit, and
superuenit in ea quae sunt proposita: and igne suae diuinitatis in corpus and
sanguinem Christi panem and vinum commutat, non minus quam iccur alimentum in
corpus cuiusdam hominis. Seculo 7. Eligius Episcopus Nouiom. Hom. 8. Vera est
caro and verus est sanguis eius (Christi) quem ad manducan dum and potandum in
mysterio sumimus, -- in quibus manet post consecrationem similitudo panis and
vini ne sit cuidam horror cruoris. Isidorus Archiep. Hispal. l. 1. de Offic.
cap. 18. Placuit Spi. S. per Apostolos vt in honote tanti Sacramenti in Os
Christiani ieiuni prius Dominicum corpus intraret quam caeteri cibi: and ideo
per vniuersum orbem mos iste seruatur. Panis enim quem frangimus corpus Christi
est qui dicit Ego sum panis vinus qui de coelo descendi; Vinum autem sanguis
eius est. Haec autem duo (panis and vinum) sunt visibilia, sanctificata tamen
per Spiritum S. in Sacramentum diuini corporis transeunt. Seculo 6. Gregorius
Magnus referente Paulo Diac. in eius vita. Praescius conditor nostrae
infirmitatis, ea potestate qua cunct a fecit ex nihilo, and corpus sibi ex
carne semper Virginis operante Spiritu S. fabricauin panem and vinum aqua
mistum, manente propria specie in carnem and sanguinem suum, ad Catholicam
precem ob reparationem nostram Spiritus sui sanctificatione conuertit. Remigius
Archiep. Rhemen. Comm. in c. 10 prim. Corinth. Caro quam Verbum Dei patris
assump sit in in vtero virginali in vnitate suae Personae, and panis qui
consecratur in Ecclesia, vnum Christi corpus sunt: sicut enim illa caro Corpus
Christi est, ita iste panis transit in Corpus Christi: nec sunt duo corpora,
sed vnum corpus Seculo 5. Chrysostomus Patriarcha Constantinop. de Euchar in
Encaen. 6. de Poen. ed. Sau. Number vides panem, nu^ vinum? number sicut reliqui cibi
in secessum vadunt? Absit, Ne sic cogires Quemadmodum enim si cera igni
adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil super fluit: sic
and hic puta mysteria consumi corporis (...), substantia, Propter quod and
accedentes ne puteris quod accipiatis diuinum corpus ex homine, sed exipsis
Seraphim forcipe ignem, quem sc. Esaias vidit vos accipere. Cyrillus Archiep,
Alexand. Epist. ad Calosyr. Influit oblatis vim vitae, conuertens ea in
veritatem propriae carnis. Seculo 4. Ambrosius Archiep Mediolan. De Mist. ^it.
c. 9. Forte dicas aliud video, quomodo tu mihi asseris quod Christi corpus
accipiam? -- Probemus no^ hoc esse quod natura formauit, sed quod benedictio
consecrauit; maioremque vim esse benedictionis quam naturae, quia benedictione
etiam natura ipsa mutatur. and l. 4. de Sacram. c 5. Ante verba Christi, calix
est vini and aquae plenus: vbi verba Christi operata fuerint, ibi sanguis
efficitur qui plebem redemit. Gregorius Nyssenus Episcopus, Orat. Catechet c
37. Verbo Dei sanctificatum panem in Dei Verbi corpus credo transmutari. Et
infra. Se per carnem inserit omnibus credentibus, commistus and contemperatus
corporibus credentium, quibus substantia est ex pane and vino, vt union cum eo
quod est immortale sit etiam homo particeps incorruptionis. Haec autem dat
virtute benedictionis, in illud (quod est immortale, nempe corpus suum)
transelementatae eorum quae apparent natura. Cyrillus Episcopus Hierosol.
Cathechesi 4. Aquam olim in vinum conuertit in Cana Galileae, quod (vinum) cum
quandam habeat cum sanguine propinquitatem facile in illum transmutatur. and
eum patum dignum existimabimus cui credamus quod vinum in sanguinem transmutet?
and infra. Hoc sciens and pro certissimo habens, panem hunc qui videtur a nobis
non esse panem, etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat; sed esse corpus Christi: and
vinum quod a nobis conspicitur, tametsi sensui gustus vinum esse videatur non
tamen vinum, sed sanguinem esse Christi. Seculo 3. Sermo de Coena apud
Cyprianum. Panis iste quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non essigie sed
natura mutatus omni potentia Verbi factus est caro. and sicut in Persona Verbi
humanitas videbatur and latebat diuinitas: ita Sacramento visibili
ineffabiliter diuina se infudit essentia. Origenes l. 8. contra Celsum. Nos qui
rerum omnium conditori placere studemus, cum precibus and gratiarum pro
beneficiis acceptis action oblatos panes edimus corpus iam per precationem
factos sanctum quoddam and sanctificans. Et hom. 5. in diverse. Quando sanctum
^^bum, illudque incorruptum accipis epulum, quando pane vitae and poculo
frueris, manducas and bibis corpus and sanguinem Domini, tunc Dominus sub
tectum tuum ingreditur. tu ergo humilian^ temetipsum, imitare hunc Centurionem
and dicito Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum. Vbi enim indigne
ingreditur, ibi ad iudicium ingreditut recipientis. Seculo 2. Tertullianus l.
4. contra Marc. c. 40. Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis corpus suum
illum fecit, and l. de resurrect. carn. Caro corpore and sanguine Christi
vescitur. Irenaeus Episcopus l. 4. aduers Haeres. c. 34 Qui est a terra panis
percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex
duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti. Seculo 1. Paulus Apostolus, pri.
Corinth. 11. Ego enim accepi a Domino, quod and tradidi vobis, quoniam Dominus
Jesus in qua nocte trade batur, accepit panem, and gratias agens fregit, and
dixit, Accipite and manducate, HOC EST CORPUS MEVM quod pro vobis tradetur. --
Qui manducat and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manducat and bibit, non
dijudicans CORPUS Domini. Retinuit Antiquitas (...) Contentorum ordo sub
aspectabili panis forma. Sub illa fuit, ante consecrationem, vera panis natura:
accepit panem. cui successit sub eadem forma corpus Domini verum; hoc est
corpus quod pro vobis. A deo que sub illa specie vel aspectabili forma, facta
mutatio. Aduersariorum Confessio. Beza, de Coena con. VVestphal. Hoc quidem
saepe diximus, quod nunc quoque repetam, retineri reipsa non posse (...) in his
Christi verbis Hoc est corpus meum, quin transsubstantiatio Papistica
statuatur. Morton. Institut. Sacram. l. 2 ca. 1 page 72. What necessity there
is to enquire into the true sense of these words (This is my body) will best
appear in the after-examination of the diverse consequences of your own sense,
to wit, your doctrine of transsubstantiation, corporal and material presence,
propitiatotie sacrifice, and proper adoration: all which are dependants upon
your Romish exposition of the former words of Christ. The issue will be this,
that if the words be certainly true in a proper and litterall sense, then we
are to yield to you the whole cause. So he.


S. E. had said that Berengarius broched your About the year of our Lord 1060.
the denying of transubstantiation began to be accounted Heresy; and in that
number was first one Berengarius who lived about ^^. 1060. Fox page 1121 Brier.
heresy, and this you Master Waferer, take heynouslie; telling us that you
have it from the Apostles. If you had said that one of them (Judas) was of your
opinion, you might peradventure have found Scripture for it, in the 6. of S.
John. where after our Savior had said the bread which he meant to give was his
flesh, that flesh which he would give also for the life or redemption of the
world, the Jews began to dispute of the modus, how that could be, quomodo
potest hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manducandum, how can this man give us his
flesh to eat? whereupon our Savior told them that his flesh was meat indeed,
and that his blood was drink indeed, and that they were to eat this flesh and
to drink this blood. heereat some of the Disciples were sca^dalized, and said,
as you do, durus est hic sermo, this is a hard speech, they had not the
patience to hear of it; they believed not; and amongst those was the man, I
spoke of. Sunt quidam ex vobis qui non credunt, sciebat enim ab initio Jesus
qui essent non credentes, and quis traditurus esset eum. there are some of you
that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed
not, and who should betray him. you know the man; he was of your opinion. yet
Berengarius being the first that taught it openly as a doctrine, he may well
be said to have broached it first. and, if instead of the word opinion, or
heresy, you put in, Sacrament; that it run thus, Berengarius broached your
Sacrament; it may be no metaphor, for it is wine that is in your communion cup,
and nothing else but wine.

Here is an end of your second Section. I will leave you now alone, in your
recreation room, and go speak with others, at the door, you shall hear of me
again by that time you have stepped into your third Section; where if you can
compose your self thereunto, we will be more seriouse. It is not my labor (it
was your Mothers,) to breed Mirth.

Nobis non licet esse tam disertis
Qui Musas colimus seueriores.
Master Mirth is a merry man; he can laugh out another eyes: and his own, it
seems, (is not laughing the cause?) be not fully open, he has studied so
long in the University, and talked there so much of homo, that he has
forgotten part of his own mother tongue. I have been disputing with him about
a piece of it, and would have left him sooner being weary in the very
beginning, (dat sine mente sonum,) to here so many words with so little sense,
but that he would have taken occasion thereby to make the press labor again
in the edition of an other as impertinent a discourse; not omitting to appoint
his title-pages to stand, and proclaim me coward at every corner-poste in
London where the players put up their bills, unless I come the second time to
the Comedy must I call it, or, Mirth's Tragedy.

Our dispute was about the signification of this English word man, whether it
does only signify the substance, the quid as they speak in schools, animal
rationale; or, whether it does import, or bring into the understanding of him
that hears or reads it and knows our language, and in that kind signify,
more then animal rationale. It is an easy Question, (and scarce a Question but
that he will make it so) which every English man or woman, or child, may
determine. The child has not yet learned to speak, and the old woman dotes,
that knows not the difference betwixt these two names, man, and, woman. and
should one write the story of his Petegrie, changing these names and
expressing the female by the word man, the male by woman, scholars would think
that he were mad. If you look into the language, you shall find the like in
other words. Those who gave to things their English names, came not to the
students in Metaphysick to have them first abstracted. Men were, and had
society, and could speak, before they met to build Schools. The Scottish,
and Welsh, and Irish, were not invented in Universities; and they which made
bricks at Babell were not all Masters of Art.

I never hard that a soul, in it self had any sex, or that animal rationale
metaphysicallie abstracted from all accide^tes, was an hermaphrodite, though
those words have a good sense in them, forma dat nomen and esse, and ratio quam
significat nomen est definitio. Before such absurdities were inferd out of
these words, it would be demanded what is this definitio? What this form?
many formalities have names which have not proper definitio^s; rationale,
sensible, corporeum, and other differences, have none: and the prima genera
(substantia, quantitas, ad aliquid, and the rest) non habent genera; therefore
no proper definition. Neither are the substantial differences of things, so
known, as that, without taking into our understanding their properties which
are of another kind or predicament, we can unfold or conceive them. Whereof he
may presently have proof sufficient, that would but endeavor himself, or put
another, (you Master Waferer,) to define the several species of living
things, beasts, trees, flowers, etc.

When natural things were by man first named in vulgar language, their
definitions or notions (which they who named them conceived) were
proportionable to their nature, which did occur to the sense invested with
certain proprieties; and never otherwise; in which case, the Philosopher
himself says, it is hard to make Quaecunque apparent aduenientia in diuersis
specie, vt circulus in aere, ligno, lapide, haec quidem manifesta esse
videntur, quoniam nihil substantiae circuli aes, neque lapis est, propterea
quod ab eis separetur. Quae vero non videntur separari, nihil quidem prohibet
similiter his se habere, quemadmodum si circuli omnes viderentur aenei. Nihil
enim minus aes esset ipsius formae. Difficile tamen est hoc mente auferre. Vt
puta forma hominis semper in carnibus and ossibus and talibus partibus apparet
Vtrum igitur sint etiam hae^, parts formae and rationis? an non, sed materia?
Verum quoniam non adueniunt etiam in al^us, non possumus separare. Cum autem
hoc videatur quidem contingere, quando vero, non est manifestum* Aristot. 7.
Metaphys^t 37 Formae naturales licet possint intelligi absque materia, no^
tamen facile, quoniam esse non possunt sine determinatis ac propriis materiis
quarum sunt: vt homo, licet possit abstrahi ab his carnibus and his ossibus,
non tamen a carnibus and ossibus simpliciter. Commentator, ibidem. Formae
naturales difficile abstrahuntur intellectu a suis materiis, impossible est
enim intelligere hominem sine carne and ossibus. Ibidem. Non potest
(intellectus) abstrahere eas in imaginatione a materia. Ibidem.
abstraction* neither was a Metaphysicall one, necessary to the first
imposition of the word or name, since the thing conceived with it is properties,
is sufficiently distinguished from other things, and capable enough of a
different name or sign. and in this manner, the Latin word Homo, (to speak
of that language too, for your sake,) needed to suppose no other notion then
that which might be gathered by observing a man's motion, discourse, figure,
contenaunce, and other accidents found in all men that came to notice and not
in any other thing but in man. The^ further, as me^ came to the knowledge of
the Metaphysick, and therbey were able to abstract a substance from sensible
properties, and figure and quantity, the name was applied to signify that
abstracted thing also, yet so, that it left not, to be withal, that it was
before. Whence it comes to pass, that the same word, signifiing, according to
diverse abstractions, more, or less, may be said to be, or not to be, entirely
verified in the same thing.

Aristotle in his first de Anima puts a difference betwixt the Logician and the
natural Philosopher, in their manner of defining, Differenter definiet
naturalis and Dialecticus etc. where he says, the Logician defines by the
form, the Philosopher by the matter; and brings an example of each. In the
sixth of his Metaphysics he shows how the Natural Philosophers way of
defining is Differe^ter definiet Naturalis and Dialecticus vnumquodque ipsorum.
Vt ira quid est. Hic enim, appetitum recontristationis, aut aliquid huiusmodi;
Ille autem, feruorem sanguinis, aut calidi circa cor Horum autem, Hic quidem
assignat materiam, Ille vero formam and rationem. Ratio enim haec ipsius rei.
Necesse autem esse hanc in materia huiusmodi, si erit. Sicut domus haec quidem
ratio etc. Arist. l 1. de Animat. 16. Qui accipit materiam in definitione, and
dimittit formam, diminute accipit: qui autem accipit formam and dimittit
materiam, existimatur quod dimittit aliquid non necessarium, sed non est ita:
quoniam forma debet accipit in definitionibus secundum dispositiones in quibus
existit. Commentator, Ibidem.
diverse from that of the Mathematician, or the Metaphysick. The Naturarall
Philosopher does (in his definition) abstract from individual matter (which he
calls vltima, 7. Me^. ^.35.
others signata,) for his definition must be constant and universal; otherwise
it would not serve his turn to make a demonstration: but he does not abstract
from sensible matter, or that which is affected with sensib^e qualities, as the
other two do. Arist. l 6 Metaphys. t 2. vide Commentat. Ibidem.
Eorum quae definiuntur, and ipsorum quid est, quaedam quidem ita sunt vt ipsum
simum, quaedam vt ipsum concauum. Differunt aute^ haec quoniam simum quidem vna
acceptum est eum materia, est enim simum conca^ us nasus, concauitas vero
absque materia sensibili. Si cuucta igitur naturalia ita vt simum dicuntur, vt
nasus, oculus, facies, caro, os, omnino animal, folium, radix, In definitione
enim carnis and ossis oportet quod ponatur calidum and frigidum aliquo modo
co^temperatu^; and similiter in aliis. S. Tho. ibidem. Aristot.
cortex, omnino planta, (nullius enim eorum ratio absque motu, sed semper habet
materiam;) manifestum est quomodo in naturalibus oportet ipsum quid est
quaerere, and definire; and cur etiam de quadam anima speculari Naturalis est,
quaecunque non sine materia. Accordingly, he does elsewhere define a li. 2. de
Anima. t. 4. and 5. Actus primus corporis organici etc.
soul. and as for singulars, he says they cannot be defined. Aristot. l. 7.
Metaphys. t. 35.
Totius vero, vt circuli huius, and singularium alicuius sensibilis aut
intelligibilis (dico autem intelligibiles quidem, vt Mathematicos, sensibiles
vero vt aeneos and ligneos) horum inquam non est definitio, sed intellectione
aut sensu cognoscuntur. cum vero abeant ab actu, non est manifestum vtrum sint
al.-quando an non sint: tamen semper dicuntur and cognoscuntur universally
ratione; Materia vero per seipsam incognita. Materia vero quaedam sensibilis,
quaedam intelligibilis: sensibilis quidem vt aes and lignum, and quaecunque
mobilis materia: intelligibilis vero quae in se^sibilibus existit non prout
sensibilia, vt puta ipsa mathematica. The metaphysick does abstract from all
these three matters, signata, sensibili, intelligibili: he can abstract a
substance from quantity, sensible qualities, and indiuiduation, and
accordingly define it; without expressing any of them in the intellectual; or
adding them, in the vocal definition.

Thus far in common. Now to come to our particular cause. The Science which
contemplates a substantial body and according to whose abstraction it was
named, is Natural Philosophy, which Science, (according to the known
doctrine of the schools, whereunto the best Peripateticks, and the greatest
schoolmen also, do subscibe,) does not abstract from sensible matter; but
defines by it. It abstractes a materia signata; and according to this
abstraction and way of defining, does impose names to things natural; ratio
quam significat nomen est definitio. Wherefore this Latin word corpus, and this
English word, body, (it is the like of all others imposed according to this
abstraction,) in the judgment of the Natural Philosopher do not abstract from
such matter, but do signify a thing sensible. And if the thing wherein they be
verified be not such, he does not esteem the speech to be entirely proper;
because the words import or bring into his understanding such a thing, howbeit,
the speaker is not tied to this notion, for he may use another kind of
abstractio^; and according Materia est duplex, scilicet communis, and signata
vel indiuidualis. Communis quidem, vt caro and os, indiuidualis autem vt hae
carnes and haec ossa. Intellectus igitur abstrahit speciem rei naturalis a
materia sensibili indiuiduali, non autem a materia sensibili communi. Sicut
speciem hominis abstrahit ab his carnibus and his ossibus, quae non sunt de
ratione speciei sed parts indiuidui vt dicitur in septimo Metaphysicorum (t.
34. and 35.) and ideo sine eis considerari potest. Sed species hominis non
potest abstrahi per intellectum a carnibus and ossibus. Species autem
mathematicae possunt abstrahi per intellectum a materia sensibili, non solu^
indiuidual. sed etiam communi: non tamen a materia intelligibili communi sed
solum indiuiduali. Materia enim sensibilis dicitur materia corporalis, secundum
quod subiacet qualitatibus sensibilibus, scilicet calido and frigido, duro and
molli, and huiusmodi, Materia vero intelligibilis dicitur substantia secundum
quod subiacet quantitati. Manifestum est autem quod quantitas prius inest
substantiae, quam qualitates sensibiles. Vnde quantitates (vt numeri and
dimensiones, and figurae quae sunt terminationes quantitatum) possunt
considerari absque qualitatibus sensibilibus; quod est eas abstrahere a materia
sensibili: non tamen possunt considerari sine intellectu substantiae quantitati
subiectae, quod esset eas abstrahi a materia intelligibili communi. Possunt
tamen considerari sine hac vel illa substantia, quod est eas abstrahi a materia
intelligibili indiuiduali. Quaedam vero sunt quae possunt abstrahi etiam a
materia intelligibili communi, sicut ens, vnum, potentia, and acrus, and alia
huiusmodi; quae etiam esse possunt absque omni materia, vt patet in substantiis
immaterialibus. S. Tho. 1. p. qu. 85. a. 1. ad 2.
to that may peake his mind.

Hereby appears the truth of those passages against which M. Waferer most
ignorantly did cavil: as that of S. E. page 51. That which presents it self
to the eye to be seen is not a pure essence or quidditie as they speak in
Schools, but it is a thing sensible, and to be perceived by this organ and
faculty, it is an extended colored thing, which we do see and conceive;
agreeing that such or such a word shall be in speech a sign of it, and the
rest, which you may read in him. And of Cardinal Allen page 57. A thing being
put out of it is natural manner of being, and out of (...) natural conditions
and sensible proprieties agreeing to such a name, and endowed with strange
accidents, although it keep it is substance, yet because it wants the
conditions of subsisting which together with the substance come to the sense
and conceit of man, and are comprehended under the proper name, it almost
leeseth it is proper name; or if it keep it, yet not so properly as if it kept
it is proper manner of being. And of my Lord, page 39. I admit that in these
words, This is my body, there is a figure, not a mere or naked one void of
the truth and propriety, but a figure joined with the truth and with
propriety: because allthough they signify that the Eucharist is the body of
Christ truly, reallie, and properly according to the thing; yet they do not
affirm it to be the body of Christ after such a corporal and natural manner
as other things are the things that they are said to be, but after a
spiritual, invisible, mystical, sacramental manner, and such a one as does
figuratiuelie show and represent the natural manner of being of the same body
in another place.

In which words there be two things more specified, the one is that the
Sacramental manner of existence, is figuratiuelie the natural manner of
existence; which also came to pass by the Institution, as appears more fully
in the Gospel, do this in remembrance of me. The other, that the words This
is my body, do likewise insinuate the spiritual manner of existence which the
body has here in the sacrament; for, they do not signify the body in what
manner soever, or abstracted (I speak of the proposition, not of corpus, which
is a simple term) but they signify determinatlie our Saviors body with
this kind of existence which it has in the species or form of bread.

Out of the former distinction of a double abstraction; if you should hear an
understanding man deny, that there is any kind of improprietie in the word
corpus, you were to know that he takes it according to the Metaphysicall
abstraction; in which sen^^ the term is entirlie proper, as before was
observed, not according to the Physical. So easily you may reco^cile him,
with the others cited by S. E. and thereby see how little it does import the
maine, whether in the word, there be, or be not, admitted a kind of
improprietie. In the word, I say, or term; for it is one thing to speak of
that single word, and an other thing to speak of the proposition; whose sense
I have unfolded, as far as occasion has been offered; and shall do further
as I shall find cause. I must now to M. Waferer again, who is gotten to his
next section and there expects me.


The third argument was about the killing letter; out of Origin, who by the
killing letter meant (as it was Answered) not the Catholic sense, but the
Capharnaiticall.
Apologist: S. E. makes a noise with the Capharnaiticall strain, as if it
differed from their carnal eating: but I refer the Reader for satisfaction
to D. Featlie his Conference, which vnanswerablie conuinceth their shifts of
weakness and obstinacy.


Censure. Vide Bellar. li. 2. c. 8.. tertius l^eus. Sunt certi denique fines
quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
Had you settled a little your countenance whilst you were alone, it would have
mended the matter something, for much laughter does not well consist with
Magisteriall gravity; but to put on a brazen face, ^^d avouch to the Reader
what by reading without further study or instruction, he knows to be
otherwise, is an extreme, more absurd. What kind of eating the Capharnaiets
did mean, my Lord told your Doctor out of the Fathers, and, S. E. repeated the
it again. They thought S. Augustine says, that our Savior would cut of some
pieces from his body and give them to eat. Carnaliter putarunt quod
praecisurus esset Dominus particulas quasdam de corpore suo and daturus illis.
whereunto Chamier your great Panstratist, from whom now and the^ you borrow
matter for your Pamphlet, subscribes in these words. Et hoc quidem verum, quod
ipsa lectio indicat; and, Quis non videt (lo what Andabatarians he makes you
two, Doctor Featlie and your self, Cham. lib. 11. c. 19. n. 30.
) in hanc formam argumentatos esse Capharnaitas? Omne corpus carnaliter
manducandum, laniandum est, at secundum Christu^ eius corpus carnaliter est
manducandu^ Ergo idem laniandum est. This is true, as one may see by the very
reading of the place. Who sees not that the Caphernaits argued in this manner?
Every body that is carnally to be eaten is to be cut or torn in pieces; but
according to Christ, his body is carnally to be eaten; therefore it is to be
cut or torn in pieces. So they, as your Master Chamier tells you* whereas we
believe, that the body of our Blessed Savior is received whole and entire
under the form of bread, as S. E. told you in his Notes, and my Lord in the
Conference defended against your Doctor. Is there no difference M. Waferer
betwixt these two? betwixt eating of flesh in it is proper shape and receiving
it in the form of bread; betwixt receiving a body whole, entire; and eating
but a piece? Belike there is no difference with you betwixt all, and some;
betwixt a part, and the whole; betwixt a live, and a dead thing; betwixt a
corporal, and a spiritual manner of existence; betwixt the exterior forms
of flesh, and bread, who would have thought a man of your name and nature,
could be so melancholy, as not to discern this?

But you are not your self disposed, and therefore send him that will have
satisfaction to Doctor Featlies Conference. Suppose he go.

Intererit multu^ -- Is there more then was when S.E. read it over? Nothing at
all. But S. E. has not Answered, why so good M. Waferer? Because it
vnanswerablie conuinces those shifts (that is, S. Augustins exposition,) of
weakness. Is that all? (S. Augustine might be weak to grapple with a Lion;) and
obstinacy.

Away with this melancholy M. Waferer* what? may Featlie dissent from your
Oracle Chamier, and from the Scripture interpreted by his Spirit, and from
Saint Austin, and other ancient Fathers, and from the Catholic and
universal Church, with commendations; and S. Austin not dissent from Featlie
without obstinacy? What Vertigo brings this about? may nothing be said for
him, nothing answered in his behalf? No* for the Doctors Argument does
Vnanswereablie convince.

And who dares look such an Argument in the face? S.E. belike ran away, let us
see that first: for if he durst abide, greater Scholars need not fear. The
Doctors objection I will put down all, as he relates and has amplified it
himself; and will compare it with the Answer that was made.

Featlie. Origin says Hom. 7. in Leuiticum. If you follow the letter in these
words, unless you eat the flesh etc. that letter kills.

Answer. He speaks of the litterall sense wherein the Capharnaites understood
those words; not of that wherein the Church does understand them. This answer
you may read more at large in the Relation, page 63.

Featlie. what is litera Capharnaitica, the litterall sense wherein the
Capharnaites understood the words?

Answer. They thought, as S. Augustine says, that our Savior would cut of
some pieces from his body and give them to eat; quod precisurus esset
particulus quasdam de corpore suo; this being the common, obuious, carnal way,
of understanding such a speech. They never thought of receiving a man's body
whole, under the form of bread: which is the sense, left unto the Church by
the Apostles; and confirmed by the Hole Ghost the Spirit of Truth. The words be
not meant of dead, naked, flesh: they contain Spirit and life. Pieces of
flesh, not united to the Divine Person, such as they thought he would have them
take, and carnal eating of such pieces in their proper shape and form,
profits nothing to salvation; the thing were horrible in it self. It is the
Spirit, the Divinity, gives a quickening virtue to that which is united to the
word, Cyr. Al. Anath. 11
and this same word does teach another sense which is the very life of that
letter; and does also (in it is kind) give life to the receauer: Spiritus est
qui viuificat Caro non prodest quicquam; verba quae ego locutus sum vobis
Spiritus and vita sunt. Let Saint Augustine speak again, Non crediderunt
aliquid magnum dicentem, and verbis illis aliquam gratiam cooperientem, sed
pro^ voluerunt ita intellexerunt, and more hominum, quia poterat Jesus aut hoc
disponebat Jesus, carnem qua indutum erat verbum, veluti concisam distribuere
credentibus in se, Durus est inquiunt hic sermo. which imagination of cutting
in pieces, and consuming it, our Savior, as he says, refutes in the next
words, Si ergo videritis filium hominis etc. Illi putabant, says he,
erogaturum corpus suum, (concisum vt supra,) ille autem dixit se ascensurum in
coelum, VTIQVEINTEGRVM. Where he does oppose integrity to chopping or cutting
into pieces. He goes on. Certe vel tunc videbitis quia non EO MODO quo putatis
erogabit corpus suum. certe vel tunc intelligetis quia gratia eius non
CONSVMETVR morsibus. And again afterward in the same place. Magister bone,
quomodo caro non prodest quicquam, cum tu dixeris nisi quis manducauerit carnem
meam, and biberit sanguinem meum non habebit in se vitam etc. Non prodest quic
quam, sed quomodo illi intellexerunt: carnem quippe sic intellexerunt quomodo
in cadauere dilaniatur, aut in macello venditur, S. Augu. tract 27. in Joan.
non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. They believed him not, affirming a great matter
and covering a grace under those words: but as they listed so they understood,
and as men use to do, because Jesus could or disposed it so, that he would
distribute unto those who believed in him the flesh which the word had put on,
cut in pieces as it were. This say they is a hard saying. Ibidem.
They thought he would give them his body, (cut in pieces) he said he would
ascend into heaven, entire verily, (...) bona gratia. de vocabuli suppositione
vide Theologos. Vide Turrian. de Euch. tr. 2. c. 13 and 19.
not cut in pieces. Surely then at least you shall see that he will not give
his body eo modo quo putatis in that manner you imagine* then at least you
will understand that his grace will not by bitts be consumed. Good Master, how
does the flesh profit nothing, when as thy self have said Unless a man eat my
flesh and drink my blood he shall not have life in him, etc. It profits
nothing, but as they understood; for they imagined it, as it is torn in pieces
in the carcass, or sold in the butchers shop: S. Aug. Ibidem.
not as it is quickened with the spirit.

Featlie. For ought appears by Scri^ture or any ancient record, the
Capernites error was in this that they construed Christ's words groslie and
carnally as you do* which you and they should have taken spirituallie: my
words are Spirit and life.

Answer. Seeing our Savior (I repeat my Lords words) says his flesh is
truly meat, and that his words are truly life, they are to be understood so
that they be expounded both properly and also spirituallie or mystically*
which thing we rightly do when we say they are to be expounded properly
according to the substance of the thing eaten, because that substance which in
the Eucharist we eat is the very substance of the body of Christ: and also
spirituallie according to the manner, because we do not eat cutting and
mangling it (as the Capharnaites did conceive) but without hurting it at all,
no otherwise then if it were a meet Spirit. Thus far my Lord* who did also
declare out of S. Augustine (whose antiquity I suppose Featlie will not call
into question) and out of another more ancient then he, what kind of eating
the Capharnaites did understand. Quidam quia non credebant, nec poterant
intelligere abierunt retro, Sermon. de Coe. Cypr.
quia horrendum eis and ncfarium videbatur vesci carne humana, existimantes hoc
eo modo dici, vt carnem eius vel elixam vel assam, sectamque membratim edere
docerentur, cum illius personae caro SI IN FRVSTA PARTIRETVR, non omni humano
generi posset sufficere; qua semel consumpta VIDERETVR INTERIISSE (mark this by
the way) RELIGIO, cui nequaquam vlterius VICTIMA superesset. Sed in
cogitationibus huiusmodi caro and sanguis non prodest quicquam, quia (sicut
Magister exposuit) verba haec spiritus and vita sunt, nec carnalis sensus ad
intellectum tantae profunditatis penetrat nisi fides accedat. you heard S.
Augustine before, Putauerunt quod precisurus esset Dominus particulas de
corpore suo. Carnem veluti concisam distribuere quomodo in cadauere dilaniatur
aut in macello venditur non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. Some, because they did
not believe nor could understand, went back, for that it seemed to the^ wicked
and horrible to eat man's flesh, thinking it was meant they should eat it
roasted or boiled, and chopped in pieces; whereas the flesh of that person
(Christ) were it divided into portions or bitts would not serve all mankind:
and being once consumed, Religion would seem to have perished withal; no
victime or sacrifice then remaining. But in such thoughts as these, flesh and
blood profits nothing for (as our Master himself has expounded) these words
are spirit and life; and unless faith comes in, the carnal sense penetrateth
not unto the understanding of so great a depth. Breiflie; they meant the
common, carnal way, of eating flesh, in it is own form and shape, piece
after, piece, whereby the thing eaten by degrees is consumed. Of which kind of
eating our Saviors words were not indeed to be understood, for his body was
not to be cut in pieces and to be consumed; nor in it is proper shape to be
devoured, but to be received in another shape, and still to remain whole,
entire.

Featlie. There is no such thing (as that which in this answer is attributed to
the Capharnaites) implied in the litterall meaning of these words (unless you
eat my flesh) nor can be gathered from any circumstance of the text.

Answer. The Question is not whether that be the true sense of the letter; we
know it is not: but whether the Capharnaites did understand or conceive it so.
And that they did, it has been proved, first by the testimony of S.
Augustine; and he not alone neither. Secondly by the confession of your own
Chamier out of whose quiver you take the chiefest of your bolts; who thinks
them blind that by reading the place perceive it not. Thirdly our Savior
himself correcting them, does insinuate what they meant, by telling the^,
caro, the carnal meaning of his words, no^ prodest quicquam, does nothing
avail, there is a higher meaning which the Spirit, the inte^^our man, and, by
faith only, can perceive, in them. Spiritus est, qui viuificat, flesh apart
and separate from the Word, who for us was made flesh, gives not spiritual or
eternal life. You mistake in thinking he means to let it be consumed with
eating, or cut in pieces; he will keep it still, and in the sight of men
appear again and ascend, immortal, impassible, entire. Si ergo videritis
filium hominis ascendentem (vtique integrum says S. Augustine) you will then
see that he understands and can effect more then you are able to conceive; and
therefore merited to be believed in this. and, that he meant not to have his
flesh consumed, cut in pieces, and eaten that way which you imagine. Fourthlie,
they (the Capharnaits,) meant that eating which the word eat does first
signify and which at the hearing of it me^ commo^lie do conceive, (see above,
page 2* 3) not reflecting upon that peculiar notio^ which our Savior took it
in, which notion by Philosophers had never been thought upon.

Featlie. A man might eat flesh according to the rigor of the letter, though
he neither buy it in the market nor cut it.

Answer. For buying, there is no difficulty* but I pray you Master Featlie,
was it ever heard that one man did with his mouth eat an others body, in its
own shape and form, without cutting or tearing? did the Anthropophagi swallow
men whole? their mouths then were great* greater the^ the Capharnaites, who
were as other men: and therefore thought not of that way, but of the common.
Neither did they think of eating a man's body entire in the form of bread:
that eating of man's flesh neither the Philosophers nor those who gave the name
(anthropophagie) to man eating nor those Jews (the Capharnaits) ever had
seen, or could have invented: it was the Eternal wisdom who did (not
reprove, but) ordain it, as appears more distinctlie in the Institution of
the B. Sacrament which we speak of. This thing in my hand in the exterior
form of bread is my body, the very same that shall be delivered scourged,
nailed on a cross, wounded, for you; take, and eat, it.

Featlie. The horror of the sin of anthropophagie or eating man's flesh, is
not in buying man's flesh nor in cutting it: but in eating it with the mouth and
chamming it with the teeth. If we should do so in the Sacrament we should
follow the killing letter Origin speaks of, and run upon the point of Saint
Cyrills sharp reproof, do thou pronounce the Sacrament to be man eating: and
do thou irreligiouslie urge the minds of the faithful to gross and carnal
imaginations?

Answer. Gross and carnal eating, eating piece by piece, eating by the mouth
a man's body in it is proper form, that horrible anthropophagie, we detest.
What and how, we eat, according to our Saviors Institution, you have been
told over and over; and in the former Argument this matter of anthropophagie is
discussed. Supra, page 67.
Read the Notes again: they stand good. Neither is any new thing here
objected, but only we are told (and it is forsooth, a great mystery) that
the sin of Anthropophagie or eating man's flesh, is not in buying, nor in
cutting it that is to say, to buy or cut, is not to eat. Sure, a learned
observation.

Featlie. I oppose against your Interpretation S. Chrysostom, who says. To
take Scripture according to the letter, is to take it according to the sound of
the words. To which Doctor Smith replied, when I see the words of Chrysostom I
will answer them* you shall when you please quoth Master Featlie.

Answer. Neither is here any thing new. what this word eat, and eating man's
flesh, See page 301. and seqq.
do sound in the ears of men never instructed in the Christian school, who
knows not? But why did not Doctor Featlie, if he thought the words worth the
reading, cite the place? could he not find it out in all the time betwixt the
Conference and the printing of Relation, which were near twenty years.

Featlie. Now I appeal to the Ear of all that are hear present, whether
these words, nisi manducaueritis carnem, sound after Doctor Smiths
Caperniticall strain. I hear nothing but the eating of the flesh, which you
do as properly as the Capernites could conceive, with the mouth and teeth.

Answer. And I apeale to the Judgment of all that read this Censure, or the
Relation of S. E. (which has the same in substance, all,) whether this
unanswerable Argument be not answered; And whether S. Augustine (whose
exposition it was that by this unanswerable Argument was impugned) be not freed
from that unworthy imputatio^ wherewith the Peda^t charge the maintainer, of
weakness and obstinacy.

In the margin Featlie cites the Confession of Berengarius: and S. E. in his
margin (it being a quarrel only on the by) cites the place where he may find
my Lords Answer: in his book, against a prating Minister of Raschall who (take
his own words, for I can not imitate his elegancie) challenged all English
Jesuits, and Iesuited Papists, in the world, tagge and ragge, to answer his
(confused, silly) books, or any piece, or parcel of them. which books
(since you seem not to know so much M. Waferer I now tell you) were answered.
his Babel was surprised, Bell confounded. A further Answer to that marginall
citation then a marginall citation, S. E. did not esteem necessary;
especially considering that the said Confession was not objected in the
Conference. Neither could it beseem so great a Cha^pion as you proclaim your
Doctor, to stricke when he was out of the field* and to your own disadvantage
you solicit a melius inquirendum. Featle page 296. margin.


For, casting my eye upon it, I find that your Doctor deals not, in it,
fairelie. He refers the words tractari, frangi, dentibus atteri, to Corpus
nakedlie, putting it thus, Credo corpus D. N. I. C. sensualiter and in veritate
manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri; whereas
Berengarius in his Confession does not so* the Confession (which is recited
here in this margin) Ego Berengarius -- consentio Sanctae Romanae and
Apostolicae Sedi; and orae, and cord profit or de Sacramentis Dominicae mense
eandem fidem me tenere quam D. and Ven. Papa Nicolaus, and haec sancta Synodus
authoritate Euangelica and Apostolica tenendam tradidit, mihiquo firmauit:
scilicet panem and vinum quae in altari ponuntur, post consecrationem non solum
Sacramentum sed etiam verum corpus and sanguinem D. N. Jesus Christi esse, and
sensualiter non solum sacramento sed in veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari,
frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri, iurans per sanctam and homousion
Trinitatem, and per haec sancta Christi Euangelia. De Consecr. distin. 2. c. 42.
has whithin it is own terms an explication, if we look well upon it. which
explication that you may see the better, I will first take the sense of the
Confession into parts; and then look upon the connection or coherence of the
words. which done, the Reader may reflect again upon it as it is in it self,
altogether.

The first part of the sense is this, Profiteor panem and vinum post
consecrationem, non solum Sacramentum sed etiam verum corpus and sanguinem
D.N.I.C. esse. I profess that the bread and wine, be, after consecration, not
a sacrament only but also the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Here is (I do not say all the words, but one) part of the se^ce. importi^g
that the consecrated bread and wine be a Sacrament; and not only a Sacrament,
but also the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. so that, under the
name of consecrated bread (it is the like of consecrated wine) Berengarius in
this Confession comprehends two things; the visible Sacrament, (by which he
means the species:) and the body which is invisible. Non solum Sacramentum,
sed etiam corpus. you know the force of the particles, and can resolve the
proposition (I suppose) according to the rules of Logic. The like you have in
the Canon Hoc est. which afterward the Doctor obiecteth, Contendimus
Sacrificium Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare, visibili elementorum
specie, and inuisibili D. N.I. C. carne. We contend that the Sacrifice of the
Church does consist of two things; the visible species of the elements, and the
invisible body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in old Irenaeus, Qui est a terra
panis percipiens vocationem Dei, (...).
iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans,
terrena, and coelesti. The bread which has being from the earth, receiving the
invocation of God, (being consecrated,) is now, not common bread, but
Eucharist, consisting of two things, the eartlie, (the species,) and the
heavenly, (the body.) And another old Father before cited, Panis iste non
effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro. That bread
being changed not in shape (there is the species remaining:) but in nature, is
by the omnipotency of the word made flesh. (there is the invisible substance,
the flesh, or body of our Savior Jesus Christ. If you find in authors
teritur with corpus otherwhile; you find a caution with it, Sub vtraque
specie, and sub vtriusque speciei particula singula, totus est Christus Jesus;
and sumitur residens in coelo, sedens ad dextram Patris: ipse vere est in hoc
Sacramento, de^tibus teritur (secundum species) and integer manet. Manducatur
and non corrumpitur. Immolatur and non motitur. Stephan. Eduen. lo. de Saciam.
Altar. c. 15. vixit circa annu^ 950. Credimus terrenas substantias quae in
mensa Dominica per sacerdotale ministerium diuinitus sanctificantur,
ineffabiliter, incomprehensibiliter, mirabiliter operante superna potentia,
conuerti in essentiam Dominici Corporis; reseruatis ipsatum rerum speciebus,
and quibusdam aliis qualitatibus, ne percipientes cruda and cruenta horrerent;
and vt credentes fidei proemia ampliora perciperent; ipso tamen Dominico
corpore existente in coelestibus ad dextram Patris immortali, inuiolato,
integro, incontaminato, illaeso: vt vere dici possit, and ipsum corpus quod de
Virgin sumptum est nos sumere, and tamen non ipsum: ipsum quidem quantum ad
essentiam, veraeque naturae proptietatem, atque virtutem; non ipsum, si spectes
panis vinique speciem, caeteraque superius comprehensa. Hanc fidem tenuit a
priscis temporibus, and nunc tenet Ecclesia quae per totum diffusa orbem
Catholica denominatur Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. li. de Eucharist. Vix^
circa annum 1059. and cum Berengario disputauit.
) I proceed unto

The second part of the sense, Profiteor panem (eundem) sensualiter non solum
Sacramento sed in veritate manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium
dentibus atteri. I profess that the (consecrated) bread, is sensibly touched
with the bands of Priests, broken, and by the faithful chewed, not in
sacrament only but in very deed. This is the second part of (I do not say
the words: but) the sense: wherein you will have more ado to find a
difficulty, then I shall have to find the solution, The Question is not what
other men say of them: but what is contained manifestly in them.
which the words, if they be supposed to stand thus, offer of themselves. That
the Priest does touch the consecrated bread with his hand, and his mouth, and
his tongue, every one knows; and our Saviors body being therein reallie, in
rei veritate, not in signo tantu^, he, does also touch it, more, then the woman
touched it, who touched immediately but his garment. yet, you can not deny but
that indeed and truly she did touch it. Some denied, then, that any had done
it; and our Savior himself confuted them, and affirmed, and proved it. The
history is in the Gospel. A woman that had a bloody flux, came behind our
Savior, and touched his garment, the border of it; he demanded, who it was
that had touched him, they denied that any had done it. Negantibus omnibus
etc. he stood in it, still, that it was so: And a woman -- came behind him, and
touched the border of his garment: and immediately her is^ue of blood stanched,
And Jesus, (...) who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with
him said, Master the multitude throng thee --. And Jesus said somebodie has
touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gonne out of me. And when the woman
saw that the was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him she
declared unto him before all the people for what cause (...) had touched him,
-- Luc 8.
tetigit me aliquis: and proved it, nam and ego noui virtutem de me exijsse,
where upon, the woman fell upon her knees at his feet, and confessed it.

It is not necessary when we say we touch or see a thing, that every thing
in it, every essential part be according to it self an object of the sense;
or that the sense perceive every part of it that is sensible. He who looks
you in the face, says he sees you, though the rest of your body be within
your clothes. and if you, being an (...) cataphract in your protestantish
(...) should for fear pull down your beuer before you come into the list,
your Adversary for all that might light upon your () unless you bring with
you Giges his ring, so to make your self invisible; as other of your Champions
it seems did, many hundred years together; for none of them appeared, unless
it were to Swinglius one, Ater an albus, he knew not; and an other to Luther,
With a great voice.

I see a man, yet my eye does not discern the substance of his soul; or his
matter; or his savor. and, by touching him, I do not feel his color, or
discern his form from his matter. We should end many controversies in
Philosophy soon, if souls could be seen with eyes, and matter touched.
There is a distinction amongst the Peripatetiks, of perse, and per accidens,
appliable to many things. and, per accidens is said many ways, M. Mirth;
which had you learned, you might have been a better Scholar then many be, and
more worthy of your cap.

You have heard the sense of Berengarius: I come now to look upon the
coherence of his words, which one cannot mistake in as far it appartaines to
the former part. Consentio autem S. R. Ap. Sedi and ore and cord profit or
etc. scilicet panem and vinum quae in altari ponuntur post consecrationem non
solum sacramentum, sed etiam verum corpus and sanguinem D. N. I. C. esse: The
sumne whereof is this, Profiteor panem and vinum post consecrationem non solum
Sacramentum esse sed etiam verum corpus and sanguinem.

The later part is this, and sensualiter non solum sacramento sed in veritate
manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri. where, though
he do not repeat the word panem, yet the construction of the sentence does
enforce the repetition of it. Profiteor panem, esse corpus; and manibus
sacerdotum tractari, what? the same panem. This is the native construction of
the words. The conjunction and, does but couple diverse attributes, est corpus,
and tangitur, and atteritur; leaving the subject still unchanged. as if I
should say, Petrus est substantia, and currit, and discurrit; Substantia, and
currens, and discurrens, were attributes; and Petrus the subiectum to them all.

If any should demand how corpus and Sacramentum both, can be predicated upon
this subject panis: I desire him first of all to look again upon the former
part, and he shall see directly without all controversy that it is so.
Profit or panem and vinum post consecrationem non solum Sacramentum sed etiam
verum corpus and sanguinem esse; Supra page 239
there both are affirmed* and the like is in the Canon Hoc est, before also
cited. whereunto may be added the words of S. Ireneus. And the thing is
easily conceived; for, the Consecrated heavenly bread, the Eucharist, the
Blessed Sacrament, has the exterior form of bread; it is a Sacrament: and
within that form, or exterior sign, it has the body of our Savior it
contains, or concludes, both, under the name: Berengarius. Qui dicit panis and
vinum altatis solummodo sunt Sacramenta, vel panis and vinum altaris solummodo
sunt verum corpus Christi and sanguis, modis omnibus panem and vinum superesse
constituit. ^anfrancus. Nihil horum Romana Synodus or dendum esse decreuit: nec
Humbertus Episcopus ad confitendum vel iurandum horum tibi aliquid tradidit.
Prior quidem sententia per quam dicitur, panis and vinum altaris solummodo
Sacramenta sunt; tua est tuorumque sequacium. Posterior vero quae enunciat,
panis and vinum altatis solummodo sunt verum Christi corpus and sanguis,
nullius hominum est. Nam, and tu veritatem carnis and sanguinis negas; and
Ecclesia Christi sic panem in carnem, vinum cred^t conuerti in sanguinem, vt
tamen salubriter credat and veraciter recognoscat Sacramentum esse Dominicae
passionis, diuinae propitiationis, concordiae and vnitatis; postremo assumptae
de Virgin carnis and sanguinis, singula suis distinctisque modis. Lanfrancus
lib. de Sacrament. Altaris, aduersus Berentium.
wherefore both together, may well be affirmed on it.

And if Berengarius had affirmed the one only (abstracting from, but not
denying, the other, abstrah^ntium non est mendacium) as, when I say, the
Heavenly bread is the body of our Savior, Panis consecratus est corpus
Christi, and stop there; it had been easy, in this case also, to give the
true sense: for, sometimes the word panis, and Sacramentum, and Eucharistia,
supponunt pro corpore, connotande speci^s; as Deuines well remember. To sa^e
nothing of that figurative kind of speech, wherein the part is elegantlie taken
for the whole; I presume you know the distinction betwixt suppositio and
significatio.
or, the whole for the part: which figure, if we should use in speaking of
this mystery, (as S. John did in speaking of the Incarnation, Verbum caro
factum est,) we should not exclude, but include, and confirm the real
presence; as he does the Incarnation, in the words but now cited. Neither be
we so scrupulous, as never to use a figure in this matter of the blessed
Sacrament. though none, without contradicting God him self, can avouch, in it,
or in the words of Institution, a mere figure.

But to return again to the Profession; you may perceive now (if you will but
set aside your humor of partiality, and judge according to the plain sense
and construction which the words offer (that what some other (suppose a
Schoole-man) might have expressed in a larger discourse; saying for example,
that, the body, not according to it is own form and nature, but according to
the Sacramental species and figure wherein it is, is touched with hands and
teeth, even that, Berengarius in fewer words does profess, in saying, the
consecrated bread is touched with hands and teeth. making the subject of his
speech bread, which word (bread) he had immediately before professed to
signify both, the species or Sacrament, and the body. and therefore chooses
rather the same word be resumed again, when he speaks of touching, then to
put corpus, in place of it, least the Reader by that occasion considering the
thing signified by it, apart, and not as in that Sacramental form, might
mistake him. Which now (if he attend to his words, and their construction, and
coherence,) he cannot do; being not able to find whereunto tractari and atteri
be related, or what is in the speech, the subject of touching or chewing, till
he comes to panem in the beginning: where he finds withal that it signifies
both corpus and the species together.

And, did panis (which is to be resumed in the second part as I have showed)
stand there, in that second part, for corpus, connotando species, or by a
Synecdoche stand (it self signifying the Whole,) for a part: yet still the same
warines does appear, in that tangi and atteri were not attributed to the
body, but as signified by a name bringing the species withal into the hearers
mind; by a name signifying the whole: and not standing for a part but as it is
within the whole. The honor of which prudent circumspection is not indeed due
to Berengarius, but to those who conceived and drew the form.

Consider now the speeches Master Waferer, and see how they differ, that which
Featlie puts in his margin as Berengarius words, Credo orpus Domini etc.
manibus sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri: and
Berengarius his own words, as they are to be ordered according to the right
Syntaxis. Profiteor de Sacramentis Panem (he means that which is consecrated,
the Sacrament) manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus
atteri. who does not perceive how the later brings with it an explication,
whereby it is made intelligible, which the former does not? He who says the
Sacrament is handled, broken, touch* with the teeth; is easily understood,
but when you say the body is handled, broken, touched, the speech is obscure,
and needs an explication.

Yet with an explication, he that believes the real presence, will perceive
the meaning of it (of your proposition, for of that I speak now) to be that
according to the form of bread wherein the body is, it is said to be touched,
handled, broken, though not according to it is own proper form. and with this
explication he will believe it.

Those who deny God to be Incarnate, will never believe that he could be seen
with men's eyes, that he could be nailed upon a cross. He that is infinite,
might he, say they, have a figure? he that is impassible, suffer? he that is
immortal, could he die? yes, he could.

Being in the form of God, he esteemed it no robbery himself to be equal to
God; but he made himself of no reputation, taking on him the form of a
servant, made into the likeness of men, and found in the fashion of a man, he
humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Phillippens. 2. He was God and in the form of man. as he was God, according to
his divinity, he could not suffer; he was infinite, immutable, immortal,
impassible. as man, according to his humanity, he had a visible shape, a
figure, in which he was seen, and touched, and suffered; and died. No man ever
saw God. Joan. 1. yet, He was seen upon the earth, and conuersed amongst men.
Baruc. 3. God is a Spirit. Joan. 4. and a spirit cannot be touched, or felt
with hands. it has not flesh and bone. Luke 24. but yet, feel and see, etc.
Ibidem. reach hither thy hand -- my Lord and my God. Joan. 20. The Word was
with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God. all
things were made by him. Joan. 1. true. and, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us. Ibide^. That which was from the beginning; which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled of the word of life: and the life was manifested, and we have
seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with
the Father, and appeared unto us; that which we have seen and ^eard, etc. 1.
Joan. 1 Hear you this Master Wa^erer? life, eternal life, that which was with
the Father, that life, appeared unto us; we saw it, with our eyes; we touched
it, with our hands.

Touched life, touched the intellectual Word, touched God, a Spirit; with
ba^ds. What? would you have more light to see how this might come to pass?
behold. The life was the light of me^. It was the true light which does
illuminate every man that comes into the world. This light is near. it is
near you; you are a man. Joan. 1.
The word was made flesh. Now you see it. that Word, that life, that Spirit,
God, was in the form, of man, and according to that form, he was touched,
with hands.

You believe it* and see withal how sacred mysteries, when they be delivered
in some terms be more easily conceived, then in others. When I say, Christ,
was touched with hands, torn with whips; nailed upon the Cross; you conceive
me without a comme^tarie: but, when I say, God was torn with whips, or,
nailed unto the Cross, you expecte an explication, least the the hearers
mistake the meaning as those Heretics did that thought the Divinity suffered.
So, when we say, the Sacrament is touched with hands, or teeth; panis,
(consecratus,) or sacramentum, manibus tractatur, frangitur, I shall be easily
understood. But if one say, as Featlie puts it, Corpus Domini nostri manibus
Sacerdotum tractatur, frangitur, there will be expected an an explication,
least the hearers mistake, and think, that our Saviors body according to it is
own dimensions and form, is used so.

As for those words in rei veri^ate, whether you take them to signify that
the body is truly touched, according to that Sacramental form wherein it
is; or, that this touching of the body, is distinct from touching of it in a
mere sign or Sacrament; it will come in the end all to one. For, being
reallie in the form which is touched, it is truly said to be touched
otherwise then it could be by the touch of an empty sign* and a further
determination of it was not necessary. It is not such as that of the Jews, or
of the woman; touching him. one of those was by the garment; the other was,
secundum inhaerentem formam. this form here which immediately receaues the
touch and communicates the denominatio^ to the body as in it, is more united
then the one of those, and therefore more apt to communicate the denomination;
howeuer it be said less united then the other. Whether the denomination be, in
regard of the body, (for the species there is no difficulty,) proper, or
improper, or less proper; the Confession does not specify. Should I talk of
Analogy, Mortons rigor would have wine broken properly: though he were not
well aware it ensued upon his pretense
you would not understand me; and if I speak of Aequiuocum a consilio, you
will take occasion to make inuectiues against mental reservation, for you are
curious to paint dolphins in a wood. wherefore I will only repeat what has
been said allreadie. the body is so approximated to the hand, and mouth, by a
real presence in the form of bread, that it cannot be truly said to be
touched Sacramento solum.

Neither is this manner of speech found here only in this Confession
whereunto Berengarius did subscribe. Others before had it; and they were such
as understood better then you, the power of words: and in what sort (in
mysteries of this nature) they might be verified. Sapientum est rebus imponere
nomina, and to those who are skillful in revealed Theology it appertains to
name formalities where they find names wanting to things appertaining to this
object: or to apply words, before invented, Stephan Episc. Eduensis, supra page
3, 1.
to signify more the^ those inuentors thought on: so making them Analogicall,
or Equivocal; as they see cause.

Tertullian. Zelus perorabit ingemens C^ristianum etc. eas manus admouere
Corpori Domini, quae Daemonijs corpora conferunt. He speaks of those who made
Idols. Proh scelus! semel Iudaei Christo manus intulerunt, isti quotidie corpus
eius lacessunt. o manus praecidendae! Tertull. i^ de Idol. c. 7
Zeal will plead lamenting and greeuing that a Christian touches the body of
our Lord with those hands that made bodies for devils. Ibide^.
Oh the villainy! the Jews once laid violent hands on Christ; these molest his
body daily. o hands worthy to be cut of! This is he, if you remember, who
said, Caro vescitur corpore. S. Cyrill of Alexandria Iure sanctae
Congregationes d^e octaua in Eccles^is fiunt, and foribus sublimiore modo
clausis visibiliter simul atque inuisibiliter Christus omnibus apparet.
Inuisibiliter quidem vt Deus, visibiliter in corpore. praebet enim nobis carnem
suam tangendam, vt firmiter credamus quia templum vere suum suscitauit. and in
an other place upon those words, Ego in ipsis and tu in me, vt in vnum sint
consummati. Corporaliter (says he) Filius per benedictionem mysticam nobis vt
homo vnitur, spiritualiter autem vt D^us, etc. Cyrill. Alexan. l. 12 in Joan.
c. 58.
Hol^e assemblies are rightly made in Churches upon the eight day, and the
doors being shut after an higher manner Christ appears to all, visiblie and
invisibly both: invisibly as God, visiblie in his body. For he g^ues us his
flesh to be touched, that we may constantly believe he truly did raise his
temple, (or body.) Idem li. 11 in Ioa. c. 27
The son (of God) by the mystical benediction (consecration) is united unto
us as man, corporally: as God, spirituallie. S. Chrysostom. Quemadmodum in
Regijs, non parietes, non tectum aureum, sed Regium corpus in throno sedens
omnium praestantissimum est, ita quoque in Coetis Regium corpus, quod nunc in
terra, viendum tibi proponitur. Neque Angelos neque Archangelos, non Coelos,
non Coelos Coelorum, sed ipsum horum omnium tibi Dominum ostendo. Animaduertis
quonam pacto quod omnium maximum est atque praecipuum, in terra non conspicaris
tantum sed tangis (he is approximated ^hen sufficie^tlie to verify those words
which were objected) neque solum tangis sed comedis, and eo accepto domum
redis? Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Ep. pri. Corint.
As in royal palaces the walls and the gilded roofes are not esteemed the
most magnificent thing of all, but the royal person seated in his princely
throne: so is the kings body in heaven. Now this make thou see here on
earth. For here I show thee, not Angels, nor Archangels, nor heavens, nor the
heaven of heavens, but I show unto thee him who is the very Lord of all these
things. Thou perceauest now in what manner thou do behold here on earth
that thing which is most precious and most honorable of all other: and how
thou do not see it only, but also do touch it; and that thou do not
touch it only but also do eat it, and having received it returned unto thy
house. Hoc Corpus affixum, verberatum, morte victum non est Hoc corpus sol
crucifixum videms, radiosauertit. -- Hoc corpus in praesepi reueriti sunt Magi,
and viri impij and barbari longo itinere confecto cum timore and tremore
plutimo adorauerunt. I mitemur igitur saltem barbaros, nos qui coelorum ciues
sumus. Illi enim cum id praesepe and tugurium tantum, neque eorum quiequam quae
tu nunc intueris viderent, summa accesserunt reuerentia and horrore: tu vero
non in praesepe id, sed in altari; non mulierem quae in vlnis teneat, sed
Sacerdotem praesentem and spiritum perabunde fuper proposito diffusum
sacrificio vides, nec simpliciter vt illi corpus intueris, sed and eius
potentiam and omnem cognoscis administrationem, and nihil eorum quae per ipsum
facta sunt ignoras, and diligenter es initiatus in omnibus. S. Chrysostom. Hom.
24. Pri Cor. Ascend ad coeli portas, and diligenter attend non coeli sed
coeli Coelorum, and tunc quod dicimus intueberis. Etenim quod summo honor
dignum est, (...) id tibi in terra situm ostendam, Ibidem. Non est temere hoe
excogitatum, nec frustra memoriam mortuorum inter sacra mysteria celebramus,
aut accedimus pro istis agnum illum iacentem (in altari) and peccata mundi
tollentem deprecantes; sed vt his consolatio illis aliqua siet. Idem Hom. 41
pri. Cor. Pro omnibus oramus qui ante nos vita functisunt, maximum credentes
animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi
(...) quod ante nos iacet Sacrificij. S. Cyrill. Hier. Catech. mist. 6. Sanctum
ac viuisicum, i^^ruentumque in Ecclesia celebramus Sacrificium, ^^n hominis
alicuius nobis similis and communis cor^us; similiter and preciosum sanguinem
esse (...) quod proponitur, credentes, sed magis tanquam proprium vinificantis
verbi corpus accipimus. Anathem. 11. Conc. Ephesians.

That which lies, on the Altar, before the Priest, here on earth; may be
touched, with hands: what hinders? And what this thing is, it is made out of
Controversy, by these words, proprium verbi corpus; quod in praesepi reueriti
sunt Magi; affixum, verberatum; quod summo honor dignum est: agnus peccati
mundi tollens; obsecratio ill^us quod ante nos ^acet Sacrificij. Vide S.
Dionis. A^eopag^. 3. Hierarch Ecclesiast, which books are well defended by
Master Brie^ley in his treatise of the Mass.


Before he said that our Savior after his Ascension exhibited his body to us,
vt teneremus and manducaremus, quod, says he, maximum dilectionis signum est.
quos enim amamus nonnunquam etia^ morsu petimus. And before that again,
showing how the words of S. Paul (which are pri^cipallie understood of
unbloody immolation) be verified also in breaking of the host, which action is
(though not an essential, yet) an integrall part, as it were, of the unbloody
immolation, Quare addit, says he, quem frangimus? and he answers, Hoc in
Eucharistia videre licet, in cruce autem minime: sed omnino contra, os enim
eius non comminuetis ex eo. Sed quod in cruce passus non est id in oblatione
patitur. The same Father in an other place, Quos radios solares non deberet
excedere manus illa quae hanc carnem perrumpit, os quod igne impletur
spirituali, lingua quae cruentatur hoc admirabili sanguine? in which words he
does most veheme^tlie urge a real presence to the Priests hands and mouth and
tongue, in regard of the species of bread, and wine, wherein they be. And
again. O miraculum, o Dei benignitatem qui cum patre sursum sedet, in illo
temporis articulo omnium manibus pertractatur! there is no miracle in being
touched in a mere sign. Quum Spiritum Sanctum inuocauerit sacrificiumque
illud horrore and reuerentia plenissimum perfecerit, communi omnium Domino
manibus assidue pertractato, quaero ex te quoto illum in ordine collocabimus?
And Quis daret nobis vt eius carnibus impleremur? quod Christus fecit vt maiori
Charitate nos astringeret, and vt suum in nos ostenderet desiderium, non se
tantum videri permittens desiderantibus, sed and tangi, and manducar. Idem in
eade^ Hom.
Why does he add, which we break? this in the Eucharist we may see: not upon
the Cross, but quite otherwise, you shall not bruise a bone of him. But what
he suffered not upon the Cross, that he suffers in the oblation, (the Mass.)
Idem Hom. 26. in Matthew.
Then what sunbeams had not that hand need to be more pure, that breaks up
this flesh, that mouth which is filled with this spiritual fire, that tongue
which is embrued or sprinkled with this wonderful blood? Idem de Sacerdotio l
3.
O the miracle! o the benignity of God! he that sits above with the Father,
is touched at the same time with every ones hands. Idem de Sa. cerd l. 6 Dare
you, Mirch, Featlie, Morton, publicly call your communion bread so?
when he (the Priest) has inuocated the holy Ghost and celebrated the most
reverend and dreadful Sacrifice, touching daily with his hands the Lord of
all, I demand of thee in what rank or order we shall place him? Idem Hom 46
in Ioa.
Who would grant to us to be filled with his flesh? this Christ has done to
oblige us unto him with more love, and to demonstrate his affection to us:
suffering, himself not only to be seen of such, as desire it, but to be
touched also, and eaten. Reflect on this. Christ himself, the Lord of all, he
that sits above with the Father, (this is not bakers bread,) is touched with
hands, and Et dentibus carni suae infigi. Ibidem.
teeth also. Cyrill. Hier. Catech. mist. 5.
Accedens ad communionem, non expansis manuum volis accede, neque cum
disiunctis digitis, sed sinistram veluti sedem quandam subijcias dextrae quae
tantum regem susceptura est, and concaua manu suscipe corpus Domini.
Approaching to the communion, come not with the palms of thy hands spread out,
nor with thy fingars parted; but, holding thy left hand as it were a resting
place under thy right hand which is to receive so great a king: that with the
hollownes of thy hand thou may receive the body of our Lord. Before you
hea^d Saint Augustine say that we receive the Meditatour, Supra page 45.
God and man, with our mouth.

If against these Fathers, you should object that the flesh of Christ is
impassible in it self, and that our Savior under the consecrated species does
not appear in his own form to our eyes: they would Answer that; yet
notwithstanding he may be seen and touched, with hands, and mouth according to
the Sacramental form wherein he is. God, in himself, is impassible; but
because he was in the form of man, he might suffer, and be nailed upon the
Cross; and this, without driving the nails (as you seem to conceive) through
the Divinity. And, according to the same (humane) form he was truly seen,
though the men's eyes discovered him not according to the divine form, within.
For, had they known it, they would hot have crucified the Lord of glory.

If secondly you object the Capharnaites interpretation; the Reader (by that
which has been said before out of S. Augustine) will take notice of your
wilful error in that behalf; and acquit these great Scholars here cited
from so foul an imputation. We neither eat, not touch with mouth, or hands,
the flesh of our Savior according to it is proper form, (which was the
Caphernaietes error;) but in the form of bread, we touch, and eat it. The
bread which I will give is my flesh. Joan. 6. Mat. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
My flesh is meat indeed, take (with your hand) and eat (with your mouth)
this (in form of bread) is (what?) my body, (...), this is my body which is
broken for you.


Apologist. To that part of the section where he mistakes S. Augustine to
maintain a corporal eating when he affirms that Judas received the price of
our Redemption, not by his faith for that was shut, he being reprobated,
therefore into his body. I answer that there are two kinds of eating in the
Sacrament, one both corporal and spiritual, wherein the body feeds on the
outward elements corporally, whilst the soul receaueth the true body and
blood of Christ by faith, the other only corporal wherein the receauer
partakes only the outward sign, and not the body signified. So I say, Judas
received the last way only, and not the first, though his faith had shut out
Christ's body yet his mouth was open to let down the Sacrament of his body.
He (as all the wicked) received pane^ Domini the bread of the Lord, Sacramento
tenus, according to the visible sign: the other eleven (as all the faithful)
did also reuera indeed partake panem Dominum of bread which was the Lord.


Censure. It is well you confess, that your Answer is but to part of the
discourse: it has hitherto been your manner, the rest is such as you know not
how to cavil at it. The words of S. E. which you pick out be these, Judas
(according to S. Augustine) received the price of our Redemption not with the
mind sure (he was then a traitor) but with the mouth. The substance of your
Answer is, that he received bread, and wine; the signs or elements; but, not
the body, and blood. which answer is so far from satisfying the place of S.
Augustine, that it is directly co^tradictorie. S. Aug. Epist 162.
his words are, Tolerat ipse Dominus Iudam, Diabolum, furem, venditorem suum,
sinit accipere inter innocents Discipulos, quod fideles nouerunt precium
nostrum. Our Lord himself suffers Judas, a devil, a thief who sold him; he
lets him receive amongst the innocent Disciples that which the faithful know
our price. That which the faithful, the Apostles, knew to be the price of our
redemption, that he, Judas took, what was that? wine, or blood? non
corruptibilibus auro vel argento redempti estis, says our Pastor, sed pretioso
sanguine quasi agni immaculati Christi. 1. Pet. 1.
You were not redeemed with corruptible things, gold and silver; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without spot or blemish. And the Saints
in the Revelation, Apoc. 5.
Redemisti nos in sanguine tuo, thou have redeemed us in thy blood. This is the
price of our Redemption as the faithful know; and this, Judas, though he was a
traitor, did receive amongst the rest of the Disciples; not, with devotion, nor
with faith neither; not cord, no; he was one of those qui non crediderunt: but
ore tantum, with his mouth, only* whereas the other, both with heart, Aug. l.
2. con. Aduers. leg. c. 9.
and mouth, into themselves, did receive it. And so did the Church in S.
Augustines time. We receive with faithful heart and mouth, the mediator of
God and man, man Christ Jesus (this is not bakers bread) giving us his body to
be eaten, and his blood to be drunck: though it seem (to such as Waferer is,)
more horrible (even thus, with the mouth) to eat m^s flesh then to kill, and
to drinck man's blood then to shed it.

In Baptism we were incorporated into Christ, made one flesh: and this union
he does consummate, as S. Augustine does insinuate by the real exhibition of
his body in the Sacrament. But this matter is to high for M. Waferer; who at
least should have regarded the words of Origin (before his eyes) who says of
our Lord in the Sacrament, Supra Conf. page 65.
Where he enters unworthily there he goes in to judgment, to the receauer.
Mark well, there He (He, to whom Origin will have the communicant say, Vt ad
perficiendum mysterium vnitatis accip^amus ipsi d. s^o, quod accepit ipse de
nostro Cap. firmiter ex Conc. Lateran.
as the Church does at Mass, Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou enter under my roof: this is not bread, he
would not have you call bread, Lord, as S. E. told you in his Notes) Where He
enters vnworth^lie, there He goes in to Judgment to the receauer. The like, of
inuocating our Lord there, in the form of bread, on the Alter, we have in
Roga^tes Agnum propositum. S Chry. Hom. 41. in 1. Cor.
S. Chrysostom, Obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi quod in altari positum
est Sacrificij. Saint Cyrill. Hier. Cathec. Mist. 5.
S. Cyrill, and others, the thing which here I urge is, that the Church did in
S. Augustines time, receive that which he calls the Mediator, not with heart
only, but also (hoeuer to infidels the thing might appear horrible,) with the
mouth: that the Apostles did eat panem Dominum, bread the Lord; which bread,
understood well what they did: and that Judas, notwithstanding his malicious
infidelity, received (he does nor say the outward signs, only, as you do,
but) the price of our Redemption; adding that the faithful know it so to be.
Those know it that have learned the difference betwixt blood, and wine, betwixt
panis Dominus, the Mediator, and bakers bread. He knows it S. August. tract.
62. in Joan.
qui diiudicat, hoc est, discernit a caeteris cibis, Dominicum corpus with the
eye of faith who perceaues that (...) S Cyrill. Hier. Catech. t. 4.
that which appear bread, is not bread (in substance.) what then? (...) but
the body. the body? how? did not our Savior take bread? yes, he did; but
that Serin. de Caena Cypr.
bread being changed, not in shape, but in nature, is by the omnipotency of
the word made flesh: as you were told from Antiquity.

You will reply that the rest of the Apostles having faith did receive two
things, one with the body by the mouth, to wit, the outward elements or
signs: the other With the soul by faith, to wit the body and blood: which
later, Judas (wanting faith) could not do, and therefore only with his body
by the mouth received the signs, this, S. Augustine, you think, insinuates
when he says of him that he received panem Domini, having said of the rest
that they received panem Dominum.

Answer. of panis Dominus bread the Lord, the Mediator, you heard before from
S. Augustine, that the Church in his time, (it is the same of the Apostles,)
received it, not only with their heart or soul, but also with their mouth:
that mouth which, in his words is distinguished from the soul or heart. Of the
bread of our Lord, panis Domini, (which S. Augustine, expounding the 40.
Psalm, qui edebat panes meos, etc. says, Judas did eat contra Dominum
against our Lord, according as it was before prophesied,) I will speak
afterward; Per buccellam illum designauit, vt appareret de illo dictum, qui
edebat panes meos. S. Aug. Enar. Psalm. 40.
he designed him by the morsel, to make it appear that it was said of him, He
that eats my bread. Let that bread alone a while, and let us consider whether
Judas (who did not receive spirituallie) took any more, according to S.
Augustine, then only the outward sign. Sure, our Saviors blood, the price of
our Redemption, is more then your outward sign which you speak of; and Judas,
according to S. Augustine, received (he does not say the sign of the price,
but) that which the faithful know to be the price of our Redemption. such
indeed as had not faith, Judas himself, thought it bread and wine; but the
faithful, the rest of the Disciples, they knew that, in substance, the thing
was not bakers bread, as before consecration, but panis Dominus, bread the
Lord; not wine from the grape, but the price of our Redemption, Act. 20.28.
the very blood of God. Number now the things received by the rest (all that
is antecede^t to the effect which the Sacrament does give,) and the things
received by Judas, and see whether you can find what such thing they received
more, the signs, both received: the body and blood, the price of our
Redemption, both received; what is there else in the Sacrament that is
antecedent to the effect which it produces in the worthy receauer?

If we consider the effect of the Sacrament, the Apostles by it (by the
Sacrament) received increase of grace, they received it to life: but Judas
coming unworthily, with treason in his heart, increased by a sacrilegious act
the grieuousnes of his sin. A man ought to come with great reverence and
preparation to receive the benefits of God, but peculiarly to this Sacrament
wherein with the benefits he is to receive God himself, he ought to examine
himself well and look into every corner of his conscience that there be
nothing amiss in it when he comes that searches Jerusalem with a candle, and
hates iniquity with his heart. If malice, if abomination, be not removed, if
due preparation be not made, the Divine Justice will revenge the contempt or
neglect; and that also, for example of others, even (often) in this life, which
made the Apostle give a general warning unto all that offer to come to this
table, to try themselves first. 1. Cor. 11
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that
cup, and the reason. For he that eats and drinks unworthily eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body, not omitting to
mention the execution of Gods vindicatiue justice upon the transgressors. For
this cause many are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep. There are
in S. Cyprian, and other ancient Writers, S. Cypr. Sermon. de lapsis.
diverse examples of Gods judgments in this behalf upon such as ante expiata
delicta, ante exomologesin factam criminis, (mark this by the way, for
Confession;) ante purgatam conscientiam, have pressed in amongst communicantes
to receive; and thereby offered violence (as he spekes) to the body and blood
of Jesus Christ. But we need not go so far to fetch examples, the example of
him, we were but now speaking of, Judas, being notorious and most fearful. He
had received unworthily, and quickly after (his crime being enormous) the
Divine Justice permitted the Devil to take possession of him, and to use him in
the betraying of the son of God; and after, in the utter undoing of him self.

Our blessed Savior knowing this, did signify it in the reaching of a piece
of bread. Joan. 13. Luc. 22.
Cum intinxisset panem, dedit Iudae Simonis Iscariotae. Et post buxellam
introiuit in eum Satanas. When he had dipped in, the bread, he gave it to Judas
Iscariotes the son of Simon, and after the sop Satan entered into him. After
which, exiuit continuo, he presently went out about the treason, this was
panis Domini, quem manducabat contra Dominum. the poena, the execution of the
Divine Justice, did accompany it, he had before made himself liable hereunto:
but here began the manifest execution, and, by a new act of ingratitude in
resolving to betraie his Lord, and Master, who had admitted him to his table,
and with his own hand reached him bread, he merited (so we sometimes use the
word) that the execution should begin at this instant or moment. Which
ingratitude was so great that God in the Prophet, at the forsight of it, could
not (as it were) forbear to complain, long before, Psalm. 40. August. tract.
59. in Joan.
qui edebat panes meos (Saint Augustine reads, in the place objected panem
meum (...) magnificauit super me supplantationem. mine own familiar friend in
whom I trusted, he that did eat of my bread, has greatly trodden me under
foot. And this buccella, this panis Domini, was not the Sacrament according to
S. Augustine. Non vt putant quidam negligenter legentes, tunc Judas Christi
corpus accepit; intelligendum est enim quodiam omnibus eis distribuerat Dominus
Sacramentum Corporis and sanguinis sui, See S, August. tract. 62. in Joan.
vbi and ipse Judas erat, S. Tho. 3, p. q. 81 art 2 Card. Peron. Passag. S.
Aug. page 226 S. Aug tract 62 in Joan. Quid autem erat panis traditori datus,
nisi demonstracio cui gratiae fuisset ingratus? Intrauit autem Satanas post
hunc panem in Domini traditorem, vt sibi iam before possideret, in quem prius
intrauerat vt deciperet. S. Augu. Ibidem.
sicut Sanctus Lucas euidentissime narrat: Ac deinde ad hoc ventum est, vbi
secundum narrationem Ioannis apertissime Dominus per buccellam tinctam atque
porrectam suum exprimit traditorem. Judas did not then receive the body of our
Lord, as some who read negligentlie do think: for we must understand that our
Lord had already given the Sacrament of his body and blood to them all, where
Judas also was, as Saint Luke most plainly relates, and then afterward this
happened, where according to the relation of Saint John, our Lord by the morsel
dipped and given, did manifestly design the party that would betraie him. So
he, in his Co^mentarie upon S. John; where he has more to this purpose. By
this here cited, it is clear what he meant by panis Domini. he is his own
interpreter. What he meant by panis Dominus, and Mediator Dei and hominum, you
know too, not bread, not a mere sign or figure, not the Sacramental element
as you speak, with a reference to the body or grace; that is not panis
Dominus, bread the Lord; it is not Mediator Dei and hominum, the Mediator of
God and men, Who then? it follows, Homo Christus Jesus. Vide supra in Praefat.
and page...
See again the words of S. Chrysostom page 349 S. Cyrill page 350. and Origin
page 65.

I will not here dispute what the more learned of your men, Bilson, Hooker,
Andrews, etc. (some of them be cited by Montague in his Appeal c. 30) ^old in
this point whereon depend others of great weight. Either they take the words,
Hoc est corpus meum, in their If they do not: the proposition is with the^
meerelie figurative Feat: Page 294 and VVafer. page 35. vido sup. page 159. as
it is with others page 163.
native, proper sense, (...) or they do not? If they do not, the difference is
in obiecte; since we do. As, betwixt us, and Arians, about these Words Ego and
Pater vnum sumus, there is difference in obiecto. If they take them in their
native, proper sense, (...), they are consequently to admit (your Mor^o^^^^ed
above page 293.
Patron tells you,) the conseque^ces which you Puritans deny. amongst which
consequences you may find the modus. Nobis vobiscum de obiecto conuenit, says
Andrews to Bellarmine. Per ambiguitates bilingues, communem fidem adfirmant,
etc. Tertull. aduers. Valentin. Citatur inferius in solutione Arg. quinti. Do
Consilium vt aperte fidem Ecclesiae praedices, aut loquaris vt credis.
Dispensatio etenim ac libratio ista prudens verborum, indoctos decipere potest:
Cautus auditor and lector cito deprehendet insidias; and cuniculos quibus
veritas subuertitur, aperte in luce demonstrabit. Et Ariani quos optime nosti,
multo tempore propter scandalum nominis homousion se damnare simulabant,
venenaque erroris circumliniebant melle verborum. Sed tandem coluber se
tortuosus aperuit, and noxium caput quod spiris totius corporis tegebatur,
spirituali mucrone confossum est. S. Hieron. Aduerr. Joan, Hierosol. Ep. ad
Pammach. Quod si quando vrgeri coeperint, and aut subscribendum eis fuerit, aut
exeundum de Ecclesia, miras strophas videas. Sic verba temperant, sic ordinem
vertunt, and ambigua quaeque concinnant; vt and nostram and aduersariorum
confessionem teneant: vt aliter haereticus aliter catholicus audiat; quasi non
eodem spiritu and Apollo Delphicus atque Loxias oracula fuderit, Craeso and
Pyrrho diuersis temporibus sed pari illudens stropha. Exempli causa pauca
subijciam. Credimus, inquiunt, resurrectionem futuram corporum. Hoc si been
dicatur, pura confessio est. Sed quia corpora sunt coelestia and terrestria,
and aer iste and aura tenuis iuxta naturam suam corpora nominantur, corpus
ponunt non carnem: vt orthodoxus corpus audiens, carnem putet: haereticus
spiritum recognoscat. Haec est eorum prima decipula, quae si deprehensa fuerit,
instruunt alios dolos, and ^nnocentiam simulant, and maliciosos nos vocant; and
quasi simpliciter credentes, aiunt; Credimus resurrectionem carnis. Hoc vero
cum dixerint, vulgus indoctum putat sibi sufficere, maxim quia idipsum and in
^ymbolo creditur. Interroges vltra, circuli strepitus ^ommouentur, fautores
clamitant: Audisti resurre^tionem carnis; quid quaeris amplius? Et in peruersum
^udiis commutatis, nos sycophantae, illi simplices ap^ellantur. Quod si
obduraueris frontem, and vrgere ^oeperis, carnem digitis tenens, an ipsam
credant re^urrecturam quae cernitur, quae tangitur, quae incedit (...)
loquitur. primo rident: deinde annuu^t. Dicentibus^ue nobis, vtrum capillos and
dentes, pectus and ven^em, manus and pedes, caeterosque artus ex integro
^essurrectio exhibeat: tunc vero, risu se tenere non ^ossunt, cachinnoque ora
soluentes, tonsores nobis ^ecessarios and placentas and medicos ac sutores
ingerunt. ^dem S. Hieron. de Error. Orig. in Epist. ad Pammach and ^cean.

Congregatis Episcopis, volentibusque voces im^etatis ab Arianis inuentas e
medio tollere. -- and litte^rum sacrarum voces certas and confessas scripto
com^ecti; nimirum, ex Deo esse silium, and natura vnige^tum esse verbum, cumque
solum virtutem and sapie^^am esse patris, and verum Deum esse, vt Ioannes
dixit, ^ splendorem gloriae, and formam substantiae patris vt ^aulus scripsit:
hic Eusebiani prauas suas opiniones quentes, inter sese mussitate: Imus quoque
and nos, inquientes, in vestram sententiam. Nam and nos quoque ex Deo sumus,
etc S. Athanas. Epist ad Episc. Aphric. Episcopis vero denuo interrogantibus
paucos istos, Anne agnoscerent Filium, non creaturam esse, sed virtutem and
vnicam sapientiam Patris, and per omnia imaginem indemutabilis patris, and Deum
verum? Deprehensum est Eusebianos inter se conlusuriate and annuere; nimirum,
quasi ista etiam ad ipsos pertinerent. Nam and nos, inquientes, imago and
gloria Dei appellamur, -- Quod si etiam Deum verum Filium nuncupent, id and nos
quoque non male habet, quoniam verus Deus factus est. Haec Arianorum corrupta
and pe^uersa men's. Caeterum Episcopi intellecta eorum fraud, collegerunt in
vnum has voces etc. Ibid. Non omnibus dormio.

Post panis vinique benedictionem, se suum ipsiu^ corpus praebere ac suum
sanguinem disertis ac perspicuis ve^bis (Christus) testatus est. Quae verba a
sanctis Euangelistis commemorata, and a D Paulo postea repetita cum propriam
illam ac apertissimam significationem praese ferant, secundum quam a Patribus
intellecta sunt, indignissimum ^^ne flagitium est ea a quib^sdam contentiosis
and prauis hominibus ad fictitios and imaginarios tropos quibus veritas carnis
and sanguinis Christi negatur, contra vniuersum Ecclesiae sensum detorqueri.
Conc. Trident. Sess. 13. c. 1. Animam sub vtraque, vi naturalis illius
connexionis and concomitantiae qua parts Christi Domini etc. c. 3.

Quid? credant ne filio ita dicenti. Ego and Pater vnum sumus? Certe inquient,
quia ita scriptum est, credimus, Sed quomodo vnum sint etc. S. Athan. vbi supra.


and more particularly in his 9. Sermon Of the Resurrection, page 476. At the
name of JESUS every kn^e should bow etc Philippens 2. If to his name, then
your arguments against relative image worship are confessedlie inualid.
His name, He, Jesus, has left behind to us, that we may show by our
reverence and respect to it, how much we esteem Him; how true the Psalm
shall be, Holy and reverend is his Name. But if we have much ado to get it
bow at all: much more shall we have to get it done to his name. There be some
that do it not. What speak I of not doing it? there be that not only forbear
to do it themselves, but put themselves (he speaks of Puritans) to an evil
occupation, to find faults where none is, and cast scruples into men's minds,
by no means to do it. Not to do it at his name? Nay at the Holy mysteries
themselves, not to do it: where his name is (I am sure) and more then his name,
even the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and those, not without his
soul; nor that without his Deity: nor all these, without inestimable high
benefits of grace attending on them. So he, your Doctor Andrews. Are these
things, all, within your communion-bread? surely no, Jesus, a Savior.
secundu^ ratione^ spiritualis and Vniuersalis salutis, nomen est proprium
Christo. S. Th. 3. p q. 37. a. 2. Ego sum Dominus, and non est absque me
Saluator. Isa. 43.
Not more, nor so much, as in his Name, the soul, (for example,) is not there,
at all, any way, no not as in a sign. unless at leingth, the words of
Institution, sound with you thus, Hoc, est, corpus meum; this bread, does
signify, my soul. Which interpretation had your Doctor Carolstadius ex his
sacrosanctis vocabulis, Hoc est corpus meum, misere distorquet pronome^ Hoc.
Suinglius autem verbum substantivum Est, macerat. Oecolampadius nomen Corpus,
torturae subiicit. Alij totum textum excarnificant and inuertunt. -- Alij
dimidiam partem textus crucifigunt, -- Alij dicunt non esse articulos fidei,
ideoque non esse de hi^ contendendum, liberum enim cuique esse vt hic sentiat
quicquid velit. Hi omnia pedibus conculcant and destruunt Veruntamen Spiritus
Sanctus est in his singulis and nullus vult erroris argui in his tam diuersis
and contrariis probationibus and textus ordinationibus cum tamen vnam tantum
textus collocationem vera^ esse oporteat. Adeo crasse and manifest Diabolus
no^ naso suspendit. Luther. Desens. verb. coenae page 387,
Grandfather heard of, he would with open laughter have redoubled his crasse
and manifest Diabolus vos naso suspendit.


The fourth Argument was taken out of Gratian and the Gloss, that the
Heavenly bread is the flesh of Christ secundum que^dam modum. It was Answered
that the Gloss which does use the word Sacramentum, speaks of that which is
Sacramentum tantum: and Gratian of the Canon, says the Heavenly bread which
includes the flesh of Christ, is the visible flesh or body secundum quemdam
modum.
Apologist. For satisfaction concerning Gratian, if you but please to read D.
Featlie on another occasion, you shall find him instead of yielding that
Gratian contradictes himself, prove that he oppugnes your transubstantiation.
See the Conference betwixt D. Featlie and M. Musket, page 60. etc.


Censure. He must look for satisfaction somewhere else, it seems, who does
expect it; as no man ever did from you to my knowledge. Well! at your request,
I have turned unto the Conference, and the page 60. What is there?

Featlie. I make a breach upon you with two Canons; the Canon-lawe, and the
Canon of your mass.

Answer. Nonne hoc spumosum?

But stay: let us make a demurre upon the Doctors preface, and consider whether
it be likely that he does urge Authority, sincerely. He who does offer to
persuade us, that the Canon-lawe, that Gratian, that the Mass it self is
against the real presence, as here in this argument he undertakes to do, what
will he not affirm? what testimonies will he not press to serve him? what so
strong that he will not wrest? what so sacred that he will not violate? he
might as well urge against us the Canon made at Trent, in this matter, and
outface me, that in this defense, I, do not avouch, but oppose it. I cannot
think him in his wits that undertakes to persuade me, white is black: neither
is he much wiser that takes on him to know the meaning of the Church better
then She her self. Ea quae in voce, Arist.
su^t earum quae in anima passionum notae. Where the words are obscure or
a^biguous, it is better the speaker interpret his own mind: then you that are
not of his counsel.

I am sent hither by Waferer, to see how the Doctor does urge the Canon of
Gratian; which I will examine, God willing, before I return to look again on
his pamphlet: but, since instead of one Canon I find two, drawn together, to
make the greater noise; I must give the one a lift, to remove it out of my
way, before I meddle with the other. Which way the mouth of it stands, the
Doctor (he stood in his own light,) could not see. He tells us (...) it is
against the Real presence. Why so Master Featlie? because Featl. Conf. with M.
Musk. page 66.
it is very incongruous to pray to God to look down mercifully upon Christ,
and to accept the body and blood of his son, as he did Abels sacrifice of
first fruits: yet the Canon of the Mass does so, Offerimus tibi de tuis donis
and datis hostiam puram etc. panem sanctum vitae aeternae and calicem salutis
perpetuae: supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris and accepta
habere sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui Abel. We offer unto
thee of thy benefits and gifts, a pure host, -- the holy bread of eternal
life and the chalice of everlasting salvation. Upon which vouchsafe to look
down with a favorable clear countenance, and to accep of, and auow them, as
thou have vouchsafed to accept of the gifts or oblations of Abel thy child.

Answer. That quae, is not referd, as you pretend, to Christ, or his body
absolute. read again and mark it. Neither would any scholar conclude
(suppose your premises had been right,) ergo the Canon denies the real
presence: it affirms it, and in those very words. But rather thus, ergo that
prayer is not well conceived. or, is incongruous. Which is far from your mark.

Wherefore to help out your argument, you add an other piece. Per quem
(Christum) haec omnia Domine semper bona creas, sa^ctificas, viuificas,
benedicis and praestas nobis; by whom o Lord thou do ever create, sanctify,
quicken, bless, and bestow upon us all these good things. Whence, your
inference is, as before, that the Canon is against the real presence. But I
turn it upon you. The words cannot be verified without a real presence, ergo
the Canon, by them, does make for the real presence. And the ancient Fathers
who dedeclare themselves to be directly for the real presence, use the same
kind of speech. To begin in S. Cyprians time, one, as ancient as he, tells
us, vsque hodie veracissimum Corpus suum creat, and sanctificat, and benedicit.
till this very day, he does create, and sanctify, and bless his own most
true (not a mere figure then,) and most holy body. How so? let the same
Author tell, how the Sacrament (for of that the Cano^ speaks,) is made, Panis
iste non effigy sed natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. Well,
but how quickened? and sicut in persona Christi humanitas videbatur and latebat
Diuinitas, ita Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter Diuina se infundit essentia.
Another; Influit oblatis vim vitae conuertens ea in veritatem propriae carnis,
vt corpus vitae quasi quoddam semen viuificatiuum inueniatur in nobis. Sermon. de
Coena Cyp. S. Cyril. Alex. Epist. ad Calos.
That bread being changed not in shape but in nature, is by the omnipotency of
the word made flesh: and as in the Person of Christ the Humanity did appear
and the Divinity lie hid, so (here) a Divine Essence does vnspeakeablie
infuse it self into a visible Sacrament. He does flow into the things offered
the power of life, converting them into the verity of his own flesh: that the
body of life might as a certain quickening seed be found in us. The like is in
S. Chrrysostome, S. Ambrose, and others; as you might have learned partly out
of Gratian whom you cite, had you but read him.

Moreover, in Scripture it self, these words have a larger sense then that
which you conceive. Joan. 17.
Ego pro eis sanctifico meipsum. there sanctifico is offero, or sacrifico:
himself being (as the words import) both the victime and the Priest. Psalm. 101.
Populus qui creabitur laudabit Dominum. Psalm. 50.
Cor mundum crea in me Deus. Praecipio 1. Timot. 6.
tibi coram Deo qui viuificat omnia. These words, viuificat, and creabitur,
have a latitude as you see. And, since almighty God does not only give life,
but still conserve it, Hebr. 1.
portans omnia verbo virtutis suae; why may not he be said in that regard also,
still to quicken; why cannot an action of omnipotency able to abstract
accidents from the subject still keeping them in being, and under them to make
a succession of substances, be called (in large sense at least) creation? since
none but the Creator can, in chief or as principal, produce this effect? and
he, who puts in the Sacrament the bread of life, which heavenly bread lives it
self, and gives life to the receauers, why may he not be said (in a large sense
at least,) to quicken the things that are before the Priest?

And you Master Featlie, that are so strait-laced as not to suffer words to be
ever used but in one sense, and that (of all) the most rigorous, what sense
will you find in Scripture, where words are not, ever used so? or, to forbear
that question and come nearer, how will you expound (of bread and wine, which
is your intent) these words by you objected? Haec omnia Domine semper bona
creas, sanctificas, viuificas; and the like before cited out of the Fathers?
was your communion-bread made of nothing? is it alive? did the Church in her
liturgy mean to profess this? was this the Fathers meaning? show me (to use
your own words, Featl. pga. 68.
Master Featlie) in what tolerable sense (those elements) may be said
co^tinuallie to be created and made alive, since before they cannot be said not
to have been, or to have been dead. Creatio est ex nihilo, Viuificatio est
rei prius mortuae aut non viuae. So you, inuoluing your credit in a
difficulty, out of which you will never extricate your self till you believe
as we do.

But, there is a prayer (to resume that argument for the Readers sake) supra
quae propitio and sereno vultu respicere digneris etc. True, there is indeed
such a prayer: and the quae, that is in it, (which word you catch at,) reflects
on things otherwise, and more, then you imagine. Haec quotiescumque feceritis
-- vnde offerimus -- supra quae propitio and sereno vultu respicere digneris,
and accepta habere, sicut -- vt quotquot ex hac altaris participatione --
repleamur per Christum --. See the like (and withal the meaning of it,) in the
Liturgy of S. James, Respice in nos, and ad nostrum hoc rationabile obsequium,
idque accipe vt Abel dona accepisti, -- ita quoquee manibus nostris qui
peccatores sumus, recipe (...) Apocalypse, a Prophecy which thou have been
pleased to inspire and suggest unto one of his Disciples, we read that an
Angel came and stood before the Altar (the Altar of thy mercy) Apoc. 8.
with a golden censer, and that there was given unto him much incense, that he
should offer of the prayers of the Saints. and, that the smoke of the incense
ascended from his hand before thee, o God. And we, though not yet Saints, be
consecrated unto thee in the blood of thy dear Son, wherefore let our
incense, our prayers, ascend too. Iube haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli
tui in sublime altar tuum in conspectu Diuinae Maiestatis tuae, vt quotquot ex
hac Altaris participatione sacrosanctu^ filij tui corpus and sanguinem
sumpserimus omni benedictione coelesti and gratia repleamur per eundem Christum
Dominum nostrum. Command, o God, these things to be brought by the hands of
thy holy Angel unto thy holy Altar in the view of thy Divine Majesty, that
we, as many of us as by this participation of the Altar shall receive the most
holy body and blood of thy Son, may be replenished with all heavenly
blessing and grace through the same Christ our Lord. So the prayer which you
speak of; in the Canon of the Mass.

I have staid so long upon it, that Waferer, who sent me to look upon the
place of Gratian: will think I have for fear, taken Sanctuary, and dare not
appear to answer it against his Master Featlie; who having ^got the Canon
ready, is leuelling it against our cause: and (since now I am defending it)
against me. The Minister by a stratagem has gotten me just before his Doctor,
and I may not (without loss of honor) step back or run away.

Well: stand I must. But is this thin paper (my poor armor) Canon-proof?
the bullets will fly thorough and thorough; or, I shall be blown away out of
rerum natura. If I be killed, Master Mirth, you will singe my Dirge^ and laugh, a
peale or two. I leave you this writing for a remembrance of me; and for your
greater comfort, will tell you mine; that if I die in this cause I shall need
no more Canonizing.

Your aim is (M. Featlie) to prove that our Saviors flesh, is not under the
species or accidents of bread, after Consecration. I am directly opposite. I
say, it is there. Give fire to your Canon.

Featlie. Gratian has these words. As the Heavenly bread, which is Christ's
flesh after a sort or manner is called Christ's body, whereas indeed it is the
Sacrament of his body: and the sacrifice of the flesh of Christ which is done
by the Priests hands is said to be his Passion, death, and crucifying, not in
the truth of the thing but in a signifying mystery. Thus Gratian.

Answer. And well: had it not been your misfortune (shall I mitigate your
action by that word?) to corrupt the text, by omitting that substantial and
intrinsecall part of the sentence which answers directly to that argument you
made out of it; as will appear in the ensuing citation and discussion. In
regard whereof, in the other See the Co^fer. page 68. and Feat. Relat. page 295.
Conference where you did object the same words (as unanswerable) you broke of
the citation before you came to them: which was no great argument of fair
dealing in the trial of so great a cause. Was it not this which Waferer meant
when he said Featlies argument was VVafer. page 50.
mincinglie produced? If the Canon thus corrupted, do chance anon to burst, and
and the pieces fly about your ears, each enough to confound you, thank your
self. To the text of Gratian, so alleged, you join words out of the Gl^sse,
which are cited above in the Catholic Relation page 68. and shall be brought
again when their turn comes. The text must go first.

Featlie. In this allegation, unless you will tax Gratian with false quoting,
there is a threefold Cable which cannot easily be broken, first Saint
Augustines authority, out of whom S. Prosper collecteth this sentence:
secondly S. Prospers, who in effect relates it, and approues it: and thirdly
Gratians, who inserts it into the body of the Canon-lawe, and cites both for
it.

Answer. We shall be held hard to it (it seems) with this triple Cable. and
this mustering of men together, to make good the breach which the Canon (you
presume) will make in our Cause, makes a great noise amongst the unlearned, who
expect by this time when the mountains will bring forth.

Featlie. The words of Gratian and the Gloss here are so clear against your
real presence of Christ's body under the accidents of bread and wine, Brutum
Fulmen.
that never any Protestant spoke more expreslie and directly against it.

Answer. Implerunt cornua bombis.

Featl. page 62.
I think I must bid you, as Master Musket did, Frame your argument out of those
words.

Featlie. Gratian here speaks of the bread after consecration, for before it
is consecrated it is not Coelestis panis heavenly bread, much less caro
Christi, Christ's flesh; by your own confession. But here he says this
heavenly bread is but after a sort Christ's body and not indeed, as the
opposition betwixt suo modo, after a sort, and reuera indeed, plainly shows
(as if I should say, that picture is after a sort, or in some sense, Caesar's,
it being indeed the true picture of Caesar) Therefore after consecration the
Sacrament is not in truth Christ's body, but only in a signifying mystery.

Answer. If you take the bumbast out of this Argument, it will be more in
fashion; though not altogether. The Sacrament consists (you were told before)
of two things; the one visible, the other invisible: the Controversy is not
whether all this be the body, (the species or shape of bread, may signify but
cannot be, a man's body;) but whether the body be reallie according to the
substance within that accide^tall shape, whether it be contained (as the
Council speaks) in the Sacrament. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. Supra, page 182. and
seqq. Supra, page 73.
You have been told also that a thing may represent or signify that which
(according to the substance) is within it: and that a substance, under two
several forms, may by the one signify it self as in the other.

The Doctors Argument out of the Canon does touch upon these two points,
wherefore I am to see whether it does affirm or deny them. 1. Whether the
body be or be not in the Sacrament. 2. Whether by the Sacramental form be
signified the natural form or shape as it was upon the Cross, the substance
under them both being the same.

In his Minor, (for his Argument is an ill favored kind of Syllogism,) he
has imposed: for, these words, this heavenly bread is but after a sort
Christ's body and not indeed, (what ever meaning they might have) be not in the
text, several pieces be deceitfullie patcht together, for advantage. That the
Reader may see, and judge, I will represent here the Canon it self; VVafer. p.
50.
by parts, for the Doctors engine may be taken in pieces; and at leingth,
because the Apologist complains this Argument was mincinglie produced. The
first part.

Hoc est quod dicimus, hoc modis omnibus adprobare contendimus, Sacrificium
scilicet Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare; visibili elementorum
specie, and inuisibili D. N. I. C. carne and sanguine: Sacramento and re
Sacrameti: sicut Christi persona constat and conficitur Deo and Homine, cu^
ipse Christus verus sit Deus and verus homo: quia omnis res illarum rerum
naturam and veritatem in se continet ex quibus conficitur, conficitur autem
Sacrificium Ecclesiae Sacramento and re Sacramenti, id est corpore Christi. Est
igitur Sacramentum and res Sacramenti id est corpus Christi. It is this we
say, this it is which we labor by all means to prove, namely that the
Sacrifice of the Church is made and does consist of, two things, the visible
species of the elements and the invisible (...) and blood of Christ. And this
is that mincha, that clean oblation (as the Fathers tell us,) which is offered
by the Church every where; according as the Prophet Malachie did foretell. I
come now to the second part of the Canon wherein the difficulties that might
occur about this, be dissolved, our cause more confirmed; and yours directly
contradicted.

Caro eius (Christi) est quam forma panis opertam in sacramento accipimus, and
sanguis cius quemsub vini specie and sapore potamus. Caro videlicet carnis, and
sanguis Sacramentum est sanguinis: carne and sanguine, vtroque inuisibili,
intelligibili, spirituali, significatur visibile Domini N. I. C. corpus
palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutum, and Diuina Maiestate. His flesh it is
which in the Sacrament we receive covered with the form (or species) of
bread, and his blood which we drink under the species and savor of wine. The
flesh indeed is a Sacrament of the flesh, and the blood is a Sacrament of the
blood. By flesh and blood both invisible, intelligible, spiritual, is
signified the visible, palpable body of our Lord Jesus Christ, full of the
grace of all virtues and of Divine Majesty. You see how it says first that
our Saviors flesh is covered in the Sacrament with the (exterior) form of
bread; and the like of his blood, which is in the form of wine: Caro eius est
quam forma panis opertam etc. with what face then could you say that Gratians
words are clear against the real presence of Christ's body under the
accidents (or exterior form) of bread? or, Featlie page 61.
that this heavenly bread (according to the substance) is not indeed Christ's
body, but a sign only? Seco^dlie it says (which ruins utterly all
Waferers silly discourse against S.E. upon this occasion) that the flesh
here, is a Sacrament of flesh; and the blood, a Sacrament of blood. Caro
videlicet carnis and sanguis Sacramentum est sanguinis. in explication whereof
it says Thirdly, that the invisible and spiritual flesh which is here
covered with the exterior form or accidents of bread does signify the
visible and palpable body of our Lord Jesus Christ and the like it is of the
invisible and spiritual blood. carne and sanguine, vtroque inuisibili,
intelligibili, spirituali, significatur visible etc. Whereby we are instructed
against Featlie when he says page 63. that Gratia^ does not oppose modu^ modo,
Featlie page 63.
the manner to the manner (when he compares the consecrated bread to the ble
body,) but modum rei verae, and veritati rei; the manner to the truth of the
thing; and (that) therefore in saying it is suo modo there, Featlie Ibidem.
he implies that it is not there truly, or in the truth of the thing,
visiblie or invisibly. for the text of Gratian does affirm the flesh to be
there invisibly; covered with the form of bread. and, that this invisible
spiritual flesh of Christ is a sign of, or does signify, his visible body;
as has been observed from the words before cited. After which ensue those
which Fealie stands upon, being the third part of the Canon, in this tenor.

Sicut ergo Coelestis panis qui vere Christi caro est (the Doctor, perchance
according to the coppie which he did use, leaves out vere) suo modo vocatur
corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi, (how so, if it be
vere corpus Christi? it follows, and exactlie, according to the doctrine of
the former part, carne inuisibili significatur visibile corpus:) ill^us
videlicet quod visibile, palpabile, mortale, in cruce suspensum; (this Featlie
conninglie left out: whereas it is indeed the solution of his Argument.
Hitherto one (...) of a comparison; now follows another) Vocaturque ipsa
immolatio carnis quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio mors crucifixio,
non rei veritate sed significante mysterio: (now comes the (...) common to them
both;) sic Sacrame^tum fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As
therefore the heavenly bread which indeed is the flesh of Christ, is after a
sort called the body of Christ, whereas in truth it is the Sacrament of the
body of Christ, I mean of that which being visible, palpable, mortal, was
put upon the Cross; and (as) that immolation of the flesh which is done by
the hands of the Priest is called the passion, death, and crucifixion, not rei
veritate in verity of the thing, but significante mysterio in a signifying
mystery: So the Sacrament of faith, Baptism I mean, is faith. The force and
life of which comparison you have in S.E. page 72. Here breeflie I observe
that this text, in the double (...) speaks of two things; the one is the flesh
of Christ in the Sacrament, which it calls panem Coelestem: the other is the
act of immolation performed by the Priest, which it calls immolationem carnis.
Of the first of these it says again, two things: the one appertaining to the
quid of it in ratione rei; telling us that it is according to the interior
substance caro Christi: the other appertaining to it as it has put on rationem
signi; telling us that it is Sacramentum corporis Christi visibilis and
crucifixi. Of the second also two; the one that it is a mystical mactatio^,
crucifying, death, of Christ: the other, that it is not his death or crucifyi^g
in rei veritate. Vocatur immolatio carnis quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Christ^
passio non rei veritate sed significante mysterio.
The two former things, vizt the heavenly bread, and the act of Immolation,
Featlie (either of ignorance or of purpose) does confound: so to draw upon the
one (against the authors intention, expressed in clear terms, more then
once, or twice;) all that is avouched of the other which prooceeding, in a
matter of this nature, urged and insisted upon in two several disputations (to
decrie the real presence of the body of our Savior in the signs, which when
Luther began, was believed by all the known Christian Churches in the world,
and is so plainly delivered in Scripture that the greatest Protestants in the
world were in conscience thereby confessedlie convinced; Luther. Melan^^ton,
etc.
) and not urged only, but also several times printed, to the ruin of poor
souls which esteem him a great clerck; gives us just occasion to complain of
it as vnworth^e of a Scholar; and in it self unconscionable. And to think, as
Waferer does, that he thereby proves Gratian to oppugn transsubstantiation,
or, that his discourse does satisfy what S. E. had said about the text, is a
sign that the judgment or understanding power is in the man defective. But
stay we are to answer his interrogatorie, that will kill the cause.

Featlie. Has Christ tWo bodies, one visible and palbable, an other invisible?
and the (heavenly) bread is truly the one, and s^ Sacrament only of the
other?

Answer. Not two according to the substance, the Dualitie is in the manner, it
is the same body, which on the Cross was visible, in the Sacrament it is
invisible, and, as having one of these manners of existencie, it was a sign
the text says, of it self, as in the other; carne and sanguine vtroque
inuisibili, there is the body in one manner of existe^cie, significatur
visibile Domini corpus, there is the same body in an other manner of
existencie again, that caro quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus,
and, the caro crucifixa, are in substance but one. Corpus visibile, palpabile,
in cruce suspensum, and coelestis panis qui vere Christi caro est, or, as he
does otherwise also call it, caro inuisibilis intelligibilis, spiritualis; are
according to the substance, but one thing.

Had you cast your eye on that which in Gratian follows, out of S. Jerome, you
had seen a further confirmation of this double manner, together with the
solution of your difficulty. Dupliciter intelligitur caro Christi, and
sanguis: vel spiritalis illa atque Diuina, de qua ipse ait (caro mea vere est
cibus and sanguis meus vere est potus, and nisi mand caueritis carnem meam and
biberitis meum sanguinem non habebitis vitam aeternam;) vel caro quae crucifixa
est, and sanguis qui militis effusus est lancea. The flesh and blood of Christ
is understood two ways: either that spiritual and Divine, whereof he himself
says my flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drink indeed; and, unless you
eat my flesh and drink my blood you shall not have everlasting life: or the
flesh which was crucified, and the blood which by the soldiers lance was
powered out. according to this distinction of the same flesh, secu^dum d^uersos
modos, he does resolve an other difficulty of videbit and non videbit, both
verified in the same, being taken according to diverse manners of existing.
Iuxta hanc diuisionem, and in sanctis eius (Christi) diuersitas carnis and
sanguinis accipitur, Com. in c. 1. ad Ephesians.
vt alia sit caro quae visura est salutare Dei: alia caro and sanguis quae
regnum non queant possidere. According to this distinction, the diversity of
flesh and blood is taken also in the Saints: that it be one flesh which is to
see the salvation of God; another flesh and blood which cannot possess the
kingdom. How another? how alia and alia? secundum substantiam? no that were
not to reconcile Scripture, but to decrie Scripture, and the common Article of
the Resurrection: but, alia and alia secundum modum. And, of the flesh of
Christ in like manner; that spiritual and Divine flesh which he says we are
to eat, and the flesh which was crucified be not alia and alia secundum
substantiam; no: be they Master Featlie? diuina quae vere cibus, and crucifixa;
be these alia and alia secundum substantiam? you will not say they be: but alia
and alia secundum modum.

When the Scripture says, God gave Saul another heart, the meaning is not that
he took out that which was before, and put in place, another, substantiallie
distinct; but it was another in the manner or accidental being and S.
Augustine cont. Adamant. Cum induerit (corpus) in corruptionem and
immortalitatem, iam non caro and sanguis, sed in corpus Coeleste mutabitur.
and, de fide and symbol^. In Coelestibus nulla caro, sed corpora simplicia and
lucida, quae appellat Apostolus spiritualia. S. Aug. con. Adimant. c. 12.
when the body shall have put on incorruption, and immortality, (it shall be)
now not flesh and blood but it shall be changed into an heavenly body. Idem
De fide and Symb. cap 10. Credimus and carnis resurrectionem. Non tantum quia
reparatur anima, quae nunc propter carnales affectiones caro nominatur: sed
haec etiam visibilis caro quae naturaliter est caro, cuius nomen anima non
propter naturam, sed propter affectiones carnales accepit. Haec ergo visibilis,
quae caro proprie dicitur, sine dubitatione crede^da est, resurgere. S. Aug.
Ibidem. Si mutatis moribus dicimus hominem non esse qui fuit, si denique
mutatis aetatibus ipsum corpus non dicimus esle quod fuit: quanto magis ipsum
non erit, tanta conuersione mutatum vt non solum immortaliter viuat, verum
etiam inuisibilem videat. S. Aug. Epist. 111. Non hoc corpus quod videtis etc.
Supra. page 53. Vide ibi marg. Ait mod^cum et iam non videbitis me, quia eum
corporaliter tunc videbant quando iturus erat ad patrem; and eum deinceps
mortalem visuri non erant, qualem cum ista loqueretur videbant. tract. 101. in
Joan.
In the coelestialls, no flesh, but simple and bright bodies, which the Apostle
calls spiritual. He that conceaues what is said before of the manner of
defining which the Supra, page 301. and seq.
natural Philosopher does use, will understand this easily. and this, here
affirmed, by these learned Fathers, according to the manner which the Scripture
also does frequent in speech, is a double confirmation of that Philosophy.

Featlie. Gratian opposes not modum modo, but modum rei verae and veritati rei.

Answer, This is answered allrea^ie: In the first part of this (...) he does
oppose modum modo. he does oppose the invisible flesh, conu^red with the form
of bread, to the same flesh as it is visible: and says that the former is a
sign of the lather. Which I have plainly shown by the text it self, and
have produced the words wherein this is evidently affirmed. In the second part
of the (...) he does oppose one action to another; or, one manner of
immolation: to another manner of immolation affirming the Consecration or act
of unbloody immolation to be the bloody passion, not in rei veritate, to
consecrate is not to crucify; but significante mysterio; as has been also
told you. Moreover, the confounding of these two, thereby to conclude the
flesh not to be there, in the Sacrament, according to the truth of the thing,
visible or invisibly, (so you speak,) has been detected for a gross
corruption, repugnant to the text.

Featlie. And now having brandished the sword of the text of Gratian, let us
see how you can ward a blow with the scabbard, the Gloss.

Answer. The lightning of your sword was like the thundering of your Canon.
Surely Doctor, it was a violent Objection, this.

Belli ferratas portas, vectesque refregit.

Wars iron gates it has burst up, and Bars.

Featlie ex Glossa. Dicitur Corpus Christi improprie suo modo, non rei
veritate, vt sit sensus vocatur corpus Christi, id est significatur.

Answer. If Soldiers when the sword cannot pierce, nor the Canon make a
breach, should give an onset with their scabbards, what Elogium befits them,
Doctor? the scabbard too should be fit for the sword; the commentary should
be according to the text; or neither is good. Who told you that Deuines were to
be directed in the understanding of matters purelie Theological, by a Canon
Lawier? or, that the Author of the Gloss did fully comprehend the text? which
(as you have seen, and so much he saw too) contradictes the fond Heresy of
empty signs, and bakers bread moreover, the Gloss it self in plain terms
affirms (as you find cited in S.E) that bread is transubstantiated into the
body, Supra, page 75.
that where before was bread and wine, there is now (after consecration) the
accidents (of them) only, that under those accidents the flesh and blood (of
Christ) do lie hid and are covered; and the reason; least there might be
horror in receiving, if the shape of raw flesh and blood should appear. And
yet forsooth if we believe you, the words of Gratian and the Gloss here (in
the scrappe you cite perchance) are so clear against the Real presence of
Christ's body under the accidents of bread and wine, that never any Protestant
spoke more expreslie, Featl. page 61.
as if an Atheist out that place Dixit insipiens in cord suo non est Deus,
should cite for himself only the later part non est Deus, and then avouch that
never Atheist did speak more expreslie. Is this your sincerity? is this fair
proceeding in the trial of Religion? and, must the press groan under this?
the monument of the great Disputant must it be built upon these pillars? and
his Statua be adorned with a garland of these flowers? O Conscience! o Religion!

In the Relation set forth by S. E. Doctor Featlie is said to have
acknowledged that Gratian did contradict himself: Page 70.
who then can excuse this his urging of the place again, in a second
Disputation; and printing of it afterward twice; still pressing the place
against the Real presence; once anno 1624. in diuulging one Conference; and
again anno 1630. in the publishing of another, who ca^ say that in urging
these men's Authority he did not impugn a known truth? or if he did not know
it, if he could not understand their words, what mist was there in his
understanding? what ignorance, in so great a Rabbin?

But hear his Echo, in the Apology. In this Section (wherein the place of
Gratian and the Gloss are discussed) so far as Doctor Smith and his Antagonist
argue, VVafer. page 50.
if you peruse the places you shall find the arguments (though so mincinglie
here produced) unsatisfied, where you are forced to put a trick on Doctor
Featlie, and make him confess against Gratian, least his Lordship should be
non-plust. I can not but pity such slender policy. But for satisfaction
concerning Gratian if you but please to read Doctor Featlie on another
occasion, (in his Conference with M. Musket, page 61. etc.) you shall find him
instead of yiedling that Gratian contradicts himself, prove that he oppugnes
your transsubstantiation. Thus innocentlie, the godly sincere Brother Cui nec
Ara, nec --

I now return to the words objected, putting you first in mind (which
Featlie does acknowledge was told him in the Conference) Featl. page 29^
that three things in a Sacrament are to be considered, as Divines note; 1.
that which is Sacramentum tantum. 2. that which is res Sacramenti tantum. Vide
Suar. 3. p. to. 3. disp 1, Sect 3. Tria distingnu^tura Theologis in Sacramentis
novae legis, res tantum, etc. Et disp. 42. Sect. 1. 3. 4. Magist. in 4 d. 8. S.
Tho. 3. p. q 73. a. 1. Ibidemque Co^mentatores.
3. that which is both res and Sacramentum that which is (here) Sacramentum
tantum, be the species of bread and wine, which are signs, but are not
reallie, either, of the things by them signified: that which is res Sacramenti
tantum, is grace which is signified by the Sacrament (as you may know by the
general definition) but it self not being visible, is no sign, of this S.
Bernard speaks in the place cited by Waferer page 49. rem Sacramenti nemo
percipit nisi dignus. that which is both Sacramentum and res Sacramenti, as
signifying and being also signified, is the body of our Savior in the sign.
According to this distinction, commonly received and known when the
Glossatour made his exposition, it was answered that he spoke of that which is
Sacramentum tantum, to wit the specie, which are not reallie and properly the
body and blood of Christ, but improperlie and significatiue only. to which
meaning his own words would have directed you. Sacramentum, scilicet species
visibilis, the Sacrament that is, the visible species. and, species panis sub
qua latet corpus Christi, est Sacramentum carnis, the species of bread which
has under it our saviors body, is the Sacrament of Post consecrationem
sacerdotis, quae sacrificium dicitur, duo sunt ibi, scilicet Sacramentum and
res Sacramenti; quae ante consecrationem ibi non erent. Glossa. ad Can, Hoc
est. and again. Sieve sacrificium hic dicatur ipsum Sacramentum, scilicet
species visibilis: sieve corpus Christi: sieve immolatio (so he took it when he
said it was consecratio) corporis Christi: non est verum quod hic dicit,
scilicet quod constat ex Sacramento and re Sacramenti; (none of these are
constituted of the two things here especified) sed tenentur collectiue, pro
ipso Sacramento and re Sacramenti. Ibidem. Caro, id est, species panis, sub
qualatet corpus Christi, est Sacramentum carnis Christi. and sanguis, id est,
species vini sub qua latet sanguis Christi, est Sacramentum sanguinis Christi,
Ibidem. Coelestis panis, id est, coeleste Sacramentum quod vere repraesentat
Ch^isti carnem, dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie. Ibidem, Caro Christi
potest intelligi secundum illam formam and quantitatem quam habuit in cruce:
vel secundum quant tatem corporis glorificati quod spirituale videtur, quod
nulli sensui subiacet. Idem, ad Can. Dupliciter. Non hoc corpus manducaturi
estis, id est, non in eadem specie, vel grossitie, vel repraesentatione, sed in
Sacramento. Idem, ad Can. Prima. Licet enim vbique sit etiam in altari quolibet
in vera forma quam de Virgin sumpsit; non tamen subiicitur corporeis sensibus.
Ibidem. Vide quae de transubstantiatione tradit, page 75.
flesh.

That he spoke of this exterior shape, and not of the thing within it, it is
yet further manifest by that which has been cited out of him touching the
real existence of the body, under that form; and the turning of bread into
it. See the Conference page 75.

An understanding Reader, by this which has been said, will be able himself
to find the meaning of Just. Dixit ex Antiquis non nemo si recte memini,
Christum suscepisse adoptionem filiorum, numquid Haereseos illum damnasses.
Herm. Minime vero. creed rem enim propterea dixisse quod suscepetit adoptionis
Sacramentum; baptismum puta Just Potestne Sacramentum adoptionis, adoptio
nuncupari? Herm Opinor: nam signum illius est. Vnde etiam Sacramentum corporis,
corpus appellatur. Just. Eri^igitur Sacramentu^ adoptionis, adoptio proptie, si
par in eo sit vtriusque ratio; Sacramentum enim corporis, proprie corpus est.
Herm. Continere fateor. at esse, qui probas? an forte de toto praedicatur pars;
idemque vnum horum quod alterum est vere and proprie? Just. Dominus ipse
Sacramentum corpus suum vocauit. Herm. Vocauit quia co^tinet; contentum enim
demonstrat pronomen quod est in operatorio Domini sermon, formam vocas, quae
sic videtur exponenda, Hoc, nempe contentum sub hac panis forma visibili, est
corpus meum: at non propterea Sacramentum corpus suum vocauit quod omne sit
corpus vere and proprie. quod en im sacramentum tantum, vel quam conspicis
figur^ panis, non est proprie corpus hominis. Nec de toto composito (quod ex
corpore signo que sieve specie) pars affirmatur. Just. Negas igitur panem corpus
esse proptie, panem inquam co^secratum? Herm. Panem cui proxime competit
Sacramenti ratio, nego proprie corpus esse: fateor tamen continere corpus,
Christi inquam: quod cum sit inuisibile, non totum Sacramentum est. Apertius,
and more tuo. Vox panis, pro composito supponi potest: vel pro specie; vel pro
contento. Sumendo pro contento, verum est quod a^s; id enim Dominus Jesus
diserte affi^mauit dicens, hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis tradetur,
Apostolo test, 1. Cor. 11. panis quem ego dabo cato mea est. Ioa. 6 sumendo
pro specie, fateris ipse non esse verum, proprie. and hae quidem veluti parts
totius compositi, pro quo si nomen sumatur (sunt autem voces earum quae sunt in
anima passionum notae) neutram poteris de illo partem proprie and seorsum
affirmare. Just. Id quidem verum, de toto partem non affirmar^ proprie,
distinguuntur enim. Ex Aduersarijs M. Faunouallensis 3. p. 75. paragraphe 3 See
the Confession of Berengarius, above page 328. Profiteor panem post
consecrationem non solum Sacramentum sed etiam verum corpus Christi esse The
testimony of Lanfranc. page 337. Sententia quae enunciat, panis and vinum
altaris solummodo sunt verum Christi corpus and sanguis, nullius hominum est
The words of the Canon, page 405. Duobus constare, visibili elementorum specie,
and inuisibili carne -- S. Irenaent page 330. Eucharistia duabus rebus
constans, terrena and coelesti. De solo vero Corpore non est verum quod constet
istis duobus: quod non solum etc, vt in Confess^ sed neque de speciebus solis.
Dico Species consecratas esse Eucharistiae Sacramentum, seu ad illius
constitutionem intrinsece and essentialiter pertinere. Suarez 3 p. t, 3. Disp.
42. sect 1. Dicendum est Eucharistiam non esse solas species Sacramentales, sed
compositum ex corpore and speciebus, seu corpus Domini sub specie bus
contentum: atque ade O corpus and sanguinem Christi intrinsece and in recto
pertinere ad constitutionem huius Sacramenti, Idem, Sect. 3. vbi pro hac
sententia citat S Tho, Bonan. Caiet. aliosque Observe also that it is one thing
to interpret favorably an obscure speech (as that of our Saviors adoption,)
in behalf of him that knew no Church-decree speaking of it; and this before
the learned; producing withal like speeches that have to their knowledge a
good and true sense, (though similies hold not in all points, he that compares
you with a lion means not to say you are a beast or irrational though that be
essent^all to him, and abstrahentium Ph^losophers tells us non est mendacium,)
and another thing, to catechize the common people, or teach ones own tenet.
Lastly note that it is one thing to say signum continet, illud cuius est
signum, and another thing to say that ex ratione signi hoc habet, and forget
not that in names ^he^e is analogy. Vide Aristotelem in Praed. de relatione
Dom. and Catet. de significatione nominis concreti,
others (if any be objected) that use the like speeches: and the better, if he
bear in mind the variety of supposition that happens in these words, Vide
Suar. 3. p. to. 3. disp. 42. sect. 4. Secundo colligitur.
Eucharistia, Sacramentum, Panis consecratus. you shall find the^ taken
sometimes pro corpore, connotando species continentes: Sometimes pro speciebus,
connotando corpus contentum: sometimes pro toto composito, for the whole
consisting of the body and the species, both. According to which diversity of
acception, such propositions as over hasty or unlearned men think opposite,
will be found to contain a good sense.

Having freed the Canon from you M. Featlie, and got possession of it again, I
will turn it against your Apologist to drive away that silly troop of
Arguments which he has brought into this Section. You remember the charge that
was in it. This in substance: ^ in the Sacrifice of the Church two things, one
the species of the elements, and this visible; the other, the invisible body
of our Lord. 2. the invisible thing, the flesh, is covered with the visible. 3.
the flesh is a Sacrament of the flesh. 4 the invisible and spiritual flesh in
the Sacrament, does signify the visible and palpable body which was upon the
cross. 5. the Heavenly bread, which is indeed (according to the substance)
flesh; is the sacred sign or Sacrament of the visible mortal body. 6. the
act of immolatio^ performed by the Priest is called the passion of Christ, non
rei veritate sed significante mysterio. The Reader remembers all this. I
request him also to reflect upon the discourse of S. E. page 71 which Master
Waferer with all his Arts does impugn, and I am now defending, the substance
of his Arguments (for his words do not merit the transcribing) is without
order (for he has none at all) as follows.

Waferer. S. Augustine says Epist. 23. Secundum quemdam modum Sacramentum
corporis Christi corpus Christi est.

Answer. That which is Sacramentum tantum, Aliqui putaba^t species solas esse
Sacrame^tum. Vide Suarez disp. 42. 2.
is secundum quendam modum (to wit significatiue) Corpus Christi: that which is
res and Sacramentum, is corpus Christi; or caro spiritualis, vere. and the
same, is corpus Christi visibile vt visibile secundum quendam modum; to wit
representative. the Canon, sicut ergo etc. illius quod visibile etc.

Waferer. The same thing cannot represent it self, for there is similitude
betwixt the representing and the represented, which similitude cannot be in
case it be the same thing.

Answer. Why not? if it be (as our Saviors body is) in diverse exterior
forms or shapes at once? why may it not by the one represent it self as
existe^t in the other? the similitude (such as it is) is not founded, as you
conceive, in the substance preciselie, wherefore they be not the same in that
very respect and point, and was above also answered Birckbeck page 180.
but in the exterior shapes or forms, which be not here the same, in the
representing, and the represented* The Canon. Carne inuis^bili significat^^
visibile Domini corpus.

Waferer. It is not only without ground^th the Gospel, but also false, to
say ^he same body was in diverse forms or shapes at once.

Answer. Our Saviors body was in the shape of bread, invisibly. This in my
hand is my body. and it was visiblie sitting at the table at the same time; h^
said take, eat, this is etc. The Canon. Carne inuisibi^i, intelligibili,
spirituali, significatur corpus Domini visibile, palpabile. The Quod then, is
the same.


Waferer. If one and the same thing can be in several forms, one form may
represent the other, but the thing represents not it self.

Answer. had your opposition been to purpose you should have put it thus, but
the thing by the one cannot represent it self as in the other, which was the
proposition you undertook to disprooue. I doubt whether your eyes be fellows,
you mistake so often, that which is before them; and, it seems, if I may speak
according to your Philosophy, that either they be mere accidents, or, the one
is not like unto the other. For in both, is, (am I not mistaken?) the same
form or substance. S. P^ete fishing, was a figure of S. Peeter preaching.
What? did accidents only fish? and other accidents preach? (...) was the
fisher a figure of the preacher ^ Peter in one action, of himself, as in the
other? this matter is allreadie dispacht, page 185. and seqq. where you shall
find an answer to your discourse about the Manna. The Canon. Caro carnis and
sanguis Sacramentum est sanguinis.

Waferer. The body is not in the Sacrament in it is proper shape, Sed and
Christus post resurrect^one^ su^m diuersa action diuersa que temporum ratione,
sui ipsius typum gessit and figuram. Vt enim a^t Augustinus; apparens duobus
Discipulis etc Alger de Sacram. l. 1 c 18. Ille contendat Christum mentitum
esse singendo, qui negat eum quod signify ^ui^ impleuisle faciend^ S. Aug. de
mend. ^on, Cons c 13. ad illud, sinxit se longius tree. longius na^que profectus
super omnes coelos, etc. Ibid.
how then can the Sacrament represent it as so existent.

Answer. The shape represented is the visible shape and form our Savior had.
The Canon. Carne inuisibili significatur visibile corpus. and again,
Sacramentum est corporis, illius videlicet quod visibile. Neither is this
representation, univocal; or the relation, natural to the species, as you
suppose: but it is founded in the Divine action or institution, which serves it
self of that analogy which the matter does afford. Read your own words page
60. Most certain it is that the sacramental signs and actions are the
memorial and figure of no other body then that of our Savior on the Cross.

Your Questions about the meaning of the word hoc, into which you would have
the whole proposition (o worthy man to write Divinity!) to be
transubstantiated, will find an answer in the next Sectio^, though you must
not expect that I repeat there again in terminis, so choice a piece of M.
Mirth. No more with Gratian for this time.

Waferer. The species (you now dispute against that which was answered to the
words of the Gloss) cannot be called Coeleste Sacramentum in regard of their
reference (the words of S. E.) to our Saviors body which they cover.

Answer. Why so?

Waferer. Nothing is a sacrament in respect of covering.

Answer. That which invisibly co^taines, and exhibites to us, not only grace,
but the Author of grace, may therefore well be called a Sacrament. such
covering well deserves the name; though couers, be not all, Sacraments.
Howbeit you mistake S. E. who told you the reference to the body enclosed was
enough to draw upon it this title Coeleste, Heavenly. The sacred body of our
Savior is within the species: whence it comes that the one has rationem
contenti, the other continentis: which notions are conceived, you know,
relative, and, since a relation is specified by the terminus, that relation is
not natural which is terminated unto, and reciprocated with, that which is
above nature. To inquire for an action making immediately these r^ferences,
were needles. Even in those that are natural the Philosopher looks for no
other action then that which makes the foundation, which he calls the
fundamentum. where one thing contains another, the reference follows of it
self. That by the consecration the body is put within the species, the Gloss^
(whose Authority you are again scanning) told you, and by the words of
Institution it is manifest. Supra page 75 Matthew 26.
The Canon. Caro eius est quam forma panis opertam accipimus.

But why should you make any difficulty about the title of sacred and
heavenly, drawn upon the species in a sense equivocal, by reasons of the
reference? When we urge against you, the Fathers, to prove that our Savior in
the Eucharist is to be reverenced and adored, then you tell us that the worship
is exhibited to the forms because they be sacred; and you can fetch examples
from Baptism: how then comes it to pass that whilst you dispute against us,
The words Reuer^nce, Honor, and Adoration simply in themselves, without the
adiunct and additament Divine, cannot conclude the Divine woship proper to God.
-- Under the degree of Divine worship, we our selves yield as much to the
Eucharist, as S. Augustine did to baptism when he said ( epist. 164) we
reverence baptism wheresoever it is, Morton. of the Mass l 7 c 2, sec. 3,
Divine Nazianzene teaceth that the Angels are present at baptism, and do
magnify or Honor it with their presence and observance, Idem Sect 2. Were
the Crucifix as glorious as either art could fashion -- it is but a mere sign
invented by man; and therefore how infinitely more honorable in all Christian
estimation must a Sacramental sign be, which only the God of heaven and
earth could insitute? Idem li. 4. c. 2. Sect 3 in the Challeng. Reverence is a
due respect had unto things or persons, according to the good qualities that is
in them, this is either inward, or outward, the inward is our estimation of
them, according to their conditions and properties: the outward is our open
expression of our said estimation, whether by words or acts, their inward etc.
Idem. l. 7. c. 9. See the words of D. Androes cited p. 373. and what both of
them say to Theodoret, and adorantur (symbola) vt quae illa sint quae
creduntur, whereof Andr, in his Op. posth. and Mort l. 7. c. 2 and cease to
declaime against us for the relative honor we give to relics and other holy
things: observing withal that they both come short of Theodoret, adorantur vt
quae illa sint.
they loose their sanctity? But see! your brains turn about, and you will
bestow the same title upon bread and wine; and that, (the thing which just now
you disliked,) in regard of reference to flesh and blood: Take my opinion (say
you) that mere accidents can neither properly nor improperlie be called
Coeleste Sacramentum in regard of their reference to our Saviors body which
they cover, VVafer. page 57.
but bread and wine may be so called, (and why?) in regard of their mysterious
use and signification, (how so?) the reference unto that Celestial food
which they are then made instruments to convey unto us, gives them that
denomination. So you.

The several comparisons of the Sacramental species comes here too, into the
Ministers head, and troubles him: so many relations, in one thing; to the body
visible existent on the cross, to the body invisible contained within, and to
the grace which (being a Sacrament) it does also relate unto. Three relations,
in one thing; this makes him sweat, with labor to conceive it. But there is
one thing, your own self Master Waferer, wherein there be more then thirty, to
your Father, to your brothers, to the community whereof you are a part, to
your (alas! poor) flock, to your mother University, to your masters there,
to your servant, what spend I time to reckon? as many senses, and powers, and
parts; as many several accidents, and qualites, and habits, as you have; as
many several virtues as are in you, (but I must not found on them least my
number prove to short;) as many several comparisons as you have to bodies, (I
omit all other things which would make the number more then double) living or
not living, celestial or terrestrial, greater or less, then you; so many
relations you Master Waferer, have. Number them, if you can; and you shall
find for every one that I promised, a thousand, do you sweat under the
burden?

You told us but a while ago that bread and wine have a reference to the body
and blood of Christ; VVafer. page 34.
and it is your common tenet and the great mystery which you do mngnifie and
extol as a thing above the capacity and conceit of Christian men though
never so learned: yet, least you want an Adversary, you plead against this
also now your own self. There is, say you, a relation inter signum and
signatum, which relation cannot be founded in the color of bread, VVafer. page
58,
because no relation is founded in quality, but relatio similitudininis, now
the color of flesh and bread is not a like, and so there can be no relation of
similitude between them. and so on you go to conclude that the relation which
we admit is no where but in a Jesuits doting head. See your own k^kerm. of
the institution of signs. Was it not you that objected out of Tertull. and
the Gloss, the word representat? and are not you the men would have the
Sacrament to be a sign?
which if it were so, his condition were yet better then yours; for he has
within the consecrated species that which is indeed heavenly, the best thing
(to speak with S. Chrysostom,) that is in all the world: whereas your
Sacrament is reallie nothing else but bakers bread, with the relation of a
sign, which relation (your own argument comes back upon you) is not founded
in the color nor in the substance of bread, flesh and bread are not alike, but
only in the supposed institution, which kind of relations being not real,
give me leave to conclude in your Logic, yet more ciuillie, that, it is no
where but in the sacred pia matter of a Catharist.

Waferer. I have four reasons why I dislike your opinion which defends mere
accidents to be called a Sacrament.

Answer. you are content that a piece of bread, wherein there is no thing else
but bread, the rest being in your head only, be called a Sacrament? why then
may not those species be so called which do cover and infold that great
mystery of piety which was manifested in the flesh, justified in spirit,
appeared to Angels, and was preached unto Nations? if the price of our
Redemption, the Mediator betwixt God and man, the holy of holies, if Deus
absconditus be within those species, withdrawn from our sight, and they not
only signify, but exhibit him to the receauer, why may they not be called a
Sacrament?

Waferer: They do not signify by institution.

Answer. That institution which brings in, the body, under them, does also
make them to contain it. so comes relatio continentis. Could a man put more
wit into your head, In ad aliquid non est morus; Contingit enim altero mutato,
verum esse alterum, nihil mutans: quare secundum accidens, motus horum est.
Arist. 5 Phy^^ tex. 10,

Motus non est per se in ad aliquid, sed solum per accidens. S. Th. ibidem.


the relation would follow without other trouble. When your meat is in your
belly who makes the relation? when, how, by what means? look on Aristotle 5.
Physicorum cap. 3.

Waferer. the pronounce hoc in the words of Consecration, does not signify
these accidents, therefore these accidents cannot get a relation by virtue of
the words of Consecration.

Answer. He that fills a cup or chalice does not make it, yet the relatio
continentis ad rem contentam, follows upon that his action, his action brings
wine into the cup; and consecration brings our Saviors body into the form of
bread: which done, the relations be not wanting.

Waferer. The body is not produced by consecration, nor the species, therefore
the relation of one of these to the other, follows not upon the consecration.

Answer. Whether the body be produced or be not produced by consecration, is
not the matter here disputed; but whether it be present. Neither would your
argument conclude if we supposed your antecedent to be wholly true. When you
fill a chalice, you neither produce the cup, nor the wine; yet the relation of
continency does follow, and so does it when you fill a place, though you
produce not your self that are in it.

Waferer. Relations following upon actions are only between the agent or
efficient and the effect or thing it makes,

Answer. You see this to be false in the example before specified, could not
you and I be nearer one to the other unless the one of us be made again? or is
the Sun made a new as often as it is under a new sign? the moon perhaps you
will say is, because there be new moons.

Thus far concerning the four arguments of your dislike, VVafer. p. 61.
which you conclude with this iyngling clinch, that becomes your cap well, So
much (me^d that word much, and put so little; you must not commend your self,)
for Doctor Featlies Illation against your Relation.

One thing more I must note (before we leave this Section) that, whereas in it
you have showed your self much offended with S. E. for saying the species were
also signa corporis Christi praesentis, your conscience would not let you make
an end before you had granted it, in these words, VVafer page 62.
I Will grant you that the outward signs are, signa corporis praesentis, signs
of the body present after consecration, yet to show your self still
replenished with the spirit of contradiction, you tell us you deny that it is
there after the manner we define, how then M. Waferer? is it obiectiue only?
Ibidem.
as the thing believed is said to be in the believer; or as the men you look
upon, are in your eye; or as the thing you love is thereby said to be in you or
you rather in it? hear a mystery. It Is not corporally but mystically and
Sacramentallie, VVafer. Ibidem.
and yet so as besides the intellectual presence (by faith and love) there is
also a real and exhibitiue presence (of the body, I suppose,) in respect of
donation on Gods part and reception on man's part. But what it this, great
Apollo? Is the body, (antecedentlie to the effects which follow the
reception) reallie exhibited and reallie received more then intellectuallie? do
men, with their bodily mouths, receive here, that which is in heaven only,
no nearer?

Quid tanto dignum feret hic promissor hiatu? Your, Master, Calvin, has lead
you it seems into the clouds, to mount there, for a banck is to low for you.
Non solum beneficiorum Christi significationem habemus in Coena; sed
substantive participes, in vnam cum eo vitam coalescimus, and, Cited in Morton
page 151.
Ergo in Coena miraculum agnoscimus, quod and naturae fines and sensus nostri
modum exsuperat: Quod Christi caro nobis fit communis and nobis in alimentum
datur. We have in the Supper not a signification of the benefits only, but
being made substantiallie participant, we do become one life with him.
Wherefore we acknowledge in the Supper a miracle, that transcends the bounds
of nature, and compass of our reason, to wit, that the flesh of Christ is made
to us common, and given us for our nourishment. So he. Now Waferer, mount you,
though we heard you once already. (...) Every Punie can tell you that though
bread seem only bread to the eye, VVafer page 34.
and in substance be nothing else, yet in it is spiritual use and signification,
it is the body of our Savior, (this your Punies you say, know, what is there
in it more; hark and learn,) not that Christ's body is present under the
accidental forms of the elements though it be therewith sprituallie And what
has Morton more then bread, with certain references which be not real? a
sign, a seal, an instrument; what answers here to these three names, a part
rei, more then bread?
eaten, (this were Papistrie, take heed of it; but, what or how then?) This I
confess to be a Mystery: but if you demand what it is; He answer you as
Octauius did Caecilius when he did expect to hear him describe what God was,
Nobis ad intellectum pectus augustum est, and ideo sic Deum digne aestimamus
dum inaestimabilem dicimus etc. so if you expect to hear exactlie what this
mystery is, I answer, it is a mystery, and if I could perfectly disclose
it is secrets and show you what it were, then twere no mystery. So then,
besides the benefit of grace which is the effect of due receiving, and besides
the intellectual presence which is by faith, those that will, must believe a
mystery, above man's apprehension, inexplicable, incomprehensible. Will you now
see the mouse? The bread is a sign of our Saviors body; and the communicants
take it in their hands; S Hier. Epist. ad Ctes.
and eat it with their Mouths. Ecclesiae victoria est, vos aperie dicere quod
fentitis.


The Fifth objection was that Hoc stands for bread, because the Fathers,
sometimes call the Sacrament by that name, and the pronoune relates to nothing
else. The Answer was that Hoc, (whose signification of it self is confused)
relates unto the thing which is under the species when the form is wholly
uttered; and that this thing is Heavenly bread and by the Fathers so called.
Solemn ost istis nebulonibus (so the modest man calls the Catholic Deuines)
quicquid in Patribus vitiosum est corradere, etc. cum ergo obijciunt locum
Malachiae de Missae Sacrificio ab Irenaeo exponi, oblationem quoque
Melchisedech sic tractari ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, Arnobio, breuiter
responsum sit eosdem illos Scriptores alibi quoque panem interpretari corpus
Christi; sed ita ridicule vt dissentire nos cogat ratio etc. Calvin. l. de vera
Eccles. Reform. p. 389.
In this Section (as appears by the Synopsis which Waferer himself sets before
it,) be many things both impertinent to the Argument (which was of the
signification of the word Hoc;) and without order, packt together. As. 1. Of
the sixth chapter of Saint John, whether it speaks of the Sacrament, which
Question he concludes negative, so cashcering one of his own Doctors
Arguments. 2. Of transubstantiation. where he would have the Reader know from
him, yes, that the Fathers speak hyperbolicallie, when they say bread is
changed by the power of omnipotence not in shape but in nature, that the nature
it self is changed; that it is transelemented. And having said, for explication
of those places, that in transelementation, the materia prima (which is an
element or principle of the thing; as well as the form) does remain; he tells
us, the Fathers mean a change in office. Your greatest Protestantish polemicks
come in fine to the same. Expectu eadem a summmo m^^^moque,
as if that office (to represent or signify the flesh of Christ,) came in
place of the nature or form of bread: or that, a substantial form, or
element, were turned into an ens rationis, which is in a Ministers empty
brain. 3. Of adoration. where he would ridiculouslie persuade the Reader that
the Council of Trent will have latria bestowed upon mere accidents for being
(Sacramentum tantum) sacred and Sacramental signs only: as if the Church
esteemed that a motive of Divine and highest worship. 4. Of Omnipotency, where
he professes not to meddle with Gods absolute power, and yet denies things
which we maintain to be done only by that power. 5. Of the Incarnation.
where he says that, since our Saviors manhood is inseparably united to his
Divinity in that sense it may be said to be every where present to it. and
that the union of our Saviors ma^hood to the Deity is extended as far as
(the) Deity. 6. Of miracles. Where he says that, that which is only
spiritual (he means invisible, such as the changes made in the elements bread
and wine, by consecration, or by the Sacraments, in our souls; or by God in
his Saints:) is wrought no where but in the mind. These effects, and other
spiritual created things, S. Hier. ad Ctes.
all, (if this tenet hold,) are imaginary. Non necesse habet conuinci, quod
sua statim professione blasphemum est. I spare paper, to some other, better
purpose: what need I spend it? Ibidem.
Sententias vestras prodidisse, superasse est.

This Euripus homo, Wauerer, in his discourse, does say and vnsaie; and
interpret himself (when some body it seems warned him of his gross errors
against the Common Creed) no better in effect then, if having said it is; I
should add for explication, that is, Quo teneas vultus mutainte^ protea nodu?
it is not: wanting discretion to leave out, what he had not wit enough to mend.

The Objections which he brings, such as he picks here and there out of
others, he thrusts together in a bundle, without order, like sticks in a faggot;
which if it were carried to Carfox, and set on fire, would illuminate the four
quarters of the University. Will you hear some recited; and observe in him
whilst from his extaticall throne or pulpit he scatters Oracles to sanctify
the attentive ears of astonished Pupils, an example of sweet, ingenuous,
fair, civil, gracious comportment.

Credit me vobis folium recitare --
Whist! he speaks.

Apologist. let me see what you would have this bread in the Sacrament to be.
Such (say you) as whereunto the Divine essence does ineffablie power it self,
even as in Christ under humane nature the Divinity lay bid. And finally such
bread, of which our Savior says it is my flesh for the life of the world. O
most insufferable dotage! First because the blasphemous comparison of putting
Christ so in the bread shaps, as his Divinity was in his humanity, as if he
were personally united to them as he was to the humane nature. 2. you would
against sense as well as the condition of a Sacrament make an invisible thing
namely Christ, invisible under the accidens of bread to be a sign of a
visible thing namely of Christ visible on the Cross, and so make either two
Christ's, or else the self same body to be at the same time both eating and
eaten, visible and invisible.


Censure. Who bolder then blind bayard? who more furious in charging men with
error and dotage, then those who be most ignorant, and have least wit? I told
him before of his temeritie, but the Ethiopian will not change his skin, nor
the Leopard depose his spots. The Holy Ghost says of Heretics, (and we
find the experience of it) that they are 2. Tim. 3.
elati, superbi, criminatores, proterui, tumidi, Epist. Just.
Hi autem (the scriptures says of them) quaecumque quidem ignorant,
blasphemant. 2. Tim. 3.
As Iannes and Mambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith; but they shall proceed no
further; for their folly shall be manifest to all; as the others was.

It is a piece of stupid ignorance (in a writer of polemicall books) to think,
and an insufferable calumny it were to report, that we believe two Christ; or
that he whom we believe, is united hypostatice personally to the bread
shapes. To justify that we say, by you recited and so deeply charged, I
need do no more but pray the Authors themselves to come forth, and again
speak it over before your face. When you see parties, peradventure you will
blush. 1 Cor. 11.
Jesus Christ our Redeemer, God and man. Take, and eat, this (in the form of
bread) is my body which is broken, Joan. 6.
given, for you. The bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the
world. my flesh is meat indeed etc. the Comment you shall have anon, out of S.
Ierom. The Author of the Sermons in Saint Cyprian, and of the same age, Motton
page 25. Sermon. de Coena.
whom all know (your Patron says) to be a Catholic Father. That bread being
changed not in shape but in nature, is by the omnipotency of the Word made
flesh. These two places, the one out of S. John, the other out of the Sermon
that is in S. Cyprian, Waferer took notice of: and in his way there were
more; Cyrill. Catech. 4. Canon Hoc est,
as that of S. Cyrill, That which appears bread, is not bread; but the body.
and of the Canon taken out of S. Augustine by S. Prosper. It is the the flesh
of Christ which we receive covered with the form of bread. and, by the flesh
and blood, Ibidem.
both invisible, intelligible, spiritual, is signified the visible, palpable
body of our Lord Jesus Christ. and in Saint Jerome. Hieron. Comment. in 1 ad
Ephesians. ad Paulum and Eustoch. Idem in Ep. ad Hedib. q. 2.
The flesh and blood of Christ is understood two ways: either that spiritual
and Divine, whereof himself says My flesh is meat indeed etc. (mark this
Comment Master Waferer,) or the flesh that was crucified. and; Our Lord Jesus,
he the guest, and the feast; he the eater, and the thing eaten.

But stay! what is all this? a man's body, our Saviors, in bread shape;
flesh, invisible, under the form of bread. an invisible thing under accide^ts
the sign of a visible thing upon the Cross. the same body at the same time
eating and eaten, visible and invisible.


Apologist. O insufferable dotage!


Censure. And this comparison too Sermon. de Coen. in Cypr.
As in the person of Christ, the humanity did appear, and the Divinity lie
bid: so (here in the Eucharist) a Divine essence does vnspeakablie power it
self into a visible Sacrament. What is your opinion of this?


Apologist. O blasphemous comparison!


Censure. Com. in in Joan. l. 4. c. 11.
The malignant mind (S. Cyrill says) presently with arrogance reiects all as
frivolous and false whateuer it understands not, yiedling to none, and thinking
nothing to be above it self. Belike some Spirit has inspired this man, and on
the sudden given us a Divine, that can teach without learning: the very same
which taught Luther to declaime against the Mass. But, Master Waferer, bethink
your self; is this language for a Master of Art but of yesterdaie, to give a
grave Prelate, and a man of known learning? and then also, when he speaks in
the very words of Antiquity, of holy Fathers, of Jesus Christ? Is this the
modesty such a stripling should have had, the learning which you promised, the
charity which you pretend? you, who do lament the Schisms of the Church, and
are continually in thanksgiving for the great light you see wherein you have
discovered how the solid and substantial nature of bread is transelemented
into a feigned reference. is this the vindicating of your Churches cause, and
the clearing of your Doctor, it is abbetter? O the Pedanticall insolency! O
most insolent arrogancy of most arrogant Apostacy.

Of the first apostatizing Spirits it is said in Sripture, their pride
ascends ever. They would have thrones, forsooth, (each one, for they are all
of one mind,) in the sides of the North: from whence, without submitting
themselves to any, they might controwle, all. and into the same region high
pride has raised this Apol. making her self this chair; and receiving him, in
her lap. There he sits, and controwles, Antiquity. This it is when
supercilious Pedants come from As in praesenti, to print books and give Divines
lessons in Divinity.


Apologist. Not to trouble my self or my Reader with the repetition of all
those infinite solecismes which this opinion includes: take notice of this,
that it distroies the definition of an Indiuiduum, and makes Christ's
individual body not to be individual. Indiuiduum according to logic is quod
est indiuisum in se and diuisum ab alijs omnibus, as Socrates is distinguished
from Plato etc. now I say this your tenet of there all presence against this
definition divide; an individual body from it self, it diuides Christ ac
Paris from Christ in the Sacrament at Rome.


Censure. He has (if you believe him) an infinite company of reasons; but,
least he trouble the Reader, or himself, (lucidum interuallum,) with ranging
them all against us, he picks out the stoutest, (his Thersites, Achilles I
should have said,) and thrusting him into the field, bids us take notice of
him. Sure, it is a goodly reason. Limbs it has, some; but it wa^ts sinews.
like therefore to be some tough cha^pion. Has it the form and shape of a good
Argument? no: but it has a head, the mayor proposition. O quale caput! sed
cerebrum where? non habet.

The mayor might have in it a good sense; and has so, when others use it: when
it is understood of intrinsecall indiuision: but extrinsecall, is not that
which does constitute; or the want of it that which takes away, an indiuiduum:
now the Minister understands it of this later, this extrinsecall indiuision, as
will presently appear by his discourse. Thus the Mayor. The Minor is of no
great weight neither; for it stands upon his breath. Now Mirths words.
I say this your tenet against this definition diuides an individual body
from it self, it it diuides Christ at Paris from Christ in the Sacrament at
Rome. You say so well. Your Conclusion? let the Reader himself make it if he
can. Supprimit Orator --

But is there no proppe for the Minor? if you cease to say it, what shall
become of it then? yes; we shall have something to supporte it.


Apologist. For, there being distance and diversity of place, it cannot be the
same numericall body.


Censure. Did I not tell before, that he meant extrinsecall indiuision? Place,
is extrinsecall to a body. whether you be in Oxford or Odiham, you be the same
indiuiduum still, though the place be distinct. Oxford is not Odiham; but M,
Waferer in Odiham is the same Master Waferer that was at Oxford. the Minister
is the Master of Art; is he not Master Mirth? And a Master of Art might have
known further, that superuenient vbications destroy not that indiuiduation
which essentiallie they suppose. Your substantial indiuiduation, that whereby
you are substantiallie distinct from other men, (which is no accident of Master
Waferer, nor can be removed from him as much as in your mind, without taking
him away too;) that substantial indiuiduation, is essentiallie presupposed by
every particular intrinsecall vbicatio^ received in you, as an accide^t in
it is subject, and is not changed by it, by the superuenient vbication: if it
were, the same thing could not be as much as successively in several places,
as often as you changed places so often you should be an other man. One borne,
another be carried to Church to be Christened, a third brought home to suck the
mother, and (which yet would trouble you worse) another should take the
benefice, which was given you; because you took the degree, which an other (by
the name of Waferer too) I will not swear that.
deserved.


Apologist. I pray what other division can there be of material substances,
but by bounds of place?


Censure. Poor man! and what If I should come into your place and you into
mine, should I then be you, and you be that indiuiduum which I am? this were as
easy, as it is a strange transubstantiation. But I know you will deny it to
be possible; least by this means you be unawares made a Papist. I thought,
(this it is not to be so wise as you,) that your neighbor and you were
substantiallie distinguished, that his substance was not yours, nor your
substance his. by something which is in you substantial, you are distinguished
from a stock; and by something which is in you substantial, you are
distinguished from an ass; and by something which is in you substantial, you
are distinguished from your neighbor. you will not deny this, what these are
Called, every Punie can tell you.


Apologist. T's an infallible axiom that one numericall substance can have but
one manner of Mirth I hope can distinguish betwixt an accidental
presentialitie, and, a substantial subsistence.
subsisting.


Censure. If you mean naturally, this axiom is nothing to purpose here,
nihil ad rhombum. we talk of that which God has supernaturallie effected. If
you mean supernaturallie, it is a mere begging of the Question, to call that
an axiom, which no man yet ever avouched; and your adversaries do deny. Where
did you ever read (unless it were in some of your pufellowes lying pamphlets,)
that the same individual substance could not have supernaturallie diverse
accidental manners of being? or, that an individual nature could not have an
other manner of subsisting, then naturally it has? The humanity of our
Savior has another manner of subsisting then ours; it subsisteth in the Word.
is this natural, or supernatural? and accidentally we shall be changed,
when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal have put
on immortality. is not this likewise above nature? or is the state of a
glorious body, natural to the body, or impossible, that Master Waferers
Axiom forsooth, may stand and in the sense wherein it were to serve his turn.
One numericall substance can have but one manner of subsisting.


Apologist. Though place and quantity be not in the essence of a body, yet it
is a contradiction in it is existence to be without either, and consequently to
create Christ such a body in the Eucharist which is not individual is a mere
contradictorie fiction.


Censure. I doubt I shall be thought a fool for disputing with such an one as
you are. Master Mirth, who told you that the body which is in the Eucharist is
not individual? who spoke of such a body? who told you that it had not there
quantity? or that it was no where? or do you dream? if you did not, and that
the matter were not impertinent to this argument, I might hap to ask you
touching those your imaginations, how you prove it a contradiction for a body
to be without quantity, or, a body having quantity to be without a place? I
learned once from Aristotle that, quantity is not substance, nor substance
quantity: which being supposed, (and the thing is certain in it self,) you
will have much ado to infer a contradiction out of these two propositio^s,
Substantia est. Quantitas non est. or these other; Quantitas est. Substantia
non est. Contradiction being affirmatio, and negatio eiusdem de eodem and
secundum idem. you cannot Master Waferer. much less can you prove it is a
contradiction for a body to be without a place. Locus is 4. Arist. 4. Phys. t.
41.
continentis terminus immobilis primus: as the Philosopher defines it. who tells
you likewise that(b) vniuersum non est in loco. the uttermost heaven or body,
whateuer it be, is not properly in a place. No other body, does contain it;
if it did, this were not uttermost. Yet we say not, that our Saviors body
is no where; or that it is not in the Church; or that it has not quantity, or
that it is not individual. these are, aegri somnia, they be your dreams
Master Mirth, who understand not this mighty argument which you took out of
your Master Featlie: in whom I will go see (for I cannot learn of you) what
the meaning of it is. Alia sunt in loco secundum potentiam, alia vero secundum
actum. Vnde, cum continuum quidem sit quod est similium partium, secundum
potentiam in loco parts sunt; cum vero separata sint quidem tangunt autem se,
sicut collectio; secundum actum sunt. Et alia quidem per se sunt, vt omne
corpus, aut secundum loci mutationem, aut secundum augmentum mobile, alicubi
perse existit: coelum autem, sicut dictum est, non est alicubi totum, neque in
quopiam loco. si quidem nullum ipsum continet corpus: secundum autem quod
mouetur, sic and locus est partibus; altera enim alteri adhaerens partium est.
Alia vero secundum accidens, sicut anima, and coelum, parts enim in loco
quodammodo omnes sunt: in eo enim quod circulariter sunt, continet alia aliam;
vnde mouetur circulariter solum quod sursum est. Omne autem, non alicubi est:
quod enim alicubi est, ipsum aliquid est, and adhuc aliud quiddam oportet esse
extra hoc, in quo quidem continetur: extra autem omne and totum nihil est.
Aristot 4. Phys. t. 45 Terra quidam in aqua, haec in aere, hic vero in aethere,
and hic vero in coelo; coelum autem non amplius in alio est. Ibidem, t. seq.
Simul autem manifestum est quod neque locus, neque vacuum, neque tempu^ est
extra coelum. -- Quapropter neque quae illic sunt, nata sunt in loco esse,
neque tempus ipsa facit senescere, neque vlla transmutatio vllius eorum est
quae super extima disposita sunt latione; sed inalterabilia, and impassibilia,
optimam habentia vitam, and per se sufficientissimam, perseuerant toto aeuo.
Lib. 1. de Coelo. t. 99. and 100. Huiusmodi substantiae (separatae) dicuntur (a
Philosopho,) esse ibi, id est, extra coelum, non sicut in loco, sed sicut non
contenta nec inclusa sub continentia corporalium rerum. sed totam corporalem
naturam excedentia. S. Tho. Ibidem Vide eundem in 1. d. 37. q 3. a. 1. ad 4.
Non reputo inconueniens quod Angelus sine loco possit esse, etc. De quo plura
Caietanus, Nazarius, alijque.


He proposes it against Master Wood; and will needs prove the body, if it
has diverse Sacramental prese^ces (such as we believe it has,) is thereby
divided in se, in itself, so that it is no more one and the same, but diverse
bodies, this he strives to conclude out of the distinction of the Sacramental
presences, Featlie page 134. and seqq.
whereof one is at Rome for example, and another is at Paris. But he strives in
vain; for, the Dualitie is, of presencies; not of bodies; there are two
presences in one, and the same body; and these two presencies which are
accidents, separable from the forsaid body, rely upon it as their subject,
and presuppose it in being every moment wherein themselves be, so far they
are from destroying it. Neither of them, is the substantial indiuidualitie of
the body; for, the body was before, and will be the same after, when they be
not at all, how then could it be concluded that two of them be two substantial
indiuidualities? they neither are substantial indiuidualities; (which is as
easy to be proved as it is easy to prove that your vbication in this place
where you are, which you may be without when you will, is not that whereby you
are substantiallie distinct from other me^;) nor out of their plurality does
there ensue a plurality in the body their subject. for, accide^ts take not
away their proper subject, so to be, without any; but are in it: and these
presences (which we speak of) are accidents, not of a body in common, what
ever body; but, of this individual body of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Featlie, page 140
This way failing your Doctor, he takes another, to prove against Master Wood,
a substantial dualitie (in the body) out of the motion of it; for if the same
body be under two several dimensions, it might be (he thinks) the terminus a
quo and the terminus ad quem of the same direct motion, and be moved from it
self; which is (says he) a contradiction. But, neither can he bring about his
intent this way. That which is the subject of local motion, or the thing
which properly is moved, when the Priest (for example) takes an hoaste out of
the pixe, are the dime^sions of bread: which dimensions have localitie or
situall extension, and are in loco in a place, whose definition you heard,
before out of the Philosopher, the terminus a quo of which motion is not our
Saviors body, but the pixe where it was: and the terminus ad quem is the
communicants mouth wherein he puts it. Our Saviors body which is in those
dimensions, is not in loco, per se; but per accidens: that is to say, though
that accident place, which is terminus continentis etc. does not affect in in
it self, yet is it in the dimensions of bread which dimensions are so affected.
And, as it is per accidens in loco, so is it locallie moved per accidens, not
per se.

The Sacrament is not locus the place of the body, properly speaking neither
is it (the body) commensurated to the place of the species. The body is not
there after the manner of a body, extended situallie; but rather according to
the manner of a Spirit: though not altogether that way neither, but another
more undetermined and supernatural way, whereof the Philosopher wanting faith
had no knowledge. The Soul Aristotle says is in loco per accidens. 4. Phys.
t. 45. and his Commentator there, Anima est in loco quia sublectum eius quod
est corpus, est in loco. And the Soul is moved per accidens, because the body
or the part wherein it is, united; is moved: this motion being nothing else but
a successiue comparison to place. Motis nobis necessarium est and quae in nobis
sunt omnia, simul moueri, says Aristotle 2. Topic. loco 24. and 4. Phys. t.
31. Motum autem aliud mouetur per se, and aliud mouetur per accidens. and illud
quod mouetur per accidens, aliud est quod potest moueri per se, verbi gratia
membra hominis and clauus in naui; and aliud non potest, sed semper mouetur per
accide^s, verbi gratia albedo, and cognitio; ista enim non mutant sua loca,
nisi quia illa in quibus sunt transferuntur.

The connection or union of the Soul unto the body (disposed) we know by
nature; and by reason of this connection it comes to pass that moving the body
unto a place, the soul consequently is also there. The connexio^ of the body
of our Savior with the species, is revealed and made by the form of
consecration which is practical, This in the shape of bread is my body. And
the Councels acknowledge it when they say it is contained in the species; sub
speciebus panis and vini veraciter continetur, Conc. Later. sub Innocent. 3, c.
firmiter.. vna est Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 1. and 3,
so the Lateran Council: and the Council of Trent, in the same tenor, In
sanctissimo Eucharistiae Sacramento continetur vere, realiter, and
substantialiter, corpus etc. and sub singulis cuiusque speciei partibus
separatione facta totus Christus continetur. So that a double relation is
understood there, one of the body to the species: another of the species to
the body; which remain (so that no force in nature can dissolve or separate
them) whilst the species remain uncorrupted, and this by virtue and power of
consecration and of the divine omnipotence. This for the an est of this union
or connection; the modus of it in particular saint Thomas says is ineffabilis.
It suffices to know there is such a connection: by which it comes to pass that
moving the species to a place, the body of our Savior is also there: for, the
species and the body, cannot be separated or divorced. And, as it is there, in
place, in the sense above specified namely; per accidens; so is it moved, per
accidens.

It is further to be noted that when a thing, one in it self, is multiplex
secundum esse, (I take the word here in a great latitude,) it may be moved,
and not moved, secundum diuersa. The Son of God, our blessed Savior, who is
in himself one, vnum Ens, was moved according to his humane form, Vado ad
Patrem, quia Pater mayor me est. Ioa. 14.
and according to his divine form he was immovable. Your soul which is but
one, may be moved in your arm, and unmoved in your breast. and your body may
be moved according to one accidental form, as quality; though it be not at
the same time moved according to another, Were this in English he that is no
Scholar could not understand it.
suppose quantity. Cum aliquid est vnum subiecto says our Doctor S. Thomas,
and multiplex secundum esse, nihil prohibet secundum aliquid moueri, and
secundum aliquid immobile permanere: sicut corpori est aliud esse album, and
aliud esse magnum, vnde potest moueri secundum albedinem, and permanere
immobile secundum magnitudinem. 3. p. qu. 76. a. 6. And in the same place
answering an Objection which was made to prove that our Saviors body is in
the Sacrament mobiliter, quia nobis motis mouentur ea omnia quae sunt in nobis,
as before was said out of Aristotle, he answers, Dicendum quod ratio illa
procedit de motu per accidens, quo ad motum nostri mouentur ea quae in nobis
sunt: aliter tamen ea quae per se possunt esse in loco, sicut corpora; and
aliter ea quae per se non possunt esse in loco, sicut formae, and spirituales
substantiae. Ad quem modum potest reduci, quod dicimus Christum moueri per
accidens secundum esse quod habet in hoc Sacramento, in quo non est sicut in
loco.

Out of these words I take an instance to declare the solution which I gave to
your Argument whereby you would prove that if our Saviors body were in
several dimensions sacrame^tally, it might be moved from it self and so be
substa^tiallie divided in it self. The Answer is that, division in it self,
follows not out of that motus per accidens. My Soul whilst I write, is moved
per accidens, from it self, but yet remains one. It were ridiculous to think
that I cannot move my fingers without dividing an indivisible, and destroying
that immortal thing on which the motion it self depends. As for the termini,
a quo, and ad quem, they be those that be the termini of the motus per se. When
your body is in London (in your Chamber) per se, your soul is there, in eodem
loco, (your chamber,) per accide^s: the place is one; but the manner of being
in it, is diverse. Per se, and per accidens, distinguish the manner. When your
body is in motion thither (to your chamber) per se, your soul is moved
thitherwards too, to the same terminus ad quem, (your chamber,) per accidens.

Suppose you be sitting in your study, at your table, holding your right hand
on the one end, and your left hand on the other end. When you move your hands
to the middle of the table, and put them there together, the termini a quibus
in these two motions be not your soul, which is, and was, in either hand; but
the two ends of the table where your hands were, be the termini from whence you
moved them, and the terminus ad quem is not your soul which is in your hands
now being together, but the midst of the table is the terminus ad quem. You
must now keep your hands there together still, for fear least at parting them
again you divide your soul (substantiallie) into two, by moving it from it
self, whilst you move the right hand wherein it is, all, from the left wherein
it is likewise all, or, put of your too melancholy imagination of a
contradiction to ensue in case a thing should per accide^s be moved from it
self; or be in two dimensions whereof one is locallie moved from the other. Of
distance, or resting it is the same. Whilst your hands or arms do move, one
from the other; your breast and other parts, may rest; and the soul in the
right hand is nearer to the (same) soul in the left when they be joined, then
is the Of it self and by it self it cannot be dista^t from it self.
soul in the feet. Nearer, how? per accide^; that is, it is in a part that is
nearer. moved, how? per accidens; that is, it is in a part of dimension which
is moved. rests how? per accidens; that is, it is in a part that does rest.
Of it self it is not the subject of these corporal accidents or affections, as
I told you before.

Apply this to the body, existing according to the manner of a spirit, (and
after a more elevated high manner the^ that of the soul, and more
incontracted, more indetermined, more independent of local affections) in
several dimensions; some testing, some moved; some nearer, some farther of:
and when any man offers to conclude a contradiction, Some learned Deuines have
thought it probable that an angel can be naturally in two places at once; as
in two several assumed bodies: and you will have much ado to demonstrate
against them. Celarent.
look near, whether there be affirmatio and negatio eiusdem de eodem and
secundum idem, according to the same dimension; and you will mile at their
ignorance who by their wits do strive to put Gods omnipotency to the non-p^us.


Apologist. The next tedious business is about this proposition This is my
body, wherein that substantial change which is aimed at is attributed to the
power of that practical proposition.


Censure. That the proposition is practical, was the tenet of the first of
those witnesses which your Doctor cited as for himself, and in those words
which he cited, Acceptum parem corpus suum illum (not illud, as in Featlies
margin) fecit (how so?) Hoc est corpus meu^ dicendo. if by saying those words,
Hoc est corpus meu^, he made it his body, those words were practical. the
like manner of speech and more express too, you shall find in other Per
orationem Verbi Dei ab ip^o Eucharistia^ That factum ^ibum ^ illius carnem and
sanguinem esse edect sumus. S. Justin. Apol. 2. Qui est a terra panis
percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non est communis panis, sed Eucharistia ex
duabus rebus constans, terrena, and coelesti. S Iren. l. 4 c. 34 Benedictione
etiam natura ipsa mutatur. S. Ambros. de mist. init. c. 9. Quod si tantum
valuit humana benedictio (de miraculis loquitur, per Moysen, aliosque patratis)
quid dicemus de ipsa consecratione Diuina, vbi verba ipsa Domini Saluatoris
operantur? Ibidem. Vide eundem l. 4. de Sacram. c. 5. Panis per Verbum Dei and
orationem sanctificatur; non quia comeditur eo progrediens vt verbi corpus
euadat, sed statim per Verbum in corpus mutatur, vt dictum est a Verbo, Hoc est
corpus meum. S. Greg. Nyssen Orat, Catech c. 37. Vox illa (hoc est corpus meum)
semel quidem dicta est, sed per omnes mensas Ecclesiae vsque ad hodiernum diem,
and vsque ad eius aduentum Sacrificio praestat firmitatem. S. Chrysostom. de
Prod. Iudae. vide eundem Hom. 2 In 2. ad Tim. Panis noster and calix certa
consecrations mysticus fit nobis, non nascitur. S. Aug. l. 20. cont. Faust. c.
13. Absit vt de his quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui
succedentes, Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt. S. Hier. epist. ad Heliod.
Transformatur arcanis verbis panis iste per mysticam benedictionem, and
accessionem Spiritus S in carnem Domini. Theophilact in c 6 Joan. Virtute
Spiritus-S per Verbum Christi, fit sanguis Domini, Paschal. lib. de Corp. Dom.
c. 12. Per eius virtutem, and prolatum ab eo Verbum, quae videntur tam
sanctificata sunt, vt cunctum carnis sensum excedunt. I sich. l. 6. in Leuit.
c. 22.
Ancients, whom you will not, I suppose, (yet I have cause to fear the
contrary, but you should not I am sure) offer to control.

That which was aimed at, or disputed of, was not the change, but the Read
presence, as you have been often put in mind, though it be true also that those
words do serve to prove there is a change of substance. For, that which was
under them before consecration was bread; S Cyril. Hier.
and that which is under them after consecration is not bread (to use the words
of an ancient Father) but as the words import, the body of our Savior:
Wherefore doubtless there is a change. and our Saviors words, the words of
Consecration, were (in their kind) the cause of it; though not the chief or
principal. The principal cause was not the form of consecration, Sermon. de
Coena.
but his omnipotency, as Antiquity before told you: Panis iste non effigy
sed natura mutatus omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro.

Now because you complain that the matter of this Argument which your Doctor
urged, is tedious (you are wearied as it seems with answering of
distinctions,) I will in few words tender you the sum of it, and of the
Relations, in it. The proposition or enunciation is this, Hoc est Corpus meum.
in which enunciation there is the Sea the Preface.
subject, the attribute, and the note of identitie or copula. The subject is
Hoc; the Attribute, Corpus meum; the copula, est. About this Enunciation and
these three parts of it, your Doctor in his Relation moves (what expreslie
what tacitelie,) six doubts, which S. E. does resolve in his Notes. The first;
what kind of signification the subject has? the Answer is, that, if that word
only be considered, the signification of it confused and undetermined, so that
until the rest of the proposition comes, your understanding is uncertain what
substance in particular it does point at. The second, whether it be necessary
that the thing which it points at and designs according to the intention of
the speaker, (which intention is more unfolded in the words following,) be then
existent when that word is uttered? He answers, No^ Falsum est in pronomine,
aduerbiove demonstrandi requiri rem praesentem. Non enim est perpetuum; says
your great Li. 10. de Euch. c. 18.
Chamier, proving it with examples out of Scripture. The third, whether in the
copula there be a figure, The answer is the same that was given before when the
question was of the place in S. Augustine, that according to the substance (you
know what a kind of verb it is) of the thing signified, which is identitie,
there is no figure. and this (the identitie) is the principal. If further,
your regard that which it does consignifie (so L^gici^ns use to speak) there
were no inconvenience to admit ampliation, or improprietie; howbeit it seems
not be necessary, as S. E. told you in his Notes. The fourth, whether this
proposition be meerlie speculatiue. It was answered that it is Supra page 419
and seq.
not. The fifth, in what, this proposition is verified. The answer is that, both
the proposition, and all the parts of it, be verified in the effect. The sixth,
when it is verified? The answer is, that Verity is the adequation of two, the
proposition and the object; whereof one is the subject, Distingue de tempore
seu instanti quo oration significat, vel de tempore seu instanti pro quo oration
significat: aliud est enim quando quod oration consignificat, and aliud est
quando per orationem consignificatum: vt patet dicendo, Petrus crucifixus est.
quando enim oration ista significat, tunc est cum profertur: sed quando
consignificatum est tempus praetetitum. Significatio autem orationis non est
nisi oration sit integra integritate essentiali, quoniam oration non
essentialiter integra, non est oration. Caiet. 3. p q. 78. a. 5. Et quia
consignificare praesupponit significare, vt pote adiacens illi, ideo oration
sicut non significat ita nec consignificat nisi in termino suae prolationis.
Nec est hoc solum verum de tota oratione, sed and de partibus vt integrant
totam. Et de copula quidem declaratur dupliciter; tum ex eo quod ly est,
significat compositionem, quam sine extremis non est intelligere non enim
potest intelligi compositio prior his quae componuntur; tum quia experimur quod
huius orationis, lignum est album, postquam prolatae sunt primae dictiones,
scil. lignum est, antequam proferaturly album, ly est, non significat
compositionem ligni cum albo, quod conuincitur si ponamus orationem sistere,
etc. Ibidem. De subiecto autem dupliciter etiam idem manifestatur in proposito,
tum quia talia sunt subiecta qualia permittuntur a praedicatis, and propterea
ante praedicata non habent suppositionem suam; tum quia clare perspicimus quod
dictis istis duabus dictionibus, homo est, vt formetur propositio de tertio
adiacente, nullus intellectus habetur tam subiecti quam copulae. sed variabitur
Vtriusque sensus iuxta varietatem praedicati, vt patet formando duas
propositiones, quarum vna sit, homo est albus; and altera, homo est species,
clare enim in his liquet and subiectum and copulam praedicatum expectare; ita
quod varietas praedicati varietatem inducit and in tota oratione, and in
subiecto, and copula. Ibidem.
the other the terminus of the Relation of conformity, which relation seems
to be among those that be called rationis, the terminus or object of this
conformity is then only when the effect is existent: the relation it self is
when it is conceived. The subject of the relation is the proposition, to which
the understanding does apply the forsaid relation; which proposition was then
when it was uttered, and after that manner as successiue things use to be, or
have existence.


Apologist. There is no such created virtue inherent (as you suppose) in the
pronunciation of this proposition, it is rather declaratiue of what was past
then effectiue of ought which was not; your very A. B. C. of Logic will teach
you no other definition, or use of a proposition then to be, an indicative
congruous perfect etc.


Censure. You will pardon me for not writing out at leingth your long long
definition. out of which whilst you conclude that no proposition is practical,
you give way for me to infer, you not to be reasonable; because that is not
in the definition of animal. Some propositions be practical Master Waferer;
but all be not. some sciences be practical; but all be not. the genus does
abstract. To say that the words be not illatiue of any effect in their kind,
but declaratiue of what was past, and meerelie speculatiue; is a begging of the
Question: and a contradiction to those words which your Doctor Panem corpus
suum fecit dicendo.
before stood upon. And, if words may not be practical, how comes it that your
bread is a Sacrament? do you make the Sacrament without consecrating the
matter, or do you consecrating without words? The form of Baptism, is it
meerelie speculatiue? does it only declare what was done without it? That
Sacraments do cause grace, is your own tenet; and things active, are so, by
their forms. Quicunque Sacramenta dixerunt nihil efficere, sieve ij Messaliani
fuere, sieve Armeni, sieve Anabaptistae, sieve alio quocunque nomine, cum ijs
profitemur nihil habere commune. says your Master Chamiere, citing the
Hugonots Confession. Li. 2. de Sacr, c. 2
and though you have not read so far perchance in him, you should have known
at least what your Sacraments ordained by Christ be not only badges or tokens
of Christian men's profession, but rather they be certain sure witnesses and
effectual signs of grace etc. Art. 25.
own article, teach in this point. You had examples in the efficacy of other
words (whether the instance be made in propositions, or speeches which be not
propositions, it imports not) Lazarus come forth. which was the Royal Cyrill
Caten.
command of him whom all creatures obaie; and they were efficacious too. the
words (I say) were efficacious, not the omnipotency only, which was
principal; but the words were efficacious in their kind. Dixit and factum est.
S. E. did little think it would be necessary to put a Scholar in mind that
according to the Philosopher, Propositions, some be practick, factiuae, so his
interpreter turns the word ( lib. de motu Animalium, cap. 4) some speculatiue:
that Science is divided by speculatiue and practicke: and that Deuines do
consider in God, not only speculatiue knowledge, but practick also. Psalm 32.
Sap 7. Heb. 1.
Verbo Dei Coeli firmatisunt. Dixit and facta sunt. Omnium artifex sapientia.
Portans omnia verbo virtutis suae.

What kind of virtue those words have, whether Physical or only Moral, the
Schoolmen may dispute without prejudice to the general consent in matters
defined, or universally received.


Apologist. That pretty kind of Sophistry which persuades me to here out the
proposition operative before the conformity between the subject and the
predicate can be granted (as supposing the period of it to finish the
substantial change) besides that it is s^ender and boyish it is also
impertinent, because it plays upon a string allreadie broken, attributing that
change, which is, to the pronunciation of this proposition, which I have
allreadie refuted.


Censure. Ex tripode; pedanticallie, as all the rest. Can you judge of the
co^formitie or difformitie betwixt the subject and the predicate, before you
know what it is? or do you know what I would say before you here me speak?
Mirth is a -- is this true or false? Your conscience belike, tells you what the
predicate is to be. S. E. cannot persuade you, what can your own Master do?
Long consultius Scotus, (says he; Chamier l. 10. de Euch. c. 20.
) Conceptus qui causatur per orationem prolatam non habetur per eam nisi in
vltimo instanti prolationis orationis. Recte. Certum est enim nunquam posse
totum obtineri nisi ex omnibus simul partibus. Quia autem oration successiue
perficitur, non possunt omnes eius parts simul haberi, nisi in instanti eius
postremo; ideoque nec ipsa tota. and I think you will not say that you know
the conformity, before you conceive the proposition.

But it is impertinent, why so? because it plays upon a string allreadie
broken, attributing that change, which is, to the pronunciation of the
proposition. Were this the string, still he might (to keep your metaphore)
play on; for it holds as you perceived in your last paragraff. But you
mistake; the string which draws a man to hear out the whole proposition
before he knows or graunts the truth of it, or the conformity between the
subject and the predicate, is the light of reason, or ability to judge: which
string, if you have allreadie broken, you were best for your credit plead,
that it was high set. Nullum magnum ingenium sieve mixtura dementiae.


Apologist. Let S. E. flourish it as he will, our Doctor justly lays
tantalogie to his Lordships charge, which blow his Champion seeking to ward,
lays himself and the weakness of his cause to an easy censure.


Censure. If identitie of the thing signified by the subject and by the
attribute of a proposition, though the manner of signifying and conceauing be
groundedlie or cum fundamento diverse, suffice to note it of tautologie; then is
it tautolegie to say, pointing at Featlie, this is a man, a living creature, a
substance, and the sense will be, this is Featlie, Featlie, Featlie. For there
is ide^titie of the thing signified by the subject and the thing signified by
those attributes; man, living creature, substance: all these being reallie
identified to the subject, which is Featlie. And if the speech be nugatorie,
and the same conceit bread by the subject and by every one of these
attributes, the whole speech may be resolved by subordinating still the same
word to the same conceit: Ea quae in voce, sunt earum quae in anima passionum,
notae.

Whether in such propositions, the attributes be superior predicamentall
degrees, or be differences, or be metaphysicall properties, it matters not: so
there be real identitie betwixt the thing signified by the subject and the
thing signified by the attribute, whereof S. E. gave examples. God is wise, just
omnipotent, eternal. Omnipotens est aeternus, aeternus est omnipotens. Read
his discourse again: and observe in him these words, Confer. p. 923 9.
This must be granted (that identicall propositions, all, have the vice of
tautologie) if the difference of formalities be not to be regarded in speech:
and if the distinction of a double identicall proposition be now to be rejected.


Apologist. simple, simple, simple, simple, simple, simple.


Censure. The truth is so; simple, very simple: and the professors of truth,
should be so, simple. The word is honorable among Christians: though filled
with bitterness as it comes out of the mouth of Heresy, which (it self ever
doubling) thinks there is a fault plain dealing.

We tell our mind openly; we do not lap our cause up in folds, as you,
(sons of the old Serpent,) do: telling us, your tenet in this point is
incomprehensible, and yet easy: granting and strait denying again, a real
presence: and then, though no man can tell certainly what you say, we must
believe you: and if we do not we be simple, simple. It is an old trace, this.
he that showed it you, taught it others. Si bona fide quaeras, concreto vultu,
Tertull.
suspenso supercilio, Altum est, aiunt. Si subtiliter tents, per ambiguitates
bilingues, communem fidem adfirmant. siscire te subostendas, negant quic quid
agnoscunt. Si comminus certes, tuam simplicitatem sua caede dispergunt.
Simplices notamur apud illos, vt hoc tantum, non etiam sapientes: quasi statim
deficere cogatur a simplicitate sapientia, Domino vtramque iungente, Esto
prudentes vt serpents, and simplices vt columbae. Aut si nos propterea
^nsipientes quia simplices, number ergo and illi propterea non simplices quia
sapientes? Nocentissimi autem qui non simplices, sicut stultissimi qui non
sapientes. Et tamen malim in eam partem, meliori sumi vitio. Si forte praestat
minus sapere quam peius, errare quam fallere. -- Facilius simplicitas sola Deum
and agnoscere poterit and ostendere; prudentia sola concutere potius and
prodere. Abscon dat itaque se serpens, quantum potest, totamque prudentiam in
latebrarum ambagibus torque at, alte habitet, in coeca detrudatur, per
anfractus seriem suam euoluat, tortuose procedat nec semel totus lucifuga
bestia: Nostrae columbae domus simplex, etiam in aeditis semper, and apertis,
and ad lucem. Ask them in good earnest, they with a contracted countenance and
eyebrows drawn up, say, it is a mystery. try them cunningly and with
double-tougued ambiguities they profess the common tenet. Take on you to know,
and they deny whatsoever they (inwardly) approve. combat with them, and with
their whiffling they spread abroad and disperse your simplicity. (simple,
simple, simple, simple.) They call us simple, only so; to note us as unwise:
as if wisdom could not consist with simplicity, whereas our Lord does
combine them; be wise as serpents and simple as doves. Or, if we therefore
must be thought fools because we be simple, must we needs think them wise
for that they be not simple? Sure, those do most harm that want simplicity,
as those be most sottish that have no kind of prudence. and yet I had rather be
defective in this kind, then want simplicity: for he that has but little wit
is better then a start fool: and it is less hurtful to mistake ones self,
then to deceive or bring others into error. Simplicity alone may more easily
acknowledge and show God; prudence alone may move rather, Dei facies expectat
in simplicitate quaerentes, vt docet ipsa Sophia, no^ quidem Valentini sed
Salomonis. Ibidem.

In summa, Christum columba demonstrare solita est. Serpens ve^o tentare. Illa
and a primordio diuinae pacis praeco. Ille a primordio divine imaginis praedo.
Ita facilius simplicitas sola etc. Ibidem.


and betray. Wherefore let the snake hide himself what he can, let him wreath
and wind all his prudence within the turnings of his lurking holes, let the
light-abhorring beast dwell deep within the ground, be tumbled into blind
circuites, unfold and open those muolutions of his crinkling continuation,
crawle writhinglie, and not all at once. The house of our dove is simple, ever
in places discovered, and open, and to the light.


Apologist. Doctor Smith in confirmation of his discourse lays down a rule,
and gives two instances which I will sift in order. His rule runs thus,
subjects are such as their attributes permit them to be. Rather say I e
contra, Predicates are such as their subjects permit them to be: For we never
take that preposterous course to enquire whether a subject agree to the
predicate but whether the predicate agree with the subject.


Censure. Semper Leontini iuxta pocula. Still you teach Master Mirth, you be
Doctor of the Chair. Doctor Smith, he says Subjects are such etc. and other
Deuines too say the same, and Logic does admit it for a Rule in the matter of
Suppositions. But I, (who are you?) say the contrary let Logicians take it as
they will, I say Predicates are such as their subjects permit them to be. That
Subjects bear swaie, the Puritan thinks, is better Logic. Ipse dixit.

But yet, since you stand upon terms let us examine you. Do you know what is
Suppositio terminorum, and how many kinds of suppositio^s there be? if you do
not, the Punies of your House will be ashamed of such a Graduate: if you do,
then tell me before them, whether the predicate do not determine the
supposition of the subject in these propositions or speeches following, Homo
est vox, homo est species, homo est animal, homo currit, homo est mortuus. It
were to much honor to you to be posed in Divinity, else I would ask whether
there also, the same Rule be not current. Deus est trinus, Deus generat, Deus
procedit, Deus est immortalis. is it not the predicate which determines the
acception or supposition of the word Deus, which word of it self is indifferent
to stand for the first or the second or the third person; or for two, or for
all three? and sometimes in propositions it sta^ds for the first, sometimes for
the second; sometimes for the third. I might ask you further of words
aequiuocall in themselves, whether they draw their attributes to determination,
or their attributes determine them? but the things are allreadie known to
Punies.

In the reason which, you bring, you discover more your ignorance, for by it
appears manifestly that in this discourse you do not distinguish the things,
from the names: and Questions appertaining to the things, (as why the passion
is in the subject? why color is in a mixed body? which Question belonges to
natural Philosophy;) from the Questions appertaining to the terms, (of a
proposition:) as why the attribute determines the signification or acceptio^ of
the subject? which Question belongs to Logic.

The flower of Sophistry being dropped down out of your subtle understanding,
you fall next a sifting of instances: but the breaking of the string made a
hole it seems in your () for see; the first comes out entire.


Apologist. As for your instances they will not hold trial, the first is this,
as when I say this is a cross, and make it withal, the word this, does
suppose for the Cross etc. what of this? Christ was not about to make him
another body when he said. This is my body, for then Christ should have had
two bodies.


Censure. Did I not tell you that it came out entire? and, by that which comes
with it, me thinks the crack is wider then before.


Apologist. Your second instance in taceo (as supposing for silence when the
word is uttered) Aquinas reiects it. 3. p. q. 78. a. 5.


Censure. He has much there in that Article, against you: as, 1. that the
proposition is practical, such as does not presuppose the thing it signifies,
but make it; non praesupponit rem significatam, sed eam facit. 2. that hoc,
does not signify bread, but contentum sub his speciebus 3. that it is
heretical to say the body of our Savior is in the Sacrament only sicut in
signo and not secundum veritatem. with many other things. But against us, there
is nothing. That Istae propositiones, Ego tacco, Nihil dico, etc. non solum ex
intention proferentis, sed ex rigore sermonis sunt verae: ergo non significant
nisi pro momento terminatiuo nam dum proferuntur falsae sunt. Soto in 4. d. 11.
q 1. a. 5. Verbum est, non solum ex virtute intentionis proferentis, sed ex vi
significationis non significat perfectam rerum compositionem vsque ad completam
prolationem. Ibidem, Nomen and pronomen secundum Grammaticos non consignificat
tempus, sed Verbo id competit; quare demonstratio per se pronominis abstrahit a
tempore; scilicet and quo profertur pronomen, and quo terminatur totius
orationis prolatio. quare vtramque substantiam significat, pro qua item posset
supponere. At quia verbum, vt dictum est, consignificat tempus terminatiuum
orationis, virtute eiusdem verbi trahitur suppositio pronominis ad corpus,
Ibidem ex Richardo.
taceo signifies as my Lord said it did, Saint Thomas denies not. neither does
he deny that the proposition is to be understood secundum vltimum instans, as
then to have it is effect, which effect is the thing signified: yea he does
affirm it directly; oportet intelligere praedictam locutionem secundum
vltimum instans prolationis verborum. and in the precedent Article, he says in
vltimo instanti prolationis verba consequuntur virtutem co^uersiuam; whereby the
same is also manifest.

The proposition, Corpus meum est corpus meum, was true before and was not made
true by virtue of consecration; but it was not true before that our Saviors
body was in the shape of bread, or had Sacramental existence. Per hanc formam
fit vt corpus Christi sit in hoc Sacramento secundum ^eritatem. S. Thom.
Ibidem. and though this proposition Corpus meum est corpus meum be identicall
according to the manner; yet the proposition which we speak of, is not; as
you were told often enough in the Relation; where you may read still your
Doctors Predicament, which will stand, until he graunts the distinction of a
two fold identicall proposition, one for matter only, another for manner too.
wherefore no more of that.


Apologist. Put case I should grant you such power in those words (this is my
body) to transubstantiate the bread, may I not challeng the same force in them
to change the accidents as well as the substance, since they were likewise in
his hand when he pronounced them?


Censure. No. you cannot, as will appear, if you consider them well. this (in
the exteriours shape of bread) is my bo^^^. will you have is to be in that
shape, and yet the shape not to be; and our Saviors intention being to
institute a Sacrament, the exterior species which immediately does occur
unto the sense, was to remain. The Fathers also note, that, to take away the
S. Cyrill. Alex. Ep. ad Calos. Theophilac. in Mat. 26.5. Ambros. l. 4 de
Sacram. c. 4 Haimo in Pass. Christi sec Mar. Lanfranc. lib. de Corpo. S.
Bernard. Sermon. de Coena Dom.
horror of eating man's flesh, and drinking blood in their own shapes, they be
covered in the forms of bread and wine, which usually men receive. you have
S. Thomas in your hands, it seems; in him you may find more of this q. 75. a.
5.

Moreover, transubstantiation being a succession of substances under the same
accidental forms; you destroy the notion of it, if you take the same forms
away. they must remain the same. And that it is indeed so, that still there is
the exterior shape of bread, you know by sense: but whether under them there
be bread or flesh, the sense is not able to certify; you know that it enters
not so far. Some higher power must judge of it; and an understanding well
disposed (as being readier to believe God, then to rely on you, or on this
foolish dotage that God can do no more then man is able of himself to know,)
believes it is our Saviors body; since God affirms it But see! the Puritan
is in his ruff.


Apologist. Me thinks Master S. E. you close this Section very saucilie and
sillilie. For Doctor Featlie urging you that identicall propositions (such as
your discourse makes this) prove nothing, to try wether they can prove any
thing, asks this Question: If I point to Christ's body in Heaven at the right
hand of his Father and say, This, See above page 35.
or that body of Christ, is his body; will it hence follow than bread or any
thing else is substantiallie turned (into Christ's body?) you forsooth answer
him thus, No, but something else it seems is (turned;) how else could your mouth
utter such an impertinent discourse? It would have argued you of more
Schollership and judgment either to have been silent or else to have answered
him how mere identicall propositions can prove any thing.


Censure. Quantulacunque adeo est occasio, sufficit irae.

Was it not evident that the proposition was meerelie speculatiue; as much, as
if I, pointing at you, should say this is Waferer: and, this face is Mirths
own face? and that it did suppose allreadie in being, all that it imported?
and therefore was impertine^tie paralleled with this other which is not
meerelie speculatiue, nor supposes ^n being that which it importes; but, both
infer it. Our Saviors body Master Waferer, was not in the form of bread
before consecration; by consecration it was there Saint Non erat corpus
Christi ante co^secrationem: sed post co^secrationem dico tibi quod iam est
corpus Christi. ipse dixit and factum est S. Amb. l. 4. de Sacr. c. 4. ex pa^e
fit corpus. Ibidem. vides quam operatorius sit sermo Christi etc. Ibidem.
Ambrose he tells you so directly. so ^o Supra page 480. Should a lay man say
over a piece of bread Hoc est corpus (...) the proposition would be false;
wherefore it is not like Featlies. should a Priest with intention to
consecrate, pronounce them, they would be true.
others.

That propositions which for matter are identicall, may serve to prove or
infer, you might have known being Master of Art, and he (Featlie) being
Doctor in Divinity, without further teaching; which, (had any been thought
necessary,) was not altogether wanting on the part of S. E. whom you
reprehend for not teaching it. Did you run over without reading; or reading,
not understand those words in him page 94. For matter, a proposition may be
identicall, and prove too; and such are All those (here are infinite) which
define the subject (will you have insta^ce for your easie^ learning of his
mind?) as this, A man is a reasonable creature. And he that denies it can prove
any thing, shows him^self ignorant in the principles of Science and knows
not what a demonstration is. So he. and so I, do tell you now again. Your
Doctor (it is like) looks higher, and would have an instance in a matter more
elevated. Be it so God is eternal. will you have a proposition to prove it?
take this, God is immutable. you can make the Syllogism your self, I suppose.
Whatever thing is immutable is eternal, etc. Will you have a proposition to
prove that God is immutable? take this, Deus est actus purus. dispose it in
form of a Syllogism: Omnis actus purus est immutabilis; Deus est actus purus,
etc. will you have another to prove that God is actus purus? take this, Deus
est suum esse. Dispose it. It is easy to demonstrate, in this manner, that God
has understanding; that he is wise; that he is free; that he is merciful,
Just, Omnipotent; etc. taking still to make the proof good, such propositions
as are identicall for matter. And this likewise, S. E. did insinuate unto you
page 92. wherefore there was no cause to tax him with either want of
Schollership in the point, (yet a point, which neither you, nor your Master did
understand,) or ingenuitie. But this is not all.

Immediately after, you cite an other passage out of him, Which so wrought upon
your choler, that you term him cup-valiant; and; the beer is in his head;
and, he stumbles; and if his own weakness condemns him not, you will spare him.
Your mercy, sure, is great. if this be to spare, what will become of those you
do not spare? And this too, after you have taxed him with want of Schollership
and ingenuitie; adding that he concludes the Section saucilie, and (one blow
more, before you spare him,) sillilie. I forbear to transcribe the rest,
Spissis indigna theatris
Scripta pudet recitare, and nugis addere pondus.
But, that none else upon the like occasion, incur your high displeasure, I
will here register the fault in black characters; for it deserves them better,
then the red you give it. It is in his Notes upon the seventh argument, where
he defends out of S. Lukes Gospel, that at the last supper there were two
cups; the legal, and the Sacramental; interpreting S. Mathewes words (I will
drink no more of this fruit of the vine,) of the legal cup. which
interpretation the Doctor impugnes. Doctor Featlie. Page 111.
should I take: a cup, and after I had drunck of it, say I will drinck no more
of this, you would understand me of that which I drank last. The Answer of S.
E. Did I see the whole action I should judge according to that I saw, no
doubt. and S. Matthew seeing our Saviors action did conceive it will enough.
But should one or two tell me that Doctor Featlie at the table having drunk
bear and wine, said he would drink no more of this beer, I had no reason to
think he meant wine, though wine were last mentioned before. Now by the
relation of S. Matthew and S. Luke, it appear, that our Savior drank of two
several cups, and that he called the one of them the fruit of the vine; the
other his blood, and, his testament. Thus S. E. Where it will be as hard to
find a fault against manners any way, (were it that he did owe duty to your
Doctor) as to find in scirpo nodum, Et tua cum vdeas oculis mala lippusinunctis
cur --
if I be not much deceived.

But, suppose a fault. What incensed your upright zeal (which he had not
meddled with,) to fly on him so furiously? what distemper of your stomach
made you belch our such bitterness upon his Notes? what humor is it that makes
your ink, to stain, men's names, and honor? men, that offended not your
Innocence, whereof they neither spoke, nor thought, nor heard.

Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? You can tear with your mouths the credit
of whole multitudes of grave learned men; Deuines, Bishops, Councels,
Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum. If the Reader ever heard Puritan Sermon he
knows what stuff those things be made of
Popes, Church and all. vnicuique sepulchro sufficit vnum funus; and clauditur:
gutturi vestro honorum funera minime sufficient; and adhuc patet. you be still
ready to devour us. but your selves must not be told, not of your faults. We
must not, against your biting defend our good name. Why? because you, still,
are Innocent. After all your inuectiues, and calumnies when with your bitterness
against us you have scandalized your whole parish; you can wipe your mouth, and
say, I have done no wickedness.

What you do must be though well done, all. Men must adore your errors with
the title of truth. the bitter speeches that drop from your mouth must be
esteemed a sacred kind of vrbanitie. and when you dispute absurdlie, we must
not as much ar smile. O no. that were against the religion due to your, more
then sacred, worth. You are holy, no profane thing may come within your
circuit: much less touch you. Your fame is holy, your actions holy, your
writings holy, and your lies and leeres, all, holy. O the holiness of these
holy ones so the purity of these Puritans! o the candor of these sepulchers!
you must not press to near, nor speak much of them, neither; for your breath
may stain their white.

Hark! one cries out, Recede a me, noli me tangere, stand a far of, keep
aloof, touch me not, (why so, fair picture, will your colors come of
easily?) Ita ex Isaiae 65. legit S. Aug. Hom. 23. ex Hom, 50. Eodem modo
legunt Sep. tuag. apud S. Hier.
quoniam mundus sum; for I am clean: quia sanctior sum te, English bible.
Pagnin.
for I am holier the^ thou art. Are you so? c'rie you mercy. I am not as other
men are Pharisaeus, Luke 18.11.
Your Holiness, I hope, will pardon those who before did no so much reflect on
the delicacie of a Puritans reputation, which is so tender (I perceive now)
that it scarce endures a man to reflect on it. and since it is so nice, the
best counsel I can give you, (pure Images of Sanctity,) is this, that you
forbear challenging, and coming to answer distinctions; for you may chance to
meet with some who will not put their hats of, to Masters of Art, as soon as
they come in sight; especially in the distance, we are now. S. E sure will
not, if he be as you style him, (let me change your harsh language,) deux fois
tres-simple.


The sixth Argument was grounded upon the word Testament in S. Luke: where it is
taken, as my Lord Answered, for an authentic sign of the interior will or
sentence: and in this sense our Saviors blood, as under the form of wine, is
testamentum, a Testament.
The Apologist has made this Section, and the next very short; either because
he had very little to reply for his Doctor, or else to keep Decorum in his
Comedy. More Acts then five be not in fashion, wherefore the rest, (two short
Scenes, or Sections,) is all, Epilogue.

In the former of the Sections, he says, first, that it is only Christ's blood
here as it is shed here. where taking the word shed, in the ordinary common
acception (as he does expound himself afterward,) he does but beg the
Question: as will appear if we make the proposition (and he does himself
somewhere make the like,) of the body in the Sacrament: and say, it is only
Christ's body here, as it is crucified here. Who so poreblinde as not to see
this is petitio principij? He would be loath (I believe) to put this Argument
to those Catholics that never saw Master of Art in his habit, It is onli^
Christ's body in the Eucharist as it is crucified in the Eucharist; But it is
only sacramentallie (meaning in a sign) crucified in the Eucharist, Ergo it
is only sacramentallie (meaning a sign) in the Eucharist. For the Solution
whereof if you demand of any Catholic, i^ our Saviors body crucified in
the Eucharist? he tells you, No. demand again, is it there indeed reallie? he
Answers yes: so I have been taught and I believe it. And hereby, Master
Waferer, though he knows not the terms of Art, He denies that which is your
Mayor.

A Scholar will tell you further, of another sense of the word shed, when it
is attributed to the Sacramental cup; and of the word broken, when it is
attributed to the body; which you did not reflect upon when you made your
Argument. The body and blood of our Savior (the lamb sacrificed for the
world) are here in the species of things inanimate; which existence by reason
of the exterior forms gives occasion when we speak of the sacred actions
that are exercised toward or about them, to use that kind of speech which was
proper to sacrifices of that kind; whereof, some were solid and dry; others
liquid. among the solid was bread, which was broken, to signify the sovereign
dominion of Almighty God; Leuit. 2.
among the liquid was wine, which to the same end was powered out upon the
Altar. hence those words powered out or shed, and broken, are used to signify
the action of sacrifycing when the things offered or sacrificed be in forms
inanimate, of bread or wine; and even by our Savior himself, This is my body
which is broken for you 1 Cor. 11. this is my blood, of the new testament which
is powered out or shed for many. Matt. 26. This breaking for, and shedding for,
is unbloody sacrifycing. Which Calvin espied also, and confessed, when he
expounded the breaking in S. Paul, Calu in Epi, pri. Cor.
panis quem frangimus. frangi, says he, interpretor immolari.

But the Apologist obiectes again, out of the word shed. Howeuer it be shed,
(says he) it moves being powered out, if it move it is in a place, if in a
place then either circumscriptiuelie or definitiuelie. Here it appears that
(as before I noted) he speaks of shedding according to the ordinary common
acception of the word without reflecting on the other acception according to
which neither this nor the former Objection has any kind of appare^ce. For, a
thing may, by consecration, be put upon the Altar, in the form of wine,
without any local motion of it. And this presenting of it on the altar by
turning (not it, into an other thing, but) wine into it, done to signify the
sovereign dominion of almighty God, is one part of the sacrification which
we call unbloody. the other part is the putting of the body on the altar by
consecration, in the shape of bread. and both these, make one representation,
of the bloody sacrifice and oblation on the Cross.

But you are not yet accustomed to consider how words are extended (by reason
of analogy in the matters) to an equivocal kind of signification, (whereof in
the mysteries of Christianity, yea and in other matters too, there are
frequent examples,) wherefore I come nearer to your conceptio^; and in answer
to your doubt, tell you first that, as a thing may be in place either per se,
or per accidens: so may it be said locallie to be moved, either per se, or per
accidens. your soul in your hand, and the blood of our Savior here; Supra
page 471 and seqq.
are in loco, per accidens. I told you before more of this. Seco^dlie those two
modi which you speak of, do not sufficiently distinguish or expound that
which we call being in a place. God is in the world, yet neither of these two
ways: and our Saviors body in the Sacrament, though not either of these
ways which you speak of. The verity of Gods word does enforce a presence
distinct from both those. and to suppose there is none distinct, is, in you
that are Christened, an heretical begging of the Question.

Instead of a third reply, you demand, whether we believe that thing in the
Sacrament, (which you describe by transubstantiated bread and wine) to be the
price of our Redemption? I answer that I believe Jesus Christ, who told us
that, that thing in his hands, in the form of bread, was his body delivered
for our sins; and that thing in the chalice his blood, shed for us. This
Master Waferer, though you shrink, and cry, Alas fond faith; is part of my
Creed. That our Savior was borne of the Virgin Marie, is most certain; I
believe it. And I believe him (have I not cause?) that was so borne. I
willingly join with Antiquity, and with the Catholic and universal Church
of this Prince of peace, this Emmanuel, this Virgins-Sonne, this Heir apparent
of all that God has; Joan. 16.
who truly said Omnia quaecunque habet Pater mea sunt, even his Divinity, and
his knowledge, and his omnipote^cie: whereby He, Jesus, he was able to make good
his promise, the bread which I will give is my flesh, and to verify what he
did affirm, this (in form of bread) is my body.

Whilst you censured this faith, as fond, did not your conscience trouble you
Master Waferer? and when you named the price of our redemption in the cup; did
not your memory suggest unto you those words of S. Augustine before discussed,
where he said that Judas the traitor and a Devil, drank it: Judas, that took
it not by the way or means of faith; but only with his mouth yet he took
it; he took that (himself an infidel) quod fideles cognouerunt precium
nostrum. That precium, was not in the cup before consecration; S. Ambr. lib. 5.
de Sacr. c 5.
but after, it was there. Hear another as ancient, and his Catechist when he
came into the Church. Ante verba Christi, calix est vini and aquae plenus, vbi
verba Christi operata fuerint ibi sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit: Before
the words of Christ, the Chalice is full of wine and water: but when the words
of Christ have wrought, there (in the Chalice) is made the blood which redeemed
the people. Apol. page 89
So he. But Master Waferer wiser then he, Alas fond faith! if so you believe,
Lord help your unbelief.

This is all the little, he had in this matter to reply. he had wearied
himself it seems in the former Section; and his string was broken too, he
could not shoot rouing bolts as before he did. and therefore is now contented
to lie down.

Will you see how he lies? having nothing else to do, till he goes into the next
Section, I will loose a little time in counting how many lies I find here in
one page, the first of this Section; taking in (that the sense be co^pleate)
two lines out of the former, and almost two lines of the later; least I be
forced abruptly to break him of. I begin, as he does, with the Synopsis of
the matter.

Apologist. This Section refutes their construction of those words, The cup is
the new testament in my blood.


Censure. One.


Apologist. Shows that there is no substantial change wrought by them.


Censure. Two.


Apologist. That there is not identitie (material he means) in them, vzt of
the blood, and the thing whereinto the wine is changed.


Censure. Three. So far the Synopsis. Now the Discourse.


Apologist. By virtue of the words, This is my blood of the new Testament* This
cup is the new Testament in my blood, He (who?) will first conclude a
substantial change, and then consequently He, will presume identitie in them,
but both untruly.


Censure. Four. And yet there is favor too. For first, in the text, out o^
which S. E. if you mean him, defends and auouches the Real presence of the
blood, there is more then you cite; and he insisteth on words by you omitted,

Your Doctor had objected that no substa^tiall part of any testatour could be
properly his testament, in that se^ce wherein my Lord here took the words. S.
E. answers that this assertion of you Doctor is contrary to the Gospel which
importes as much as this, This drink in form of wine is my testament which
drink is shed for you. and hence he does avouch, If shed for us, it was blood,
blood a testament; and blood is ^ part. The text he cites, is in Saint Luke
whither he refers you to read the words of our Savior, which be the^, This
the Chalice the new testament in my blood which it shed for many unto
remission of sins. Secondly, in that you he, the chang of wine into blood,
and the identitie of blood with the thing unto which wine is changed, be not
^^ulie avouched out of the text, you ^peak at one time two untruths.


Apologist. I will distinctlie give answer to this confused Section.


Censure. Let this pass without a Note; though the Discourse in the ^ection as
he calls it, be distinct and ^leere, not confused: and this Apologist so far
from giving a distinct answer, that he does not answer.


Apologist. Doctor Smith and his Second, admit (what upon further try all they
deny) a figure in those words of the ^up.


Censure. Five.


Apologist. Ask them how they understand these words (this cup is the new
testament) and they reply properly enough. What then is the new Testament? it
cannot be denied but that it is the last and eternal will of Christ the
testatour etc. now how a cup which is no other the^ the work of an artificer
can be sai^ properly to be this, let who will judge.


Censure. Six. They do not say, that the artificial cup is either the
interior will, or the authentic sign of it; as he who will judge, may see
page 100. and seqq.


Apologist. But they proceed to affirm it, (the cup which is no other then
the work of an artificer,) properly to be called a Testament, because (say
they) it is an authentical sign of his will.


Censure. Seven.

Judge now Courteous Reader, whether this be a man to write books an^ teach
Divinity. I will not say he is either witles or willfullie malicious, t^ vent
such things in print, the book^ being yet extant which he does thu^ impugn:
but the learned friend h^ has will as easily maintain tha^ black is white,
as defend his innocence; unless (for I will not think him to be as he terms S.
E. cup-hardie,) as he was an infant, by his Relation, at the time of the
Conference, so yet he be indeed an Innocent. I have gonne over but six and
thirty lines, all lying together or lying altogether, and allreadie repent me
of the loss (not of my labor, for without labor I found what I looked for;
but) of time.

Should a man run over all your book in this manner, Master Waferer, he
would find this nastie Centon made to cover your needy cause, as full of
lies, as a slovenly beggars breech is full of (); though you pretend to be a
sworn enemy to that vice; and so far, that because equivocation does seem
to resemble it so^what, you bitterly declaime against equivocation too; and
challenge more credit to your bare affirmation the^ ^ Catholic is able to
deserve; sending us this insinuation, publikelie, by the print, Let me tell
you, a Protestant has more reason to be believed on his bare word, VVafer.
page 97.
then a Papist, because the Protestants religion ties him to speak the truth
from his heart without any mental reservation, but the Papists doctrine
teaches him a pretty kind of deceit called equivocation, and will not stick
to license the loudest lie, so it be aduantagiou^ to the cause of Rome.

And he too, Saint Jerome says, to me seems an Hypocrite, who says unto his
brother, stay, let me take a mot^ out of thine eye. Our Savior himself styles
him so; Hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own. You tell the Church
of Rome there is in he^ doctrine a pretty kind of deceit called equivocation,
which you ar^ offering nicelie to take out; an^ cannot see the monstrous lies
tha^ lie in your own book. to which (for they come out of your mout^ upon the
paper as thick as wasp^ out of a nest, whilst you are spe^king of a pretty
deceit which yo^ your self impose, you add an other in your book, that the
Papists doctrine will not stick to license the loudest lie. But who licencied
your Book Master Waferer? whose approbat had you to it? I should have thought,
none, but the Father ^ies, would have liked it; it is ^o enormouslie peccant,
against faith, and good manners; so full of ^ies, in matters of both kinds: had
I not heard, six months and more before the printer ma^e it a coat, where the
babe was ^t nurse; with other circumstances, which are known to Mistrisse
Feat^ie.


The seventh Argument was taken out of that place of S. Matthew where the cup
our Savior drank of, is called the fruit of the vine. It was answered that
there were two cups, the Legal and the Sacramental; and that those words (as
appears by by the relation of Saint Luke) were meant of the Legal cup though
it had been easy to answer the Argument had the^ been understood of the
Sacr^mentall.
M. Featlie would have the word spoken of the sacramental cup These words in
S. Matt. This fruit of the vine, must have relation (...) the Cup of which S.
Matt. spoke before: But S. Matt spoke of no Cup before, but the cup of the new
Testament: therefore etc.

Featlie, Relat. page 302.


o^lie; of no other cup then that of the new Testament. And he had his Answer.
Now Waferer, seeing it proved in the Relation that they were spoken of the
Legal cup; and Featlies Arguments being impertinent unless they be spoken of
the Sacramental; says that Christ spoke them undoubtedly of both Apol. page
91.
cups.

Undoubtedly, Master Waferer? can you demonstrate the thing by Theological
arguments unavoidable, and so teach your own Doctor? or point out in
Scripture the place or places, that affirm it? No? not that; you have nothing
which S.E. has not allreadie answered: what then?

Apologist. What incongruitie is it to determine the matter thus? S. Matthew and
S. Mark relate them to the consecrated cup, S. Luke after to the legal.


Censure. What incongruitie? is your undoubtedly, no better grounded?
undoubtedly your Doctor smiles, to see himself so undoubtedly confuted. The
incongruitie in your explication, is easily assigned; for, our Savior said of
the Sacramental cup, this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for
many unto remission of sins: and it cannot without incongruitie and
infidelity, be affirmed, that this thing, is the fruit of the vine properly.
We were not redeemed with wine. Moreover the words of consecration were spoken,
and thereby the sacramental cup consecrated, after supper; similiter and
Calicem postquam coenauit etc. the other words were spoken in supper time, of
that cup which was drunck before the consecration of the body of our Savior:
and answerablie to the words spoken of the lamb which at supper they did eat.
Desiderio desideraui hoc pascha manducare vobiscum antequam patiar: dic o enim
vobis quia ex hoc non manducabo illud (pascba) don^e impleatur in regno Dei.
With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer: for
I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fullfilled in
the kingdom of God. Lucae 22. reflect upon the Notes of S. E. and you will
easily conceive the matter.


Apologist. You cannot say Christ's body and blood can be received either
unworthily or to death, for to the receipt of them Christ has annexed the
promise of life.


Censure. The Apostle has taught us to distinguish two sorts of
Communica^tes: some do prove, examine, discuss their consciences, before: and
coming with due preparation, do receive worthily: these have the promise of
life, supposing they persevere. others, approaching unto the table with their
hearts bent on sin, do receive unworthily; and these offend greiuouslie in
so doing. Thus Judas the traitor, did receive the price of our Redemption;
which the rest of the Disciples received the former way. they to life: he, to
judgment; as has been declared else where more at large.

Page 357.
And whilst you deny that Christ's body can be received unworthily, you
contradict the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. v. 29.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. Eats unworthily: what? this bread.
What is it? he tells you before, v, 24.
in our Saviors words, take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you.
is it damnation to eat this unworthily? yes. Why so? because it is our Lords
body; and he that eats it unworthily, discernes it not in the manner of
receiving. he eats it as if it were common bread, requiring of it is nature no
spiritual preparation, no reverence; whereas it is in it self a most holy
thing, even the body that suffered for us; and as such, with great reverence,
to be received.


Apologist. Saint Paul's meaning is that who so comes to those holy
mysteries without that wherewith to discern the Lords body, is guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, not in that he has received them; but in that he
has not received them: since they only can be received by the mouth of faith.


Censure. Only by the mouth of faith! How then did Judas receive that which the
faithful know (though you do not) to be the price of our redemption; if that
ca^ be received only by the mouth of faith, which mouth the traitor had not?
And What a perverse exposition is this, whosoever shall eat this (consecrated)
bread (which our Savior v. 24 says, is his body, broken for us,)
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body of our Lord, that is, he shall be
guilty of the body, not in that he has received it, but in that he has not
received it. He receaues it the Apostle supposes, and unworthily: and heerby
he says, he shall be guilty. You say, No: he shall not be guilty in that he
receaues it, unworthily, is not this later contradictorie to the former?
Waferers negative, to S. Paul's affirmative: Again, S. Paul puts the fault in
so receiving; whosoever shall eat etc, unworthily; v. 27. and v. 30 For this
cause many sleep etc. Waferer, in not receiving, Not in that he has received,
but in that he has not received. Thirdly S. Paul says, he eats and
drinks damnation; those acts in him are sinful acts. commission. omissio^
Waferer; the damnation is for not eating, and not drinking.


Apologist. Let not him therefore who without due preparation (and so prophanes
the holy ordinance of God) unworthily eats the sacramental bread and drinks
of the cup, think that he does communicate of the body and blood of Christ,
for so he should receive to his salvation, but let him assure himself howsoever
he mix himself with the faithful at that holy banquet, yet he receaues
barelie the outward food, and not the heavenly, which can only be discerned
and received by a lively faith.


Censure. This then Master Mirth, is the substance of the Catechism you give
such as will believe you. The wicked receive barelie the outward food. Out of
which you shall give me leave to infer, Ergo the bare outward food is the
price of our Redemption, and, Ergo the bare outward food is the body that was
broken for us. The sequel, S. Paul, and S, Augustine, yea and our Savior
himself, will make good. Take 1. Cor. 11. v. 24.
eat, this is my body which is broken for you. v 29.
he that eats unworthily (the thing given when he said take, eat, this is
etc) eats damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. v. 30.
For this cause (for so eating, unworthily,) many are weak and sickly
amongst you. 1 Cor. 11. Our Lord himself tolerateth Judas, a Devil, a thief,
his seller, he lets him receive amongst the innocent Disciples, quod fideles
nouerunt precium nostrum. that which the faithful knew our price. S.
Augustine, Epist. 162.


Apologist. After S.E. has (so poorly as not worth the confutation) iumbled
in false witnesses, and cunningly smothered the testimony of those two who
would condemn him, he is so fool hardy as to affirm that though Christ said
of the consecrated cup that it was the fruit of the vine, yet it destroies not
his tenet of transubstantiation.


Censure. Fie Waferer; will you never leave your lying? if your book persevere
in the vice until the end (and it is now very near,) it will be condemned;
unless hypocrisy may save things otherwise obnoxious to the fire, Dare pondus
idonea fumo. The witnesses your Doctor brought were Clemens, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, The Author de dogmatibus, under the name of S. Augustine, the
Council of worms, and Innocent the third. These were all, and S.E. took
notice of and answered to them, all: and without adding any more; as he may
know who will turn unto the place, which is page 114. That Christ said of the
consecrated cup, it was the fruit of the vine, you find not in his Notes;
though he tells you, the Argument might have been answered if our Savior had
said so. See p. 108. and 117.

Your reply, videlicet, He is called a vine who was, none substantiallie so
wine is also called blood which was not so substantiallie, is a begging of the
Question, if you mean that your so; does import the same manner: and
ridiculous, if you intend to have the later part an illatio^ from the former.
The thing in the Chalice was the price of our Redemption, it was shed for the
remission of sins; could this be wine substantiallie, Vide S. Chrysostom. Hom. 24.
in Pri. Cor
or in propriety? And if in your form I said thus, S. John is called an eagle
who was none none substa^tiallie, so also Waferers Fathers was called a man who
was not so substa^tiallie, would you approve of the discourse: it is just as
yours. But now you come to your Postlegomena; where you recon up your Doctors
great exploites. Whole men belike, he has divided at a blow.

Secuit Lucilius Vrbem, Te -- Te --.
Apol. What this book speaks of Doctor Featlie who will rega^d since it
contrarily appears to the world, and can yet be justified to the doubtful by
witnesses now living that he often discovered your Fishers hooks, and took
him with his own angle; he has ever been Musket proof; he allwaise put
Sweetes mouth of relish. Egle-stones simples could not work with him. How
unlikely then is this report that Smith could ouerbeare him?


Censure. Ad populum phaleras. We know the man you speak of. In the
University there was an other opinion of him; and that which has publicly
appeared since (even in those pieces you commend him for) does confirm it. Did
he but see the Character of himself, which a Scholar drew out of the first of
those you name; he would be sorry that he ever put it out. By one that was
present.
I have heard too, what he said at home in his own house, touching the
Catalogue then demanded. A frinde of his, ( Birckbeck in his Catalogue,) has
endeavored since, to draw a skin over the soar; but in vain. So many
several Religions as he names, all those men which he puts down, could never
be contained in one Communion. The Wickleffists, Hussites, Waldenses, Lollards:
and the Deuines that wrote against them, the Councels that condemned them for
Heretics: were not of one mind all; were they? Lateran Co^sta^ce
Yet do you acknowledge those Heretics your Predecessors; and put the Deuines
and Councils into your Catalogue. Your task had been to have attoned them,
making it first appear they were of one Religion, all: and then after, to have
proved by good Evidence that this one, was the Protestant, and no other.

To unite those Heresies but now specified, amongst themselves, and with
Protestants, will be another ten years work for this Collectour; atque idem
iungat vulpes: after which he may spend twenty more, to reconcile the whole
multitude of all sorts, which he puts in: and then, when Est and non est be all
one, the wound may be drawn up.

He names Fathers and Councel^ too, (who knows not that Heretics lay claim
unto the first Disciples and Apostles, that they challen^ the Scripture to
themselves, an^ would draw God, such is their arrogancy, to their side,
obtruding their errors for his word?) whereas they contradict him flatly, as
has appeared in the trial; and by men of hi^ own side, more learned then
himself, has been confessed. It has been confessed I say that in many,
great matters, the Fathers, the Ancients, all the Fathers, all from the
Apostles time, the Fathers with mutual consent, all Antiquity, the ancient
Church, the Church of the first five or six-hundred years, the Church in the
very beginning, general Counsels, all General Counsels, are opposite to
them. This he may see proved out of their own books in the Conference of
Catholic and li. 2 c. 22.
Protestant Doctrine: and in the Protestants Tract. 1. Sect. 3.
Apology there is instance made in diverse particular points. Neither were it
hard for any understanding man that knows well the true State of the
Controversies betwixt us and Protestants, to make this Euidentist confess,
that no general Council, no Father at all, would ever have subscribed to the
book of his Confession, the 39. Articles.

If you look into him, to see how he proves that any one of the Ancients held
their tenets, all; as they are expressed in the 39. Articles; you loose your
labor: he does not (though this were the thing demanded) as much as undertake
it. Unless this be percha^ce a demonstration of the thing, (suppose I take your
In the first he puts the Apostles. Dixit and facta su^t
second Age,) Iustine says, that, as upon Alimentum hoc (eucharistizatus panis
and vinum) appellatur apud nos Eucharistia, quod nulli alij participare licitum
est, quam veram esse nostram doctrinam credenti, and lauachro propter
remissionem peccatorum and regenerationem abluto; ita vt Christus tradidit, viu
enti. Non enim vt co^munem panem neque communem potum ista sumimus; sed,
quemadmodum per verbum Dei caro factus est Christus Seruator noster, and carnem
and sanguinem salutis nostrae causa habuit: sic etiam per preces Verbi Dei ab
ipso Eucharistiam factam cibum ex quo sanguis and caro nostra per mutationem
aluntur, incarnati illius Jesus carnem and sanguinem esse edocti sumus. Nam
Apostoli in commentariis a se scriptis quae Euangelia vocantur, ita tradiderunt
praecepisse sibi Iesum. Eum enim pane accepto, cum gratias egisset, dixisse Hoc
facite in meam commemorationem, Hoc est corpus meum. Et poculo similiter
accepto, and gratiis actis dixisse, Hic est sanguis meus. Justin. Apol 2 ad
Antonin. Vide Bellar. li 2. de Euchar. c. 4. vbi dicit illa verba, Ex quo
sanguis and caro nostra per mutationem aluntur, esse periphrasim panis ex quo
conficitur Eucharistia, vt sit sensus; Panis vel cibus ex quo carnes nostrae
ali solent, cum praece mystica consecratur, fit corpus Christi.
Gods dixit the Word became man; so upon our Saviors dixit bread became flesh.
or water, wine. That, the Sacrament whose materia transiens is bread such as
men eat, is the flesh and blood of Christ, and That, Christ commanded, (this
Birckbeck knows not what.) Ergo he was a Protestant, and would have subscribed
to the 39. Articles.

Pope Eleutherius told See M. Broughtons Eccles. History of great Britain.
2. Age c. 14.
Lucius, that He (the king) was Gods Vicar in his kingdom: Ergo one of the two
(if not both) was a Protestant and would have subscribed to the 39. Articles.

Policrates and the Eastern Churches contradicted Victor (who was in the
Victoris sententiam probauerunt pp. Co^cilij Nicaeni vt patet ex Eusebius. l. 3.
de Vita Constant.

Et deinceps Haeretici habiti sunt qui contrarium senserunt, vt pater ex
Epiphan. haer. 50. and Aug. haeres. 29 Bell. li. 2 de Pont c 19.

Irenaeus victorem ne tam multas Ecclesias omnino propter traditionis ex
antiqua consuetudine inter illas vsurpatae obseruationem, a corpore vniuersae
Christi Ecclesiae penitus amputet -- apposite and conuenienter admonet. Eusebius.
l. 5. Hist. c. 24.


right) about the time of keeping Easter: Ergo they were Protestants and would
have subscribed to the 39. Articles.

Irenaeus held the Apostles Creed, and says too that the Scriptures are (in
their kind) Vnum quodque maxim tunc est perfectum cum propriam virtutem est
consecutum; and maxim secundum naturam: sicut circulus tunc maxim secundum
naturam est, quando maxim circulus est. Arist. 7. Phys. ^. 18. Yet is Irenaeus
for Tradition very full, l. 3. aduers. Haeres. c 3 Maximae and antiquissimae
and omnibus cognitae, a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo Romae
fundatae Ecclesiae, eam quam habet ab Apostolis traditionem and annunciatam
hominibus fidem per successiones Episcoporum peruenientem ad nos, indicantes,
confundimus omnes eos qui quoquo modo vel per vanam gloriam vel per coecitatem
and malam sententiam, praeterquam oportet colligunt. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam
propter pot^ntiorem pr^ncipalitatem necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc
est, ^os qui sunt vndique fideles, in qua semper ab his qui sunt vndique
conseruata est ea quae est ab Apostolis traditio. And in the next chapter, Quid
antem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat
o^d^nem sequi traditionis, quam tradideruntiis quibus committebant Ecclesias;
cui ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes Barbarorum eorum qui in Christum
credunt sine charactere vel atramento scriptam habentes per Spiritum in
cordibus salutem, and veterem traditionem diligenter custodientes, etc By the
way observe what he thought of the Universality of Jurisdiction which the
Church of Rome has Necesse est omnem Ecclesia^, etc. and his reason, propter
potentiorem principalitatem^ The words of Eusebius if they be well looked into,
import the same, ne a corpore Vniuersae Christi Ecclesiae penitus amputet. vt
supra,
perfect; that our Savior taking Accipiens panem, suum corpus confitebatur?
(how? the Evangelist declares, Jesus took bread, and blessed i^ etc and said,
take, eat, This is my body. Mat. 26.) and temperamentum calicis sui sanguinem
confirmauit. (this is my blood of the new testament; which is shed for many
unto remission of sins. Ibi^em) ^. Iraen li. 4. c. 57. Our Saviors words,
the words of consecration were practical, and did infer what they signify;
as you see by Antiquity confessed, Supra, page 479 and seq. where this Father
is also amongst the rest. And that he did unto he change require omnipotency
as principal, you may know by his own words also, li. 4. c. 34. Quomodo
constabit ^is (he speaks of Heretics who denied our Savior to be
omnipotent,) eum p^nem in quo gratiae actae sunt, esse corpus Domini sui and
calicem sanguinis eius, si non ipsum Fabricatoris mundi filium dicant, id est
Verbum eius, per quod lignum fructificat, etc.
bread into his hands said Hoc est corpus meum, the words of consecration; that
the G^osticks used Heatheri^h rights toward Arts magicas operantur and ipsi
(Carpocratiani) and incantationes, philtra quoque and ^h^titesi^ etc dicentes
se porestatem habere ^d d^m^^a^dum iam principibus and fabricatoribus mundi
huius. S. ^ren lib. 1 c. 24 Gnosticos autem se vocant, etiam imagines quasdam
quidem depictas, quasdam autem and de reliqua materia fabricatas habent,
dicentes formam Christi factam a Pilato illo tempore quo f^i Jesus cum
hominibus; and has co^onant and proponunt eas cum imaginibus mundi
Philosophorum, videlicet cum imaginibus Pythagorae, and Platonis and
Aristotelis and reliquorum; and reliquam obseruationem circa eas, fimiliter vt
Gentes, faciunt. Ibidem.
im^g^s; that the Disciples of Basilices used enchantments and called on
Vtuntur and (qui sunt a Basilide) imaginibus and incantationibus, and reliqua
vniuersa pa^erga: nomina quoque quaedam affingentes quasi Angelorum annunciant;
hos quidem esse in primo coelo, hos autem in secundo, and deinceps nituntur
365. ementitorum coelorum and nomina and principia and Angelos and virtutes
exponere, S. Iren l. 1. c. 23. The Church did not thus: yet she honored the
good Spirits: as by one of the same Age, S. Iustine who^ you cited as a
Protestant you may know, He speaks in the name of Irenaeus and Polycarp and
the whole Church of that time; Sed and illum (Deum Patrem,) and eius Filium qui
venit nosque haec docuit, and aliorum sequentium, similiumque bonorum
Angelorum, exercitum and Spiritum Propheticum (...) colimus atque adoramus,
verboque and re seu veritate veneramur: idque omnibus qui discere volunt, vt
docti institutique sumus, copiose tradimus. Apolog. 2. ad Anton.
Spirits, but the Church not; that there is no way to be saved but by believing
in Jesus Christ; Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no name
under heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved. Acts, 4. v. 12. Ergo
he was a Protestant, and would have subscribed to the 39. Articles.

Melito putting down the books of the old Testament says The Scriptures
themselves were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius his time.
He says the Epistles of James, of Jude, the second of Peeter the second and
third of John, are contradicted The Church of Syria did not receive the second
Epistle of of Peeter, nor the second and third of John, nor the Epistle of
Jude, nor the Apocalypse. The like might be said of the Churches of Arabia.
Will you hence conclude that those parts of Scripture were not Apostolic, or
that we need not receive them, because they were formerly doubted of? Bilson
in his Survey, page 664. See Couel against Burg. 87. and seqq. Tbe Protest.
Apol tract. 2. c. 2 sect. 10. subd 2.
nothing Simon dicebat secundum ipsius gratiam saluari homines, sed non
secundum operas iustas. S. Iren. l. 1. c 20.
of Judith etc. Ergo he was a Protestant and would have subscribed to the 39.
Articles. See Gretser his defense of Bellarm. de verbo Dei.


Clemens Alexandrinus, says our Lord Vinum benedixit cum dixit, Accipite etc.
l. 2. Paedag. c. 2. Sanguis vitis, verbum, quod pro multis effunditur in
remissionem peccatorum, sanctum laetitiae fluentum allegori^^ significat.
Ibidem.
blessed (not bear, but) The same would Elfrick say (touching the other kind)
when he tells you, there is much difference betwixt the body Christ suffered
in, and the body that is hallowed to how sell. That which the Priest
consecrateth, and that which our Savior took, was bread: and there is great
difference betwixt bread and a man's body. But after consecration, he tells
you: In that holy housell there is one thing in it seen, and another (not
seen, but) understood: that which is there seen, has bodily shape; and that
we do there understand, has ghostly might. The housell is dealed into
sundry parts, chewed between teeth, and sent into the belly. Howbeit
nevertheless, after ghostly might, it is all in every part. See above, page
330. the testimony of Stephanus Eduensis about whose time this Elfrick is by
the Protestants said to have lived; and of Lanfranck Archbishop of Canturburie,
who lived soon after: and tells what was the belief of England and of the
world, in this point, at that time. vt vere dici possit and ipsum corpus quod
de Virgin sumptum est nos sumere, and non ipsum: ipsum quidem quantum ad
essentiam etc. hanc fidem tenuit a priscis temporibus, and nunc tenet Ecclesia
quae per totum orbem etc. Supra page 331.
wine, that he had learned to walk upon earth, not (absolutely and for it
self) to Relative honor, in due circumstances, he denies not. Put of thy
shoes, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground. Exodus 3, The
Israelites were commanded to bow before the Arck, which had in it two
Cherubins made of gold. Adore his footestoole because it is holy. Psalm 98
And they did so: Venerabantur quondam Iudaei Sancta Sanctorum, quia erant ibi
Cherubim, propitiatorium, etc S. Hieron. Epist. ad Marcell. Mark that Quia.
The Prophets, their directors, knew the meaning of Adorate scabellum, and Non
facies tibi sculptile, better, I trow, then John Calvin.

As for Clemens Alex. the learned know that his discourse in the book objected
is against the Pagan Idolatry. Cur o stolid^ (he speaks to the Heathens) and
inanium rerum dediti cogitationi, coelestem locum maledictis incessentes,
pietatem ac religionem in so^^m detraxistis? Terrestres Deos (Mercurium, Iouem,
etc.) vobis fingentes, and haec g^nita ante Deum ingeni^um. persequentes, in
profundiorem incidistis caligine^. Pulcher est lapis Parius, sed nondum est
Neptunus. Pulchrum est ebur, sed nondum est Olympius. Materia semper art
indiget. Deus autem nullius indigus. Cle^ens Alex. in Protrept. sieve Orat.
adhort. ad Gentes. Ego ^utem terram (those Idols, made of gold or other
pre^ious matter, were originallie of earth: and therefore ^e calls them so,)
calcare didici non adorare: non enim ^^hi fas vnqua^ rebus inanimatis credere
spes animae. Ibidem. Mercurium tanquam ianitorem etc. si tanquam ^nsensibiles
eos iniuria afficiunt, cur adorant vt Deos? Romani aute^ qui res maximas and
praeclare gestas For^onae attribuunt, and eam esse Deam maximam existi^ant,
posuerunt eam in sterquilinio: dignum Deae templum, secessum tribuentes. Ibidem.

^^pridius whose words are used to prove Christian Churches had no pictures in
the^, speaks of Idols. Alexander ^mperator Christo templum facere voluit,
eumque inter Deos recipere: quod and Adrianus cogitasse fertur, qui templa in
omnibus ciuitatibus sine simulachris ius^etat fieri, quae hodie id circo quia
non habent Numina, dicuntur Adriani, etc. Lamprid. (...) Alexand,


worship it; Ergo he was a Protestant, and would have subscribed to the 39.
Articles.

The Church of Smnirna could not be ^nduced to leave Christ and worship any
other for him; and they did (...) look your Dictionarie great Rabbin. And read
again S. Iustins words, supra page 546.
honor his honourers; Ergo they were Protestants, and would have subscribed to
the 39. Articles.

Polycarp when he gave thanks to God for calling him to Martyrdom, did not
invoke the Saints; Ergo he was a Protestant, and would have subscribed to
the 39. Articles.

Hegesippus lived in this second age he was of the Jewish Nation; and was
afterward converted to Christianity: Ergo he was a Protestant, and would have
subscribed to the 39. Articles.

These are the men, all that he names in the In the first Age* he names Christ
and his Apostles; which is a begging of the Question. Vide Collationem doct
Cathol. a^ Protest. cum, expressis S. Scripturae verbis. Parisiiis anno. 1622.

Adding two more: S Denis, citing his book, ex qu^ Pontificij m^lle petunt
testimonia, says Cook and S Ignatius, in whose few Epistles be many
testimonies against Protestants; whereof ^ome have been objected to Featlie
upon the like Challeng, by D. Weston.


second age, (Birckbeck* In the second age from 100. to 200. Iustine the
Martyr. Hegesippus. The Church of Smyrna, touching the Martyrdom of their
Bishop Polycarp. Melito Bishop of Sardis. Pope Eleutherius his Epistle to
Lucius, the first Christian king of Britai^e. Polycrates of Ephesus, and the
Eastern Churches, touching the keeping of Easter. ^^enaeus Bishop of Lions.
Clemens Alex^ndrinus.)

These I say, be men which he brings; and I have briefly pointed at ^is
proof, running it as I did, suddenly over: for though he were long ^n
making, I do not think the book worth serious reading. If any of his Parish
think the forsaid Arguments ^e good, I pity them. Sapientia pri^a est
stultitia caruisse.

Some there, will see by this little ^ight, how easily his pretense may be ^ut
of by the neck. The head of it, is his claim to our Savior and his Apo^^les,
whose words in Scripture you think, and would force us to be^eeue, be
Protestantish. Whereas the ^earned on both sides know the Scripture (and
consequently the Writers and Authors of it) to be for us, so d^rectlie, that
Protestants refuse to sta^^ unto the proper sense. An experienc^ whereof the
Reader has seen in the Question here discussed, wherei^ Scripture is for
Catholics so man^fest that our Adversaries themselu^^ confess, Supra, page 293
they must yield us the ca^se if it be taken (...), properly.

The trunc of a man's body being deuoid of life and soul that conta^nes and
holds all together, quickl^ resolves, rendering to each element h^^ own share.
The imagination is n^^ sooner quiet but the Chimera which it had made up of
diverse and repu^nant natures, cease to be; the n^tures remaining the same
they we^^ before it fell a working. It was Birc^becks fantasy that raised up
t^^ corpse of his pretense, assembling d^uers and repugnant Religions to m^ke up
a Protestantish body: but no^ that he has betaken himself to re^^ things
appear just as they were before. Catholics be Catholics; A^^ans, Arians;
Lollards, Lollards. No ^atalogue appears of men, whose ^eligion were current
amongst you; ^ho did they live now (believing (...) they believed) would
subscribe to ^e 39. Articles of your Church.

Had the Saints whom you recite, ^mbrose, Austine, Basil, Cyrill, Gregory,
^eo, Chrysostom, etc. had the Fathers that were in the Councels of Nice,
E^hesus, Chalcedon, been borne and ^^ued amongst you sometime within ^ur
memory, one may guess what ^ntertainement they should have found. It does
appear, by the testimony of Whole succeeding Ages, which profess to have
received these things, and their Religion generally, from them.
more men then are in England; it is known by their own confession, that they
did believe and frequent S. Ambros. lib. de Sacramentis. Where also he does
expound* the Mass. S. Aug. Conc. 1. in Psalm 33 Nondum erat Sacrificium
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, quod Fideles norunt, and qui Euangelium
legerunt: quod Sacrificium nunc diffusum est ^oto ^^^e terrarum. And his Mother
to went to Mass. l 9. Conf. c. 13. S* Basil Homil. 19. Et in Liturg. S.
Cyrill. Cateches. Mist. 5. Where h^ does likewise expound the Mass. S.
Grego. Hom. 1. de Resurrec^ Non expectat Pilati iudicium, sed per ineffabilem
and arcanum S. crificij modu^ sua dispositione and administratione praeoccupat
impetu^ violentum, ac sese in oblationem and victimam offert pro nobis S^cerdos
simul and Agnus Dei. Quando hoc accidit? cum suum corp^ ad edendum, and
sanguinem suum familiaribus ad bibendum pr^ buit. Cuilibet enim perspicuum est,
quod oue vesci homo non poss^ nisi comestionem mactatio praecesserit: cum
igitur dedit discipul^ suis corpus ad comedendum, aperte demonstrauit iam
fuisse perfec^ and absolutam immolationem. It is not Mortons obiectiue tantu^
non subiectiue, that he believed. S. Leo Sermon. 7. de Pass. S. Chr^sost. li. 3.
and 6. de Sacerdot. and Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebr^^ Id ips^^ semper offerimus
etc. Vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus exstens, and illic plenus, vnum
corpus. Et in Liturg. Conc. Niceu. Act. and can. 14. Conc. Ephesians. in Cyrilli
Anathem. The words a^ cited above, page 350. and they destroy Mortons evasion
(...) obiectiue tantum: so does all that has hitherto been sa^ of the real
presence. Conc. Chalc. act. 3. in dam. Diosc.

The like is easily shovvne of the rest of those he names, (...) S. Ierom.
Aduers Virgil. c. 3. and Epist 150. ad Hedib. q. 2. S. Hilar, 3. ad Constable. S.
Epiphanius. Haeresi 55. and Epist. ad Ioh. Hier. Optat^ Il. 6 de Schis Donat.
S. Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 3 4. and 5. S. Athana^ who was as the Council of
Nice, can. 14. S. Cyprian. l. 1. Epi^ 19. and l 2. Epist. 3. Whereunto add
the Sermon de Coena. S. I^stin. Mart. Dialo. cum Triphone. S. Irenaeus li. 4.
c. 32. Calicem q^ ex ea creatura quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem (Jesus)
co^fessus est, (Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti qui pro mult^ effundetur
in remissionem peccatorum, Matt 26.) and noui test^menti Nouam docuit
oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis ac^ piens, in vniuerso mundo offer^ Deo.


unbloody Sacrifice, S. Aug. li. de cura pro mortuis. c. 1. In Machabaeoru^
libr^s legimus oblatum pro mortuis Sacrificium: sed etsi nuquam in Scripturis
veteribus legeretur, non parua est Vni^ersae Ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine
claret Authoritas; ^bi inprecibus Sacerdotis quae Domino Deo ad Altar
fun^^ntur, locum suum habet etiam commemoratio mortuorum, (...) cap. 4. Non
sunt praetermittendae supplicationes pro ^piritibus mortuorum, etc. and l 9.
Confess. c 13 he ^e particularly commends his dead mother to the prayers of
Priests, meminerint ad altar tuu^ etc. S Chrysostom. Hom. 41 in 1. Cor. and Hom.
3. in Epist. ad Phil. Non fru^ra haec ab Apostolis sunt legibus constituta, vt
in Ve^^erandis inquam atque horrificis mysteriis, memoria eorum fiat qui
decesserunt, nouerant hinc^ multum ad ^llos lucri accedere, multum vtilitatis
Epiphan. Haeres. ^5 Dicebat Aerius, qua ratione post mortem nomina^is nomina
mortuorum? etc. quis autem mag^s de his ^ouit, hicne seductus homo qui etiam
nunc superest, ^ut qui ante nos fuerunt, habentes ante nos traditionem in
Ecclesia, qu^que etiam a Patribus fuis traditum ^acceperunt, que^admodum etia^
hi a suis Patribus qui ante ipsos fueru^t, etc. Prosunt and praeces quae pro
ipsis fiu^t etiam si totam culpam non abscindant. Where he teaches against
Aerius the Heretic, that this i^ a Tradition in the Church received a
Patribus. See the Collation l 2. c. 23. S. Cyrill, Hier. Catech. Mist. 5. Pro
omnibus oramus qui ante nos vita functi sunt, maximum credentes animarum
iuuamen pro quibus offertu^ obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi quod ante nos
positum est Sacrificij See more concerning the antiqu^tie of this custom, in
S. John Damascens Oration, Quod desuncti Missis iuuentur,
offer for the dead, communicate wit^ the S. Ireneaeus l. 3. c 3. necesse est
propter potentiorem principalitatem his words are cited above page 544. S.
Hiero. Epist. ad Damas. Cathedrae Petri communione consocior, super illam
petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio. S. Aug. Epist. 162. Romanae Ecclesiae in qua
semper viguit Apostolica^ Cathedrae principatus. Optat. li. 2. adu. Parm. Leo
magnus^ Epist. 84. ad vna^ Petri Sedem Vniuersalis Ecclesiae cura conflueret.
Council. Chalced. Relat. ad Leonem, sicut nos Capiti membra sic summitas tua
filijs. S. Greg. in Psalm. 5. Poenit. Caput omnium Ecclesiarum Romanam
Ecclesiam. Vide Coccium in Thesau. Tom. 1. l. 7. a. 6.
See of Rome: and hear, ye^ and many of them The Liturgy which was used by S.
Ambrose, is yet extant. and so are the Liturgies also of S. Basil, and S.
Chrysostom. Vide S. Ambros. Epist. 33 ad Marcellin. for. Proclum de tradit.
diu. Liturgiae Petr. Diac. ad Fulg. c 8. Syn. Trull. can. 32. circa quem
canonem vide Suarezium disp. 75, sec. 1, In the Liturgies, names, have been
added. See Perron, page 817.
say, Mass. I hope no Pursuiuant over hears me. Whist! let us talk of some
thing else* least inquiry be made after S. Peeter too, who (be it spoken
betwixt us two) did the same. Hitherto he has escaped, for no Pursuiuant with
his commission ever found the way thither where he is.

He that amongst the Fathers is pretended in the Catalogue for most points, is
S. Augustine, who is, Birckbeck says, against Church-tradition, the real
presence, worship of images, invocation of Saints, merit and efficacy of
works done in grace; and held only two Sacraments: whence he leaves his
Parish to conclude, he was a Protestant. But when he thinks the thing is done,
the task returns again. Saint Augustine did hold and maintain S Aug Epist.
118 de Corr. and gra c. 13. de Spiritu and lit. c. 17.
merit of works done in grace, Ergo he Was no Protestant. He allowed
invocation of L^. 20. cont. Faust. c. 21. l. 21 de ciuit. c. 27. de cura pro
mort. c. 4. de bapt l. 7. c. 1.
Saints, Ergo he was no Protestant. He did approve of honor given to In Joan.
tract. 36, de cons. Euang. l. 1. c. 10. de Trinit. l 3. c. 10. Doct. Christ. l.
3. c. 9 Epist. 103.
relics, holy signs, and the Cross or Crucifix, Ergo he was no Protestant.
He admitted Li. 2 con Petil. c 104. l. 2. con. Ep Pa^m. c. 13. de bono coniugij
c. 24.
more Sacraments them two, Ergo he was no Protestant. He believed the Epist
162. Conc. 1 in Psalm. 33. l 9. Conf. c. 13. l. 2. con. Adu. leg. c. 9.
real presence to the signs and mouth, Ergo he was no Protestant. He received
books of Scripture according to the judgment of the Catholic Con. Epist.
Fund. c. 5. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 8.
Church, Ergo he was no Protestant. He submitted his judgment to the Lib. 1. de
Bapt. c. 18. l. 2. c. 4. and 9. l 5. c. 17. de unit. Eccl. c. 19. lib. 1. cont.
Cresc. c. 32. 33. de vtil. cred c. 17 See the Co^fessio Augustiniana. He that
subscribeth must admit all your Articles but the denial of one or two is
enough to make one to be no Protestant.
judgment of the Catholic Church in a Plenarie Counsel, Ergo he was no
Protestant.

Shall I look a little further into the Catalogue? Who be here? Gregory our
Apostle, Austine the Monk, Venerable Bede, Charles the Great, Saint Anselme,
Remigius, Columban, Venantius Fortunatus, Theophilact, Oecumenius, gratian:
what? Were these Protestants? It seems by the Collectour. And rather then want
(impudence) he fills rooms with Monks and Abbots. and S. Bridget is there too.
Schoolmen also, (for he has opened a case to let in all,) Peeter Lombard,
Bonauenture, Ockam, Holcot, Alexander Hales, Ariminensis, Gerson, Biel, Scotus:
any body, every body.

So he but profess himself a Christian, what shall hinder? Suppose him a
Papist, as Li. ad Eugen. de consid. c. 8.
Bernard; he may be in. Or a Pope, as Epist. 84. ad Anast. and Sermon 3. de
anniuers. assumpt.
Leo the great, he may be in. If he maintain worship of images, as Lib. 4. de
fide orthod c. 12. and 17.
Damascen, he may be in. If he defend prayer to Saints and for the dead, as In
4. Sent. did. 45. qu 1. and q. 4. a. 1.
Durand, put him in too. Eusebius Caesariensis was an S. Athan. l. de decret.
Syn. Nicen. S. Hier. adu Ruff. Syn. 7. act 5.
Arian, yet he is in. Tertullia^ was a Hieron. de Script. Eccles.
Montanist, he is in. The author of the books Birck. page 157

S. Thom. In his Theological Sum: and in his Commentary upon the books of
Sentences.


de Ecclesiastica and coelesti Hierarchia, he styles a Knight of the post; and
yet has put him in. Nothing that I can see keeps one out. S. Thomas held the
lawfullnes of Communion in one kind, prayer to Saints, worship of images, merit
of works, unbloody Sacrifice, transsubstantiation. He was a Friar, and a
Massing Priest, (as they speak;) he acknowledged the Popes Supremacy, and
submitted his judgment to the Church: yet S. Thomas is in. Take heed Reader,
(whateuer thou be,) of writing; for if he find thy name in print, he will put
it in too.

If he names not these for Protestants, where is the Edant origines Ecclesiarum
suarum^e uoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorum etc. Tertull. lib. de de P^aesc. c.
32 Qui estis? quando and vnde venistis? Quid in meo agitis non mei? -- Mea est
possessio? Olim possideo, prior possideo Ibidem c. 37.
Catalogue? In his Epistle to the Reader he tells of a Catalogue of their
Professors, which the dispute in his Parish occasioned him to draw: and that
Featlie did encourage him to go on with it, and put in, and put out: and this
is the ten years work. In which time it seems he forgot what he was all the
while about.

The men he fawnes on most, be Wickleffists, Hussits, and Leonists o^
Waldensians, who themselves could not show their Catalogue of Predecessors.
neither were they of the Protestant Religion, as my Lord of Chalcedon has
demo^strated in his book^ de Authore and Essentia Religionis Protestanticae.
But do you not think Maste^ Birckbeck, that some in England have their eyes
upon an ugly foul Co^seque^ce that atte^des the maintainin^ of such men,
Wickleffists and Hussits, to have been in their times the Church of God, and
the purer part of it? One of their tenets is, (and if they were. the Church of
God, their Authority was not little,) that a man by a mortal sin loses
his Nullus est Dominus ciuilis, nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum
est in peccaro mortali VVickleff. art. 15. Conc. Constable. sess. 8. and Hus ibidem
sess. 15. a. 30.
dignity, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Temporal. another, that VVickleff^
apud VValdens. tomo 1. l. 2. c 8, and 9 Hus in Conc Constable. sess. 15. Praesciti
non sunt parts Ecclesiae, cum nulla pars eius ab ea finaliter excidet, eo quod
prae jest in^tionis charitas quae ipsam ligat non excidit. See the Protest
Apol. tract 2 c. 2. sect. 4 and 5. and sect. 3 ^t is confessed also of the
Waldensis, that they h^^d Neither Priest nor civil magistrate being guilty of
mortal sin, enjoy their dignity or are to be obaid.
none but the Predestined be in the Church. Where such Maxims (and they be
their Maxims,) be fixed in the mind, what obedience, what loyalty, what order
can be expected either in Hierarchy or in Monarchy? Sure, where all sins
are of their nature, Habeant filij Dei omne peecatum mortale esse, quia etc.
Calu. l. 2. Inst. c 8. ^. 59 VVickleff. apud VVald^ to. 2, de Sacram. c. 54 and
seqq Lutherus vero in def. a^^ 32. dixit omne opus hominis iusti esse peccatum,
ex natura sua mortale. See Abbots, and whittak.
mortal, (another Maxim amongst amongst Puritans) a Prince that had subjects
so instructed, had need look about him.

But enough; to much much of this Waferer, is it not? Let us dismiss Birckbeck
with his Evidence, and make an end of our own work. Ye^ stay: take your
Fathers blessing before you go. Kneel you too, Mirth.

Martinus Cont Artic Louan. these 27.
Lutherus. Haereticos seri^ censemus and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei Swinglianos
and Sacramentarios omnes, qui negant Christi corpus and sanguinem ore carnali
sumi in Venerabili Eucharistia.

Fie, for shame: was this a godli^ course; to solicit men first, from the
Catholic faith and Church; then t^ ride to Oxford to look out another (if any
blind one might be found) i^ D. Potters library? Did you not Ne si fort esuas
repetitum venerit olim Grex auium plumas moueat cornicula risum Fu^tinis nu^
^data coloribus.
fear, when Coccius l. 8. a. 10.
Lutherans h. Ibidem a. 4 Prot. Apol.
VVickleffists, and (h) Hussites should be heard to disclaim, as they do, from
your Profession, that your nakedness would appear? The partridg, Jeremy says,
gathers young which she has not brought forth. He gathered riches and not in
judgment; in the midst of his days he shall leave them: and his later end
shall be a fool. A throne of glory of height from the beginning the place of
our Sanctification. O Lord, the expectation of Israel, all that forsake thee
shall be confounded. Ierem. 17. Perdix nimis contentiosum animal, notum est
qua^ta auiditare ipsius contentionis currat in laqueum. Non enim disputare
amant Haeretici, sed quoquo modo superare impudentissima peruicacia, vt
congregent quae non pepererunt. Christianos enim, quos maxim Christi nomine
seducunt, iam per ipsius Christi Euangelium natos inueniunt, and faciunt illos
diuitias suas non sane cum iudicio, sed cum temeritate* inconsiderata, Non enim
intelligunt ibi esse veram and salubrem, and quodammodo germanam atque
radicalem Christianam Societatem, vnde istos separauerunt, quos ad suas
diuit^as congregauerunt. S Augustine. lib. 13. contr. Faust. cap. 12. Et tanquam
ille quem catech^zamus quaerere^ and diceret, Quo ergo signo manifesto, adhuc
paruulus and nondum vaiens liquidam discernere a tot erroribus veritatem; quo
manifesto indicio tenebo Ecclesiam Christi in quem iam credere tanta rerum
antea praedictarum manifestatione compellor? Sequi^ur idem Propheta, and
tanquam motus animi eius ordinatissime excipiens, docet eum, Ecclesiam Christi
ipsam esse praedictam quae omnibus emine^ and apparet. Ipsa enim est seeds
gloriae de qua dicit Apostolus, Templum Dei Sanctum est quod estis vos. vnde
iste dicit, Seeds autem gloriae exaltata est, sanctificatio nostra. Propter hos
enim motus paruulorum qui possunt seduci ab hominibus a manif^statione
claritatis Ecclesiae, Dominus quoque prouidens a^t, Non potest ciuitas abscondi
supra montem constituta; quia vbiquo seeds gloriae exaltata est sanctificatio
nostra, vt non audiantur illi qui ad scissuras traducunt dicentes, Ecce hic est
Christus, ecce illic. Parts enim ostendunt dicentes, ecce hic, ecce illic: cum
illa ciuitas super montem sit; quem montem, nisi ^um qui secundum Prophetiam
Danielis ex paruulo lapide creuit, and factus est mons magnus, ita vt Impleret
vniuersam terram? Ibidem cap. 13.

Stay. I had forgot a fine Argument. The Hussites held Scripture Ergo they
were Protestants. The Arians held Scripture, Ergo they were Protestants. Thus
you may prove a Lutheran to be a Caluinist: and he by turning it will prove you
to be a Lutheran. an Arian by it will prove you to be an Arian, and every
Heretic include your (if the Argument hold) within his Sect* and communion And
if you plead that you contradict the Church of Rome; so did they.




As the challeng of particular men does appear manifestly to be vain when
the proofs be looked into, so likewise does the challeng of whole Churches. The
Protestants have traveled over all the world, to seek; and find none: not a
Church before Luther (since indeed they have corrupted some, as England for
example,) whereof they can say This Church Was Protestant. They will tell you
that there are diverse who do not acknowledge obedience to the Sea of Rome,
(surely, a deep research! who knows not there have been too many
Schismatics and Heretics? There must be Heresies. 1. Cor. 11
) but if you demand whether they will justify all the tenets of those
Churches, they shrink the shoulders and say plainly, No. whereas the demand is
for a Church or Churches whose tenets they will justify, and which
reciprocallie would justify their tenets.

To say they were Protestant in the fundamentalls, is both false, and
insufficient. They say the same of us; yet confess we be not Protestant. You
shall hear them speak of great multitudes of men, more then are in the Latin
Church, (not sure more then in the Catholic, which does speak all languages,)
Nestorians, Iacobites, Arm^nians, Abassines or Aethiopia^s and Egyptian
Christians: Greeks, and Muscouites. but idly.

To justify the The Heresy of Nestorius is recorded by S. Augustine S.
Dama^cen, Vincent. Lirinensis, Theodoret, etc.
Nestorians is to condemn the Council of Ephesus where their error was
oecumenicallie And again in the Council of Chalc. act. 5.
condemned. And to justify the Their Errors be recorded, by Photius,
Nicephorus, Prateolus, Baronius, Iacobus Vitriacus, and Miraeus.
Iacobites, By the same authors. Dicunt (Armeni) carnem Christi in diuinitatem
esse conuersam, etc. Euthymius in Panoplia p. 2. t 20.
Armenians, By Co ignus de rebus Abassinorum.
Abassines and By Damasc. de Haeres. and Baronius, ad annu^ 452.
Egyptian Christians, is to condemn the great Council of Conc. Chalc. act,
5. Nam and in duos filios disp^nsationis tentantibus diuidere sacramentum,
resistit hostiliter, and eos qui passibilis audent diuinitatis vnigenitum
dicere, collegio sacerdotali detrudit, and confusionem sieve commixtionem in
duabus Christi naturis excogitantibus reluctatur, and coelestem vel alterius
cuiusdam substanriae esse quam de nobis assumpsit sibi formam seruilem,
delirantes, extermi^at: necnon and eos qui duas quidem ante vnitionem vnam vero
post vnitionem, naturas in Christo fabulose confingunt, anathematizare non
cessat. etc. Concilium ibidem, de Leonis Epistola ad Flauian.
Chalcedon, and with it the whole Church. And the Grecians (with whom the
Musco^ites, you confess, agree,) when your communion was offered, Censura
Ecclesiae Orientalis. And in Coccius and Gualterius, you may see their frequent
testimonies; and of the Affricans, and Asians also, against you.
refused it. What then will you do with these names, Where be the men we look
for? Where is the Catalogue of Protestantish Churches, in all former Ages?

You tell us of Christians in Europe, in Affricke, in Asia, and in America the
new world. This we knew before. The Quaere was of yours. where were they?

To say that these, some, have deposed their Errors, does not answer the
demand: but shows it is not answered. For, the thing looked after, is a
Catalogue of such Churches as you will justify; and, which the Fathers would
have allowed, as Orthodox: (of Heretical Churches every one can easily make
a Catalogue; there be many By S. Aug. S. Epiphan. Pratel. Gualter. etc,
Catalogues allreadie made:) whereas, if you confess that these Churches have
deposed their error* (errors oecumenicallie condemned,) you confess withal,
(a thing otherwise By the Authors above cited, it is manifest. The Nestorians
held against the Council of Ephesus, and refused it. And the Iacobites,
Armenians, Abassins* and Egyptians, all spotted with Eutichianisme, refused
that of Chalcedon.
evident,) that once they did maintain them. and, if so, then by the judgment
of the Euticheans and Nestorians were condemned by the Catholic and Universal
Church.
whole Christian world the men were not Orthodox.

Howbeit, had they become sound and Orthodox, it follows not that they would
have subscribed to your Articles, or were Protestant. yea the contrary would
follow. They have been indeed Iacobites, Nestorians, Abassins, Russits,
Greeks, and Armenians, have made ouertures of returning into Communion with the Sea of Rome. The particulars are in Miraeus lib 1. c 18.
returning to the body from which they separated themselves, the Catholic and
Universal Church; and were again The Graecians, Armenians, and Indians were
united to the Church in the Council of Florence. Acta Conc. Flor. in Decret.
Eug. Platina, Chalcondas, Aemilius. Under the name of Indians are the Abassins,
and Egyptians. Prat. Gord. Vide Sand. Monarc. an. 1432. page 556.
united some of the^, which does likewise hinder their standing in your
Catalogue. But you cannot possibly find them in a state wherein write them
yours: much less can you truly say they professed your Religion (that which
is now current in England,) many The demand is of Protestants in all ages:
men; whole Churches; or, one Church; and you must not forge your Evidence.
hundred years together.

How many, and which, do still persist in their old Heresy or Schism, there
is no need to look: since the men were not Protestant. The fewer, the better;
no doubt: for you know that Galat. 5.
Schismatickes and Tit. 3.
Hereretickes (how Matthew. 20.
great so ever the multitudes of them be,) be not saved. S. Aug. Epist. 152.
hoc solo scelere.
Whosoever is divided from the Catholic Church, how laudablie soever he seem
to live, for this only crime that he is separated from the unity of Christ,
he shall be excluded from life, and the wrath of God shall remain upon him.

M. Waferer, where are you? mill ^ui Siculis errant in montibus --. you think
I fell into this discourse for want of a particular answer to that you said in
your Doctors commendation. Repeat it, if you please, again; and I will
discharge the debt.


Apologist. What this book speaks of Doctor Featlie who will regard? since it
contrarily appears to the world; and and can yet be justified to the
doubtful by witnesses now living, that he often discovered your Fishers
hooks, and took him with his own angle; he has ever been Musket proof; he
allwaies put Sweetes mouth out of relish: Eglestons simples could not work with
him.


Censure. Here you serve in, fantasticallie after your manner, the Catalogue
(of Protestants? no: but) of your Doctors Conferences. And the first, not in
time but in the book, is that with the 2. Fathers of the Society. His Cause,
which was (and but of late) engendered ex putri materia, coming (to molest and
infect the world) out of the nastie sink of damned Errors, and pretending to
great Antiquity with good and honorable descent, was called upon to give
account thereof, and of such as had known and entertained it formerlie in all
ages thorough which it says it came. At the sight of which Question (after
many shifts and much wriggling,) it became speachles; and, out of weakness
falling to the ground, was giving up the foul ghost. When lo, the Doctor to
restore and relieve it, bestirs himself, and puts out the Relation which you
point at, and after it, Additions, and, Aremonstrance, and A Discussion. A
defense. An Answer. A Reply. Another Reply. etc. So many, that the volume by
the continual agitation of his sting, his style I should say, grew to be as
big as pestilent. Magnum de modico malum scorpium terra suppurat: tot venena
quot ingenia: tot pernicies quot and species Nicander scribit and pingit: and
tamen vnus omnium violentiae gestus de cauda nocere; quae cauda erit quodcunque
de posthumo corporis propagatur and verberat.

The name of this b. is in the forhead, in red and black characters. The Romish
Fisher caught and held in his own Net. But, laqueus contritus est. The This is
your book, S^^tes illa nodorum ve^^nata intrinietus venula subtilis, ar^uato
impetu insurge^s, hamatilo spiculum in^^mmo tormenti ratione restrange^s
book Master Waferer, (though M. Fishers Question be not,) was A Reply to D.
white and D. Featlie, anno 1625.
answered.

I add, that it has been proved by the confession of the learnedest of of
Protestants, and such as have labored to find out Protestant predepecessors,
that before Luther there were De authore and Essentia Protestanticae Ecclesiae
and Religionis Auth. R.S. Parisiis anno 1619.
none. So hard a thing it was for your Doctor, though he set a face on it and
promised a buttery Featlie in the Conference, page 14.
book of names, to show the Catalogue. And in the comparison of your doctrine
to the Scripture, it has appeared that you The Conference of the Catholic and
Protestant Doctrine with the express words of holy Scripture. by R.S.D D. and
extant now in English. See al o the Anchor o^ Christian faith, by D.
VVorthinghton.
contradict it, directly, in many places; in so much that you refuse to stand
unto the native and Supra, page 293,
proper sense of Gods words. So easy had it been for M. Fisher (had he been
willing to divert from the Question proposed in writing) to have answered the
Doctors I charg you as you will answer it before Christ -- answe^ now, Whether
you believe that Christ and his Apostles t^ught our faith or yours. Featlie
Relat^ page 29.
coniuration.

The next of those you point at, is the Conference with M. Musket, whereof we
spoke page 376. and seqq. look there. The third is his Conference in writing
(that it is I suppose you mean,) with M. Sweet; where I find an Emblem of
that within your head, the Vertigo. Long ago the Caluinists were on the
Becanus le Circulo Caluinistilo.

Form is not in matter, if the disposition fail: or, if the prime cause does
not concur.


wheel. The Catholics fear it not. He that believes the Scripture for the
Church, and the Church for the Scripture, if the resolve into them diversely,
winds not in a circle. The divine authority auouching the book, Motiuu^
principale. Motiuu^ subordinatum.
may be the formal motive inclining a man to believe both the books and the
Church: and the proposition of the Church may dispose his understanding to
believe that the books called Scripture (the Apocalypse for example, and the
Epistle of Saint Jude,) are avouched by divine authority. He that said S Aug
con Epist, Fundam. c. 5.

In locum traditoris Christi qui successerit, in Apostolorum actibus legimus;
cui libro necesse est me credere, si credo Euangelio: quoniam vtramque
scriptutam similiter mihi Catholica commendat Authoritas. Ibidem. Vide eundem
li. 2 de Doct. Christiana. c 8.


Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret
Authoritas, did not exclude divine Authority, but principally resolved into
it; though the same act depended, as he professes, on Church-authoritie
withal. When the words are examined you will find them to be of full weight.
non crederem Apocalypsi non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae eommoueret
authoritas. Infantes baptizari posse^ and debere non crederem nisi me Cath.
Eccl. commouere^ authoritas. Baptizatos ab Haereticis, non esse rebaptizandos
non crederem nisi me C. Eccl. com. authoritas. Are you moved without it?
nisi. and commo^eret authoritas Ecclesiae. and that Catholicae too.

The fourth, is his Conference with M. Egleston, who did (as Featlie relates)
undertake to prove against him that, for an Accident (quantity) to be
supernaturally conserved without a subject, is no contradiction. Is there any?
Will it be true, Qua^titas est; and Quantitas non est? It requires naturally a
subject, true: but it self is not the subject. and some thing may
supernaturallie have less then it does naturally A man cannot be without
au^nal, because it is within his essence. The subject is not so within the
essence of an ac^iden^. Some things are defined, simpliciter: some, per
additamentum. See Arist. in 7. Met. c. 3. and ibidem S Tho.
require: as well as others have supernaturallie more then they naturally do
require.

Our Saviors humanity has not the subsistence which were natural unto it;
but another. It subsisteth in the Word.

Doctor Eglestons Argument, as it appears by Featlie, was grounded in this,
that God could supply the action of the second cause. Whereunto your Doctor
answered that it was true in genere causae efficientis, In Featlies Relat^ons,
page 132.
non in genere sustentantis. this was his distinction. It was replied, that
sustentatio was actio, and omnis actio est causae efficientis. Your Doctor
answered, Omnis actio non est causae efficientis. adding that, there be three
other causes have also their action, (I cite the words of his own Relation,)
and concur A ver^all shift, unworthy of a Doctor: in the trial of a point
of faith.
actiuelie to their effect* and his first instance is in matter.

Stay Doctor! What? matter, potentia passiua, pure passiua, does that
concur active? is it an agent? has it actiuitie? Is this doctrine current
now in our English Universities? I do not think it. Sure I am that it escaped
the Peripateticks, whose slownes could not apprehend it. Their books must be
mended, for passive is active (it had been a matter lamentable to have said
this in the Grammar School,) and as well, active may be passive. The efficient
vnde motus as such may be mobile the subject, because the subject now is vnde
motus the efficient. This is one of the Doctors Victories, which he has
Chronicled himself: wherein I must needs say he proceeds consequenter. For,
where suffering is doing, vinci there is vincere. The efficient does agere by
it is form; and is moved to, but in another kind by the finis: whereupon there
might be found a reason to extend the word motion to their causalitie. But to
call the causalitie of matter by that name, or by the name of a Physical
action (Grammaticalis, makes not to this purpose, the Disputant never mea^t it
knowing it to be impertine^t) is a mere abuse of words. Materia non est
principium actionis sed se habet vt subiectum recipiens actionis effectum.
Finis vero and Agens and Forma, se habent vt actionis principium, sed ordine
quodam. Nam primum quidem principium actionis est Finis qui mouet agentem.
Secundo vero Agent. Tertio autem Forma eius, quod ab agente applicatur ad
agendum. Quam^os and ipsum agens performam suam agat, vt patet in
artificialibus. Artisex enim mouetur ad agendum a Fine, and C.S. Tho. 1. p q
105. a. 5.


After this last Answer given by Doctor Featlie (they be the Doctors own
words) in the very words above written or to the like effect, Featlie p. 133.
Doctor Egleston notwithstanding his former great vaunt, Of this disputation
with M Wood, see above, page 468.
was content to give over his Argument: and the company entreated Doctor
Featlie to oppose M. Wood etc. Thus the Chronicler of his own proclaimed
triumph, for which your lines adore him.

These Conferences are all in that volume. That which S. E. looked on, is not
there; but in another book called the Sacrilege: wherein the Doctor would
seem to have begun his Catalogue, in one point; by naming men, in every
Age, that did acknowledge and avouch a Divine precept obliging the Laietie to
both kinds to be contained in those words of Scripture which the Protestants do
cite for that purpose. I said, he would seem to do it: for he that reads the
book will find no such Metaque feru^dis euitata rotis.
matter as he pretendes. And yet, had he done it, this had been, he knows,
far from exhibiting that which was harangued for, or performing the task
wherein he was engaged; which was, to produce and make good a Catalogue, of
Protestant believers, in all points, and all ages.

Notwithstanding, having made a noise, he begins (as if Hercules labors had
been labored over again,) to shake his knottie club; and after a public
challeng, solemnlie proclaimed and in bitter terms against M. Fisher (as; In
his challe^g. page 252.
his leaden treatise, his ragged style, his white liver, his Midas Reader, his
collapsed Ladies, the distracted brains of the penner, etc.) he casts him of
contemptiblie, to come into the Relation of his Encounter with my Lord.

Mouet ecce Sophisticen.
tridentem
Postquam vibrata pendentia RETIA dextra
Nequicquam effudit; nudum ad spectacula vultum
Erigit, and tota fugit agnoscendus arena.
This is all: Master Waferer. I find no more Victories in your book, yet one
more he might get, you think; if to help you, who hitherto have endeavored to
help him; he set on me. But the meaner Scholar I am, and the greater he
conceaues himself to be, the less I need to fear. Genuinum fregit in illis.
Bigger are but butterflies in his esteem; and eagles, you know, catch not
after flies.

In tauros Libyci ruunt leones
Ne sint papilionibus molesti.
This motto he made to be inscribed in his Escocheon, in the place where he
took leave of other Adversaries, to come to fight the combat which we talk
of. You and I, at most be but Seconds; and, if I be no better the^ you, very
poor ones. Such as a Scholar without arrogancy may think no great honor to
ouermatch. If twenty year ago he were a match as you pretend, for D. Smith,
the now Bishop of Chalcedon; and has labored and exercised himself in
Controversies ever since; for him now, to crush me, were no conquest. I am not
I confess, more able then S. E. who did answer, VVaferers Elogium of S.E his
Notes, which are above, p. 9. and seq.
you say, but stammering lies so poorly as not worth confutation. his
sophistry is slender and boyish. The ABC. of Logic may teach him. And would
you have your Doctor, your Champion, so much above S. E. to come, and with his
host of Paralogismes, in your armor, least he be known; to set on me?
Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla!

Yet howeuer it happen, know this Master Waferer, Statuam quam erexisti non
adoramus. I honor the truth; I believe the Son of God; I am a Catholic, so
assured of the divine providence directing his Church, that he who does oppose
it shall never be my Oracle. Your censer shall not come into my hand, though my
Censure come into your Doctors, and be perchance, torn by it.


Apologist. Sensere quid men's rite, quid indoles Nutrita faustis sub
penetralibus Posset.


Censure. Nouimus, expertis creed, QVANTVS
In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.
Occidit, occidit,
Spes omnis, and Fortuna nostri Nominis.
Fuimus Is the Barchelour a Brittan?
Troes, fuit Ilium.



Apologist. How unlike then is this report that Smith could ouerbeare him? If
surely he had no other tools then these wherewith to quitte himself of those
blows were given him, no question but he was soundly hammered. And whereas
his Lordships Chaplain seeks to salve up the matter with this afterclap (the
Relation) those which but ouerlooke it must needs confess, it has done him
this second injury, to publish his weakness.


Censure. Smith, and tool, and hammered? qua^ frigid! Was it so soon out of
your mind that an impenetrable adamant suffers nothing, VVaf p. 94.
whilst the hand which offers it violence is disabled with it is own blow?
This it is, when a man has the luck to light otherwile on a good metaphore,
but has not wit enough to see where to put it. Things come into your
imagination, as images thorough a little hole into a dark room; where men are
seen walking with their heels upward. To rectify them, art is necessary
there; and reflection, here: which if the Reader use, he will find my Lord,
above; and your Doctor, under, in the combat. And these two Writings, of S. E.
and the Bachelour that speaks to you, to be so far from discovering any
weakness, that had our pens been answerable to his worth, this book might
remain to posterity a living monument of his success in the Dispute. But
this our pains to him was not needful; himself thereby did provide unto
himself a fairer, in the soul of M. Kneuet, who taking light, and conceauing
life in the Conference, and ^ince dead in peace, is engaged now to thank him
in eternity.


Apologist. Doctor Featlies able service to Gods Church is far to eminent to
be eclipsed by any Doway Satyr.


Censure. In these times, when Mirth writes Divinity, I may say as the
Satyrist did, Difficile est Satyram non scribere. though the Readers will find
the book of S. E. to be far from that nature. Whilst you talk here of your
Doctors service to eminent to be eclipsed, you bring again into our mind how
partiallie (not to say absurdlie) you exalt him so high as to think his
excellency appears unto the world: and how irreligiouslie you have incensed
so many lines (all, in this Pamphlet,) to the Chimera of his opinion, which you
think sits in Majesty within the clouds. Caput inter nuhila. condit. See
above page 448 and page 120.


Apologist. The Papists doctrine teaches a prittie kind of deceit called
equivocation.


Censure. That which is properly equivocation, has for it the authority of
God and man. No book, I do not except Scripture, but has it. One thing there
is, which some think, is, others think is not, indeed, equivocation; that I
mean which you glaunce at when you speak of mental reservation: which,
howeuer it may have private abbetters, as other opinions have, is no tenet of
the Church.

But answer me one Question Master Waferer; He that should say this is my
body, when he meant only that it was the figure of his body, should he not
equivocate? And, if a world of sincere people, taking his words plainly as
they come (without explication) from his mouth, should be deceived by this
equivocation, what would be thought of it? Reflect upon the matter well. The
lie which you add to this your Censure of equiuouocation, is censured
els-where. it is this, that the Papists Doctrine will not stick to license the
lowdest lie, so it be aduantagious to the cause of Rome.


Apologist. Supra page 526,
There have been those impudent pens which durst traduce the most eminent
patterns of Christianity, and affirm that worthy B^za, and Doctor King,
recanted their Religion with their last breath.


Censure. If they did, the better it was for them. Whether M. Whether M.T. B.
reconciled Doctor King, as I have heard; or did not; imports not our cause.
Lupus, the proverb says, pilum mutat non mentem.

As for Beza, what a pattern of Christianity he was being a Protestant, this
white paper will not have me paint upon it. Some thing of him, and of the rest
of your great patterns, and out of Protestant Authors, you may read in
Master Protestants Apology. At their names in the Index you have direction to
the places. See also Luthers life etc. with a further discourse touching
Melancthon, B^cer, Beza, etc. By the same Author. printed at ^. Ome^^, anno
1624:
Brierleys book, and more might easily be added, fowler then the ink that
were to characterize it, if men were disposed to draw them to the life. Such
goblins you should see, walking, at once, (did the print conspire in it) in
many places, and so horrid, (were the inside indeed turned outward) as would
make many pale, to look upon them.


Apologist. And now Sir S. E. not to dally with you any longer, (hitherto,
true, you did nothing else,) I am to let the world know (a merire world belike,
where Mirth is general crier,) that our Doctor is not that flincher, nor
Master Kneuet that turnecoate as you story them.


Censure. Proiicit ampullas. But it is to late now; for Featlie is such a
flincher, as he is storied. The story of his tergiuersation is true. Lions the
Arist. Hist. Animal l. 9. c. 44.
Philosopher says, sometimes do run away. And M. Kneuet thereupon did turn
also. But to give loosers leave to speak, what evidence do you preten^?


Apologist. For the liklihood of your Lords challinging Doctor Featlie in
England, the Reader may reflect on my answ^r to your 23. page.


Censure. That he was challenged, was not told you. That Featlie refused to
meet him in Conference, twice in England; once, before a L. another time
before two B. is true. The conferences were undertaken at the request of
others, who remember the circumstances well enough: and so does your Doctors
own Conscience too. But we must return forsooth, to the beginning of your
book, for another story, where we may look for evidence to the contrary, as
long as your Doctor was looked for by Master Kneuet, when he was to defend his
Cause; and not find it. Where is it in your book? in the sixth page. well; I am
at the leaf; speak on.

Waferer. In England there were two Proclamations out against his Lordship to
attach him, and is it liklie that a man lurking to save his life would (a great
while before this happened; many years It was before M. D. Smith was Bishop, in
the time of his Predecessor my Lord VVillia^ of Chalcedon.
before:) send two challenges (one lie, as bigg as two,) to my Lord of
Canturburies Chaplains in his house?


Censure. Is this all? so, then we have heard the first part of the
proclamation. On crier, to the second thing which you were to signify to the
world. yet stay. Now I am come to the former place whence I went, I find
another piece, appertaining to this half.


Apologist. Where you accuse him for declining a second conflict in Paris, I
answer (that is well done) that in Paris he could not meet his Lordship, (why
so? he was sent unto, and as soon as he was found, was called upon, from my
Lord. see the Relation page 119. and seq.) because his honor had so contrived
the matter that he left the town before D. Featlie had leave from the
Ambassador, whose Chaplain he was, to encounter him.


Censure. How? Not leave, from the Ambassador, in France? This excuse is to
silly to acquit your Champion from cowardice. Not leave? Belike the
Ambassador knew how he had disgraced himself before, when he brought his
arguments in a paper, and Master Porie for pity helped him out. Could he get
leave in England, of his Lord of Canterbury, to dispute, so many times: and
afterward to print his Disputations, of Religion; and not get leave in
France, of an Ambassador? Fie, Fie, Waferer; the more you stir, the worse
-- it is. Some other would have feigned a better tale to save his honor.


Apologist. That our Doctor did neither distrust his cause nor himself, in
respect of him, is apparent, (that is good: now or never a demonstration, or
some clear argument; for the game is at a dead lift. and your Doctors credit
hangs, inter sacrum saxumque:) because after this Conference with D. Smith he
had a Disputation at Paris with D. Bagshawe: (alac; this is no demonstration;)
a man of greater note (did Featlie tell you so?) and antiquity then his
Lordship, (well: your inference?) and therefore your slanders and detractions
(here is a bitter storm,) are groundles and improbable.


Censure. And therefore -- improbable. Is this all? vix vrceus. I looked by your
brave undertaking for a conviction by clear evidence. this, neither brings in
the thing looked for, nor hangs together, Master Featlie disputed since with D.
Bagshawe; Ergo, he distrusted not himself in regard of Doctor Smith. As well
you might have said, Ergo he distrusted himself (and the tergiuersatio^ was a
sign of it,) in regard of D. Smith. seeing that, neither then, nor since
though meeting others, he durst meet him. And, Ergo he took D. Smith to be
the greater Scholar: as not daring to encounter him any more, though he had
leave and list and opportunity to I do not think him willing to see a true
Relation of that Conference, ab^oad in print
try himself, on some others.


Apologist. As for Master Kneuet that he died no Papist as you report, but a
most zealous Protestant, one Master Russ^l, and diverse other without exception,
yet living are ready daily to testify against you.


Censure. Diverse other? Your self, and Featl^e: be not you the diverse other? If
you be; you may strike out again those words, without exception. He speaks in
his own cause; and makes use of you to vent his inventions. In that regard
your testimony cannot serve: and in another too, Qui s^mel verecundiae limits
transilijt --. It is not long since you were taken with a lie.

But, Master Russell; where dwells he, in V^opi^? One who was in Paris at the
time of the Conference, writes, (I have it under his hand) thus. Master Kneuet
after the Disputation told me that he did like and think better of the Catholic
Religion. He much commended M. D. S. new L. Bishop of Chalcedon, for his
temper; confessing that Master Featlie was to weak to undertake him: and that
he thought few men could have spoken better then my Lord did. He disliked M.
Featlies carriage, because it was immodest. He highly commended the solitary
and virtuous lives of the Carthusians and other Religious persons. In fine he
told me that he would go for Italy, and providing himself for the journey took
with him four or five letters in his commendation; from Catholic Doctors of
this town to their friends and acquaintance there. And I heard afterward,
that in Venice he died a Catholic.

It is still to be seen in their Library, now at Arras College in Paris,
with his name by himself written in it.
Another, who was at the Conference; thus. What opinion M. Kneuet had of the
Disputation and the Disputant, appeared sufficiently in this, that he
thereupon brought his Bible of the Heretics translation, which he had brought
out of England with him, to D. Smiths lodging being then in Cambray College,
giving it to the common Library. But when M. Featlie according to his promise
was to come into the list and answer before D. Smith, he like a coward cried
crauen, and quite forsook the field: for M. Kneuet having been three days in
seeking him as he said, could hear no news of him. But, says he, I see will
enough how the world goes: and so resolved to become a Catholic. which
Religion, he did afterward profess in his life time, and also dyed in it, at
V^mice: being married after the Catholic manner to a Catholic Gentle woman.

Here be two against your one. I will not name them, till I know where to
hear of your Master Russel, who (if he will manifest himself and abide the
trial) may know their names time enough though it be not hard to guess what
measure those are like to have (if Puritans prescribe it,) who come in to
testify against you. And in the mean time, the Reader desirous of further
satisfaction, may, if he please, inquire of M. Doctor Rainer, who lives in
Paris at Aras College, and was himself at the Conference, and acquainted with
M. Kneuet, what he knows in the matter.


Apologist. Your courtesy in lending me this work of your frinde S. E. has
made you the occasion of a great d^ale of charity, which has cleared both our
Doctor and our cause. In requital of the large encomium you gave the author,
I have justified our Doctors merit; from whose esteem he seeks to derogate.
In some lines my pen may, seem to gall him, but I Will make no Apology.


Censure. You will do well indeed to forbear making more Apologies; for your
cannot make them well. But what charity is that, you talk of? your diligence
has laid open the nakedness of your beggarlie cause, call you that charity?
For us to lay it open; that men detest and abhor so foul an heresy; and to
defend those who maintain our Saviors doctrine, and the cause of God, this
(Master Waferer) is charity. This virtue loves God above all: and rises up
when there is need, in defense of His and his servants, honor. It takes unto
it (...) the whole armor of God, and arms it self to the casting ^wne of
vain imaginations and e^^rie high thing that exalts it self ^^ainst the
knowledge of God.

But, you have cleared you say your ^^use. Because perhaps, by your mea^es it
appears a mere fiction which before your Masters had acknowled^ed to be a
mere figure. Yet someti^es, by your leave, you would have ^^st a cloud over
it, being asha^ed that men should see their con^eipt naked, bread-a-figure^: no
more. ^ou are ashamed of this. If you mea^e other clearing, that is, giving
clear ^nswers as in the beginning you did ^rofesse to do, to distinctions,
sure you ^aue not made any thing clear, vn^es it be this that indeed you
cannot ^nswer. Here and there, you have ^auilled at a few pieces of the
Relation: that is all I find in your long Pam^hlet. Wherefore I may tell you
as ^aint Augustine once told a Gram^arian who trifled in like manner, Si
^ropterea respondisti quia tacere noluisti, non quidem ad omnia, sed tamen
respo^ disti.


Apologist. If the body be substantia^lie in the Sacrament, then is there a
tr^ The like Confession there is in D. Morton: and is cited above, page 293.
Sacrifice: and if so, then pro v^ uis and defunctis. if for the dead, then s^
such as are capable of release; and co^sequentlie for release of Souls out of
P^^gatorie.


Censure. Let me make up the Syll^gisme.

But the body is substantiallie in the Sacrament, by the testimony of o^^
Savior himself, This is my body. Mat^ 26, This is my body which is given f^^
you. Luke 22. This is my body which broken FOR you. 1. Cor. 11. All the
W^ferers in the world cannot prove th^^ was a mere Wafer.

Ergo there is a true Sacrifice, a^ FOR, pro, viuis and defunctis, etc.

The Apology having been lo^^ time drawing toward an end, is the last period
now, giving up t^^ Ghost. The faith it pleades for, is substance this, vizt,
that is not o^ Lords body which he said was his body: ^^d the Authors Spirit
is Protestan^sh, for he presumes that he discernes (the body,) better then the
Catho^^ke and Universal Church that was ^^fore Calvin, could. If now at his
^^st Apologeticall gasp, he would but ^^de an act of Hypocrisy to his
Pro^^ssion, the Continuator of Acts and ^onuments might write his name in ^^d
letters.


Apologist. For my part it shall be part (...) my continual thanksgiving to
him in whom only we can see light, that we ^^ue not so learned Christ, but
can better ^^scerne of the Lords body.


Censure. O the Saint!


Apologist. Vale.


Censure. Longum Iucunde Vale, Vale. Ah! littles Toys! away away, ^ollow
your Master. If I have now and ^hen smiled in his company, it was ^is company
drew me. Being quitt ^f it I return to serious thoughts a^aine;

Et Laet longum valedico Nugis.
Apologist. Hic Rhodus.


Censure. Mirth's.

But S.E. told us of another.


Apologist. Hic saltus.


Censure. Out of the frying pan into the fire.


Exit Magister. Exit Baccalaureus.
