THE DRVMME OF DEVOTION, Striking out an Allarum to Prayer, by signs in
heaven, and Prodigies on earth.

Together with the Perfume of Prayer.

In two Sermons, Preached by William Leigh, Bachilor in Divinity, and Pastor
of Standish in Lancashire.

Luke 21. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws near. LONDON Printed by Tho:
Creed, for Arthur Johnson, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the
white Horse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Thomas Parry Knight, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy counsel, and Chanceller of his Highness Duchy of Lancaster,
together with the Right virtuous and Religious Lady his wife, grace be
multiplied in this world, and glory in a better.
Right honorable,
IF (as the Psalmist says) The Lord has so done his marvelous works that
they ought to be had in rememberance, and are much sought out of all such as
fear him: pardon me in your honorable patience, while I press with passion
such prodigies, as have fallen out of old in former times, and now of late in
these modern days of danger wherein we live. All harbingers of Gods Irefull
wrath and indignation for man's transgression; And yet I know not how, (which is
a wonder of wonders) signs from heaven, are not respected, sins on earth are
not repented for. We can discern the face of the sky, like the Jews in the
Gospel taxed by our Savior, and thereby we dare prognosticate of the effects
of fair or foul weather to come, but we cannot discern, either by signs
from heaven, or prodigies on earth, how the Lord is rison out of his place, and
threatens our destruction if we repent not.

The meditations hereof, I am bold to put under the shelter of your honors
protection, and pray they may pass your iuditious eye, in sort as they are
tendered, that is, from the duty and service I owe in many rspects, being
otherwise unable to answer the same, but in such passages, of prayer and
religious exercises as fall within the compass of my profession. And surely
such passages are best suited to your self, whom religion has made honorable,
and worthy those great and weighty employments you have undergone abroad in
foreign parts, and at home within the kingdom, under two religious Princes.

Besides, spare me to seek protection at your honors hands, in regard of the
place you bear with us, under God and the king, our worthy Chancellor, the
stern of which government you have moderated for many years, with such
justice, mixed with mercy, as I dare appeal to your clemency and mild
censure, in any thing I have here tendered.

And for the latter Sermon, which is the Perfume of prayer, (the Arrow of our
deliverance in the days of danger) I trust it shall not be offensive, if I
make it proper to the Elect Lady, your religious wife and consort, whose
practice of much piety, with prayers and tears (Church-weapons,) have been,
are and will be a blessing to your house, and an ornament to the Church of God,
whilst Anna-like, she frequents the Temple and house of God, treading upon that
holy ground, with no less due, then true devotion.

And now the Lord Jesus, as he has matched you together in grace, and given
you much honor, with length of days, espouse you to himself in the kingdom
of glory, that you may come to the feast, and marriage of the Lamb, crowned
with glory, and clad with immortality, ensigns of a better world, whither
Christ is gone before and has traced you the way to follow after: which
because you have faithfully done, he will come and fetch you to himself in a
time accepted, that where he is there may ye also be. Against which day and
blessed hour, the Lord God of heaven prepare you, with your oil and your
lamps light, that ye may meet him in the clouds, and so be caught up to
reign with him for evermore. Amen. Amen.

Your honors most humble, and at command, William Leigh.

THE DRVM OF DEVOTION.
Striking out an Allarum to Prayer, by signs in heaven and prodigies on earth.
ACTS II. 19 And I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth
beneath, blood, and fire, and the vapors of smoke.

20 The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood* before that
great and notable day of the Lord come.

21 And it shall be, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.


Upon the reading of this Scripture prophesied of by Joel, applied by Peter,
and to be accomplished in the latter days, me thought I heard the Lord speaking
from heaven, as he did by another Prophet, and say; Habacuk* 2. 2
Write this vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that
reads it, for the vision is for an appointed time, and at the last it shall
speak and not lie, though it tarry, wait, for it shall surely come and not
stay.

Now, what it is that shall come, and

If Kings of the earth stir, the commons are moved; shall the King of heaven
rise either to be judged, or judge the world, and shall the creatures sit
still? surely no, for though we his reasonable and religious creatures be
silent in our sins, and say nothing, yet shall the senseless creatures
grieve and groan after a deliverance, I say deliverance from the bondage of
corruption, wherein they are, and from the dampe of sin, wherewithal they are
pestered. Of

What may be the meaning of the spirit in this place, touching the time and
manner of these signs, when, and how they should appear to the worlds wonder,
diverse have diversely divined: 1. Some say the accomplishment should be at the
second coming of Christ to judgment, and be harbingers of that dreadful
day: 2. Others, for it shall be at the siedge and sacking of Jerusalem by
Titus and Vespatianus: of which opinion the Greek Paraphrase is, which cites
Josephus writing thereof: 3. Some say, the accomplishment should be at the
death of Christ, and in the day of his passion, when all the world should be
passionate for him, but not with him, for he must tread the wine press alone.
Lastly, and the least in reputation of judgment are the Jews, who even at this
day understand it to be meant of the wars of the Israelites, with Gog and
Magog, Ezechiel, 38. 39.

But that I seem not more opinatiue then orthodoxall, I may safely say with
the precedent words of my Text, that these shall be accomplished in the latter
days, which are always taken for the days of Christ, when with the effusion
of his blood he will power out the abundance of his spirit upon all flesh,
and withal show his wonders from time to time to a senseless world,
senseless of it Savior, so as from the first day of his coming in grace, to
the last day of his appearance in glory, wonders shall appear, more or less,
to the comfort of the godly, and confusion of the wicked.

And surely, it is respective to see, how sparing the Lord is of his
judgments, and how plentiful in his mercies, his blood and spirit are powered
out in all abundance, his signs and prodigies are but sparingly showed, and
pointed at, as harbingers of his wrath to move us to repentance, blood shed,
spirit powered out: O bottomless depth of mercy! signs but showed, and
prodigies but pointed at, limitting both fear and fire that it fall not upon
us before we repent, there was never mercy either met it on earth, or matched
it in heaven, and therefore I know not whether I shall more willingly admire his
love in spending his mercies upon us, or his undeserved favors in provoking our
repentance.

David in the person of the faithful, and in a case nothing different,
mourns over Sion with this woeful complaint, Psalm. 7 46.
We see not our signs, and there is no Prophet left, but Lord how long?

Where it is to be observed, that they do not complain, because they have no
Captain to lead them in the field; but that they have no Prophet to instruct
them in the faith: accounting it a greater calamity to lack the heavenly food,
then the earthly fight: nay more, and to come nearer the proper Subject I have
in hand, these Saints in Sion sorrow not for that they have no Ensigns to
follow on earth: but because they have no signs showed them from heaven, to
assure them of the Lords presence to fight their battles, and be propitious,
deeming it more disasterous to fail of signs about then of Ensigns below;
where prophecy is not, there the people perish: and where neither wonders from
heaven wound us to repentance, nor tokens below provoke us to prayer, we are in
danger, and die in our security.

Are not all things as they were in the beginning: so said a secure world in
the days of Peter, music, mirth, and minstrelsie were in their feasts,
velvet, silk and sables were on their backs, their coffers were full of
silver, gold and pearl, their dishes were filled with dainties, their garners
with grain, their stawles with fatlings, and their Orchards with all manner of
fruit, their gardens and fields diaperde with all variety of fruits, they felt
neither sin within, nor sorrow without, no wonders in heaven above, or tokens
in the earth beneath, blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke were uneath
seen, and therefore no marvel if they put far away the evil day, and
suncke in their security.

When Israel was full, then she kicked against the Lord, and her sin increased
as the signs decreased, til tokens from the Lord had taught her another
discipline, the vapor of smoke blasted her garland, when it was at the
greenest, famine, sword, and fiery Serpents, brake her heart to better
obedience, and the Lord was merciful upon their repentance.

We think it goes well with us, when our waters keep the course of their
wonted Channels without inundations, when the North is clear and light without
fiery inflammaons, when neither Sun nor Moon labors of an Eclipse, we
deem the day blessed, when the air is pure, and the winds are still, when
the seas are calm, and no thunder breaks the clouds; yet better it were if
thunder-clappes from above did break our hearts, and prodigies below plowed
them up for a softer mould, against the day of harvest, when the Lord shall
come in the clouds, with his fan in the one hand to winnow all, and fire in
the other hand, to purge all; the corn for heaven, and the chafe for hell.

Moabs rest, was Moabs ruin: and surely, I could never yet see, but the world
that flattereth us, is more dangerous then the world that persecuteth us,
according to that periculosior mundus blandus quam molestus: It was said of
David, by one who said well, factus est securus devictis hostibus praessura
caruit tumor excrevit: When he had no fight he fell from his God, and the
proud tumor of his lust, the less it was handled, the more it rankled.

The doctrine is good for the general, and so I will descend to a more
particular use of signs, and it may be to show that he can be merciful without
means, the Lord will sometimes be silent, and show no wonders, but pass us
like the sweet running waters of Shiloh, that go softly by Sion, but when it
pleases him for our loud crying sins to come in judgment, then will he swell
like the turbulent waters of Jorden that run roughly, the^ will his signs and
wonders be harbingers of his wrath, warning us of his near approach, ready to
destroy, if we repent not.

But to work a certainety out of such wonders as the Lord has wrought, either
by himself in the old Testament, or by his Christ in the new: It is to be
observed, that ever upon his coming to a work of judgment, or a work of
mercy, there has gone before him a commotion of Creatutes to present his
presence; for as I have already said, If when Kings of the earth stir, the
people are moved; shall the God of heaven rise from his rest, and the creatures
sit still? I say, sit still before his presence, in whose voice there is fear,
and in whose face there is fire, Heb. 12. 19.
for even our God is a consuming fire.

When the Law should be divulged from the holy Mount, the Lord came from
Sinai, Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
and rose up from Seir unto them, and appeared clearly from Mount Paran, and
he came with ten thousand of Saints, and at his right hand a fiery Law: the
air thundered, the hills trembled, burning, blacknes and darkness were his
pauilion, and so terrible was the sight which appeared, Heb. 12. 21
that Moses said, I fear and quake: It was a great day, fearful and fiery,
because of a fiery Law; what marvel then, if upon the approach of so great a
majesty, the earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the presence of this God,
Psalm. 68. 8.
even the God of Israel.

What should I say more of Isreal's God, since at the brightness of his presence,
the red sea was divided, and Jorden was driven back, Quails fell from heaven,
and the Rock gushed out water springs, the sun stood still in Gibion, and
the Moon in the valley of Aielan: Surely, surely, at the presence of this great
God, the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of
his people. Joel. 3. 16.


But leave we them elder days, and come we to the later times mentioned in my
Text; Nay, leave we that God of Majesty, and come we to the God of mercy, even
to the days of Christ, who, when he bowed the heavens, and came down into
our flesh, though he fell upon us like a shower of rain upon a fleece of wool
in sofnes and in silence, yet the heavens were shaken at the brightness of his
presence, when at his birth Angels sung his lullaby, and at his death, all the
creatures of God mourned his funerals.

To tell of the prodigies that fell out at his birth, and of the wonders that
were then seen, I will be the more sparing to speak, because out of holy
Writ little can be said thereof; yet if approved hystories may speak, and
Chronacles of elder times, may be admitted for Records of truth, that blessed
Babe, even in his birth, by signs and wonders was approved to be the undoubted
son of God, the Messiah and Savior of all the world. It cannot be denied which
holy Writ averreth, Fulget in terris lux nova de coelo, And another star
appeared at his birth, and Angels were heard to publish his praises with glory
in heaven, peace on earth, and good will among men; yea, and to attend the
presence of that blessed Babe, Kings came from far to offer their gifts,
Kings of Arabia and Seha they offered of their purest gold, and sweetest
perfume; that which the shepherds heard from heaven keeping their flocks upon
the downs of Bethlehe^, they preached to me^ upon this earth, and all these
are holy wonders of holy Record, showing fignes from heaven upon the approach of
that blessed birth, whose breath, as some write, blew open the doors of that
great Pantheon at Rome, I mean the Temple of all the Gentile gods, who upon the
birth of Christ fell down and brake their necks, as Dagon did before the Arc.
I might tell how Devils were daunted at his coming, especially when the time
of his appearance drew near, and I will here only mention two Oracles of
Apollo concerning this matter, one to a Priest, and the other to a Prince.

A Priest of Apollo demanding him of true Religion and of God; Suidas in Thulis.
answer was made out of the hollow vault, O unhappy Priest, why do thou
ask me of God, that is the father of all things, and of this most renowned
Kings, dear, and only son, and of the spirit that contains all; Alas,
that spirit will enforce me shortly to leave this habitation and place of
Oracle.

The other Oracle was to Augustus Caesar, Suidas in vita Angusti.
even about the very time of Christ's birth, who desirous to know who should
reign after him, would needs go to Delphos, and withal learn what should
become of things when he was dead; to which Apollo for a great space would make
no answer, till Caesar had importuned him from sacrifice to sacrifice, till he
came to the great Hecatomb: when as it were enforced, Apollo uttered these
strange words unto him; An Hebrew Child that rules over the blessed Gods,
commands me to leave this habitation, and out of hand to get me to Hell; but
yet do you depart in silence, from our Alters: Whereupon the Emperor standing
aghast, and musing with him self what this answer might be, returned to Rome,
Niceph. l. ^.
and built there an Alter in the Capitol, Hyri. c. 17.
with this inscription, Ara Primogeniti Dei, by both which you may see how
Devils were enforced to leave their habitations on earth, upon Christ his
dwelling in our flesh; his Incarnation was their execution, and they were
enforced to howl and utter out their own misery. When it pleased him to
swaddle us in his mercy, and so with this merciful miracle of our Saviors
birth, went the miraculous mercies of our deliverance from sin, death, and
devils: his blessed birth being attended upon, as have said, to the wonder of
all the world, with these signs from above, and tokens below, harbengers of his
most glorious and royal presence.

From the wonders of his birth, it follows we came to the wonders showed at
the death of Christ, when upon the effusion of his blood, there was a co^motion
of all creatures high and low, in heaven and on earth, all grieved and groned
to see and behold so dolourous a spectacle: The Sun was darkened, and the
Moon became bloody, stars fell from heaven, and the earth quaked, rocks burst
asunder, and Sheal was shaken; nay more, it was a day of darkness, covering
all the land as with a curtain; when heaven was shut from it shine, and the
grave was shaken, when that Kingdom of death and darkness was conquered by
Christ, whereby his death killed death, and by his life gained us life with
immortality: nay more, was it not a wonder to see how the veil of the Temple
rent, when men's hearts would not relent: In a word, the foundations of the
earth were out of course; and what had that righteous one done?

Surely, surely, though the prodigies be past with the passion, and tract of
time has vayled it from our flesh, that we see it not, yet can it never from
a passionate faith, that it feel it not: for to this end has God given us the
spirit of prayer and compassion (as says another Prophet) that we should weep
because of him whom we have pierced, Ezech. 12.
but woe is me to tell who is sorry for the afflictions of Joseph the iron of
sorrow, entered into the soul of our Savior, and we are senseless of his
sufferings, if man will not be moved, thou earth, ye rocks, graves, Sun,
Moon, and Stars, plead the cause of the Innocent, and say, what has the
righteous done? Innocent hands whom have ye spoiled? and yet are ye perced?
Innocent heart, against whom have thou Imagined evil? and yet art thou gored?
Innocent mouth, of whom have thou spoken evil? and yet art thou spunged?
gracious face, and countenance, upon whom have thou lowred, and yet art thou
spit upon? head full of deawe, and locks with the drops of the night, so
wooing us in grace, and now wedding us in glory, how were thy temples crowned
with sharp thorns, to the effusio^ of thy blood? and yet are we senseless of
thy suffering? we have sinned, and he has smarted, the Just for the unjust,
and if we will be silent still and say nothing, to clear the innocent, Sun
Moon and Stars, earth Rocks and Graves, will plead the Lords quarrel, and
say, what has the righteous done? When the man of God came out of Judah unto
Bethell, 1. King. 13. 2.
and Jeroboam stood by the Altar to offer Incense, in reprehension of the kings
Idolatry, he cried against the Altar, by the commandment of the Lord and
said; Altar Altar, thus says the Lord: Vbi alloquitur aram molliorem card
Jeroboam, where and when he spoke to the Altar softer then the heart of
Jeroboam.

The heard hearted Jews then, and we now, stand by the cross of Christ, as
Jeroboam did by the Altar at Bethel we are sadned in our sins, and senseles
of the sorrows of our Savior, the earth, stones, and graves, are more
passionate then we, they tremble, break and open, at the death of Christ, our
flintie hearts are shut from all compassion, and we are a people of no bowels,
and because we relent not, even now the tears of the clouds are in their
eyes, and they drop down shewres of reign in greater abundance then usual
has been seen, as more passionate then we, either for the sins of our
souls, or death of our Savior.

When I am lifted up an high, says Christ, then will I draw all men after me,
and not men only, but earth, Stones and graves shall open unto me, woe is my
heart, we are heavier then earth, harder then Rocks, more sile^t then the
graves, we speak not, we pray not, we praise not, we stir not, at the death
of our Redeemer, he is lifted up higher then ever he was, even from the cross
of shame to the crown of glory, and we are pulled down to all shame and
Ignonimy with the weight of our sins; heavier then a tallent of lead.

If any man say, show us his sufferings, and we will grieve with him, and for
him, I answer, Dominus in monte verbum in alto, Christ is upon the mountain
of his holiness, his word is exalted here and elsewhere in the land, for what
do we preach other then Christ Jesus, and him crucified? And does it draw all
men after it? The veil of this Temple, these stones in the pillars, this holy
ground and dead graves shall stand up in judgment one day against this people,
that they have been more pressed to hear, and passionate to feel, of the
preaching, piercing and sufferings of Jesus Christ, then the men of this
generation; for we have piped unto you out of the Gospel, and ye have not
danced, we have mourned unto you out of the Law, and ye have not lamented. But
when wisdom is justified of her children, then shall ye find it no wisdom,
but extreme madness and folly, to have haunted the Tauernes, followed your
pleasures, profaned the Sabaoths, sold Christ at a lower rate then ever Judas
did, not for thirty pence, but for a penny shot, a goodly price whereat he is
valued, and even then alas, when Christ is in preaching and agonizing over the
cup of bitter affliction; Nay, the Queen of the South shall stand up in that
great day, so shall the men of Niniuie, and the one shall condemn us, in that
they repented more speedily, and the other that she came more readily to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, then ever yet we did, to hear the wisdom of Christ.

The use is good, of all I have said, to strike a Selah with our souls, in
caution of our former and future sinning, procuring prodigies, signs, and
wonders, at Christ his death, and our redemption, for if one sin of Achan
endangered all the camp, and if one sin of David plagued all Israel, what
marvel then, if when all the sins of all the world lay so heavily upon our
Christ, and pressed him down to death, there was a commotion of all the
creatures of God, to see and behold so dolorous a spectacle: as when the son
of God gave his sacred soul, a sacrifice for our sins, who had no shelter
but in the grave, for that opened to give him passage, when the veil of the
Temple rent, and denied him sanctuary.

And now spare we a while to pass from these prodigies at Christ his birth,
and death, to the wonders were wrought sithence, even down to our disasterous
days, whereby we may gather the near approach of Christ his second coming to
judgment. The thought whereof so frighted Job in his frailty, Job. 14. 13.
that he wished the grave might be his cover, till the grief thereof was past.

I might tell of that great day, and it was the Lords day, when he mightily
declared himself to be the son of God, by the resurrection from the dead,
and what marvel then, if upon the approach of so glorious a presence, Sheal
was shaken, graves were opened, and dead bodies did rise with him, and appeared
unto many in the holy city, to the great wonder of all the world. And I might
tell of that great day, and it was the Lords day, when at that high feast of
penticost, the holy Ghost appeared in a visible sign, and was powered down
from God, and fell upon his Apostles in so great abundance, what marvel I say,
if upon the approach of so powerful a spirit, and presence, sounds from
heaven, filled their ears like the rushing of a mighty wind, fiery cloven
tungs filled their eyes, and mouths, to speak magnalia dei, to all nations
under heaven, I say what meruell if fear with an astonishme^t filled their
eyes, ears and hearts, when the Lord was about a work of so great wonder, I
leave these holy wonders to the leaves of holy writ, wherein you are daily
exercised, and by your holy patience I will follow the stream of some such
signs as sithence have fallen out, showing a presence in God prepared to
punish, without passion in man to prevent the danger by speedy repentance.

Memorable is the destruction of Jerusalem by Tytus and Vespatian, 40. years
after Christ his painful passion, who prophesied of their ruin, because they
repented not, nor did, or would know the day of their visitation, she would
acknowledge no presence of the Lord in mercy, and therefore must feel the
presence of her God in judgment, yet not without prodigies, signs, and
wonders, as harbingers of his wrath; whereof Josephus writes much, Lib. 7.
and more then I can now stand to relate, Cap. 12.
being prevented with time, but read his book de bello Iudaico, and there ye
shall find* how first, a blasing Star was seen in the air like unto a sword
hanging over the City, for more then a whole year together, threatening
nothing less then fire and desolation, for their bloody sins, the blood of
the Prophets, and of that Just one, crying vengeance to God in heaven, against
that bloody City.

2. Again, at the feast of unleavened bread in a great assembly of people,
and at nine of the clock in the night, a bright light was seen in the Temple
shining, and so continued for the space of half an hour, In token, that
because they had quenched the holy lamps, and put out the light of the world,
therefore the glory of that house should be of no continuance.

3. Thirdly, at the same feast, and in the day time, when the High Priest was
offering an Heyfer for the Sacrifice, she brought forth a Lamb in the midst
of the Temple, In sign, that though they thought they had killed that Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world, and that Moses should still have
lived when Christ was dead, yet should they see with their eyes, that the truth
should rise out of that type, and when the Heyfer was slain, yet the Lamb
should live; yea, and that very Temple, stones and all, should turn to Greet,
Ne populus redirit ad Iudaizmum, Lest the people might go back to Iudaizme.

4. Fourthly, nay yet more the great Brason door as the Author says, being at
the East end of the Temple, which twenty men could hardly either open or shut
at the sixth hour of the night flew open of it own accord, showing a new way
and passage of Christ, to a better place and being, even unto a Tabernacle, not
made with hands, but pitched in the high heavens, opening of it self, without
help of any.

5. Together with these as Josephus writes in the 21. of May, a ghastly spirit,
of an unspeakable height and bigness was seen in the city, a pregna^t prodigy
of their imine^t desolation, when Zim and Ohim, Skritchowles, Fairies, and
Satyrs, did haunt their houses, and fairest habitations. 6. Chariotes in the
air and armed me^ fighting by troops among the clouds appeared throughout all the Land of Judea, and marched toward the City with fearce Encounters, all
presages of their future fall, by the fury of war which was at their doors,
and yet they repented not. 7. Nay more, in a solemn feast, when the Priests
were assembled by night, as their manner was to sacrifice, they heard this
voice Migremus hinc, migremus hinc, let us get hence, let us get hence: the
wonder they heard sell from heaven, enioyning them silence, and a cessation
from all legal ceremonies and sacrifices now ended, both Priest, place, and
offering, upon the sole sacrifice of Christ, whom they had cruelly murdered,
and therefore had need to be gone before the fire of his fierce wrath was
kindled against that place, people and kingdom.

Lastly, and of all other prodigies to provoke their repentance, upon the Lords
presence and near approach, now ready to strike, it was not the least which
fell out in one Jesus, the son of Ananias, of the vulgar sort, who fourteen
years before the siedge, and when al was in quiet, peace, and plenty, this
son of Ananias coming to the feast of Tabernacles, when the manner was, that
the Princes of the people should do their devotions to God in the Temple,
suddenly he cried out to the wonder of them all, A voice from the East; a voice
from the West, a voice from the four winds, a voice upon Jerusalem, a voice
upon the Temple, a voice upon the Bride, and upon the Bridegroom, a voice upon
all the people: Thus night and day he ran through every street, crying without
thought of food, or regard of any; insomuch as when he was beaten by the mighty
(impatient of the prodigy,) I say beaten to the bare bones, he neither shed
a tear, or showed himself suppliant, but at every stroke still cried out, Woe,
woe, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and thus continuing during all the time
of the siege, and especially at their solemn feasts: At last, when the siege
was at the hotest, running round about the walls of the City, without fear
he uttered the same voice, and said, Woe to Jerusalem, was to the people, and
woe to my self; At which last woe, Sagitta ictus occumbebat, wounded with an
arrow, he fell down dead.

The use is good, and for us in the height of this our security, all these
wonders and signs, every man interpreted as the story says, Pro sua libidine,
even as best pleased himself, some they neglected, some they corrected, some
they contemned, donec patriae exidin, suaque pernieie eorum iniquitas confutata
est, till their error with their wickedness was corrected, with the
destruction both of their country and of themselves, they killed their
Prophets, they believed not Christ, whom when they had slain, and silenced,
then was it time for prodigies to speak, and say, O bloody City, I dare give
remission upon thy repentance, but I dare give no rest upon thy rebellions.
Before the destruction of Troy, as Virgil reports, Fatis aperit Cassandra
futuris, era Dei Iussunec vnquam credita Tencris; Cassandra foretold it ruin,
but could never be believed; she spoke from the holy Oracle, but was not heard:
Its a fearful thing when the Prophets are despised; its more fearful when
their Prophesies are set at naught; but its fearful above all fears, when
fire is a falling down from heaven, that is, when we with our Prophets and
prophesying prodigies speak, and wonders work, and yet we repent not: so it
was with Israel, I pray God it be not so with England.

To speak of the signs, wonders and prodigies that shall be seen upon the
worlds ending; I dare not, I cannot, that fear and fire oppresses my spirits
in the thoughts thereof: Et horret animus meminisse: my very mind and soul
melts at the heat thereof. And therefore having in some weak measure
mentioned that dreadful day heretofore in two other Sermons, I leave it under
a veil, as Apelles did the imperfect portraiture of Agamemnon, father of
Iphigenia, and come a little nearer home, even down to our days. Have we no
signs in heaven, or prodigies in earth, to move our repentance? Have not the
heavens of late years struck an alarm to provoke our prayers by uncouth
signs, never seen before.

It is some 40. years ago since that star in the North appeared in
Cassi^peia, whereat the Astronomers stood aghast: Surely, it was some star of
Bethlehem, conducting us to that Babe of Bethlehem, Non in cunis; sed in
Cathedra, not lying swathled in the cratch, but advanced into his chair of
high estate, by a second birth of holy doctrine the^ divulged through out all
the world: when the Gospel should beget faith in more abundance, from the
East, to the West, by North, and by South. I durst not thus presage of the
effect of this star, were I not well warranted by the judgments of two worthy
Divines, lights of this age, Du Plessis and Beza: who by that wonder in heaven,
are bold to say, that the Lord has prognosticated a second birth of Christ
upon the earth, by the preaching of the Gospel unto all nations under heaven,
never to be backed by that wicked man, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolsh with
the brightness of his coming, whereof these wonders in heaven are warnings on
earth for all Gods children to be prepared with our oil, and our Lamps light
to meet him in the clouds, and so to be caught up to reign with him for ^ver.
And so to the next.

Not many years after, and right ^pposite to that in the North, there appeared
an other wonder in heaven, a blazing star both great and fearful,
threatening some dangerous event to the Southern parts of the world, which the
Affiricans in some measure felt, when the Kings of Barbary and Portugal were
slain. The cinders of that star yet kindles a combustion in the hearts of
the two Kings of Marocco and Fez, nor is the flame extinct in Spain, but yet
burns in the breast of Sebastians blood, against that of Castile. And surely,
it may be a warning to all Christian Kings and Princes of the world, to stir
up their zeal, and melt their coldness to fight for the christ^^^ an faith
against the Infidels, whi^ rather then they should live vnco^trolled, the
heavens will threate^ their destruction by sheathing the^^ swords in the blood
one of another Chronicles made it an honourabl^ (...) fight which christian
Kings had and undertook against the Sarazens for the holy land. But the holy
Sepu^chre is now buried in oblivion, an^ the Turk has tied it to his tax and
territories, whom while Christian Kings should resist with all their powers,
and fight for the christian faith, they fall in faction one against another,
and so spend and blend their bloods together. Surely, Domestica mala maiora
sunt lacrhymis; these home bredde evils among christian kings, are greater than
can be expressed with tears; and therefore I leave it in the silence of my
soul, and to the prayer of al Gods Saints, that their souraignes may join in
a holy war against the Heathen. And so I pass ^o the rest.

That Mirabilis annus will never (...) forgotten, when the seas, rocks (...)
shelues fought for England, and ^ade us so glorious by deliverance, (...) the
wonder of all Christen^ome.

Nay more, I may not be silent, ^ow this our Goshen, and land of ^^ht, was
suddenly turned into an ^^yptian darkness, when upon (...) dark Saturday,
near hie noone, at what time usually the Sun gives out his fairest shine, a
sudden darkness was over all the land, and so fearful, as men were at their
wits ends, panted in soul, left off al secular care, and betook them to their
best prayers, not knowing what would be the Issue, till the Lord again, and
ere we thought upon his mercy, removed the judgment. In token of our
intolerable neglect of the light of his Gospel, whereof that gloomy day was a
sure Sacrament, taxing our dim sight with his sharp censure, that because for
a long season, the light had shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not: he could if he would remove the candlestick, candle and all, and put
out the eye of faith, as he had dearned the light of heaven. Nay more, and
above al, I have said to make the prodigy yet of greater wonder; it was
observed by many, how during the darkness of the day, all things were hushed,
and so still, as leaves stirred not, beasts fed not, birds sung not, but stood
aghast as if they had been filled with astonishment.

And you know how not long after, this dark day, the light of Israel was put
out fot a time, Queen Elizabeth died, a dearne day to England, had it not
been presently repaired with as clear a light from Scotland, in whose
Sunshine now we walk, and sing still with solace the Songs of Sion in our
own land. It may be so sudden a darkness presenlty relieved with so great a
light, was a Symball or Sacramenr of our Sovereigns, dead and living; two
peereles Princes, both relieved with their desired lights; He of Englands
honor, She of heavens glory; yea, and we their Subjects delivered from that
dark and dangerous night of Queen Elizabeth's death, by the speedy arising, and
luster of that morning star, our Sovereign Lord the King, whose day we
pray, may ever dawne. It may be some sharp sight may censure me in the
applying of this dark day, to the death of Queen Elizabeth: yet dare I say,
and I hope with good warranty, that when godly Kings and Princes die, Quid ni
mundus ipss defleret eum principem esse rapiendum per quem duramundi istius
re^perari solerent; So said Ambrose of the death of Theodosius: Why may not
this world deplore such a Prince to be taken away by the violence of death,
as by whom the dangers and difficulties thereof have been moderated.

Nay, he proceeds further, and nearer the point I aim at: Hoc nobis motus
terrarum graves, hoc iuges pluviae minabantur, and vltra solitum caligo
tenebrosior denunciabat, quod clementissimus Imperator Theodosius recessus
esset e terris: This the great Earthquakes we have felt, with the continual
rain we have had, and a more palpable darkness than usually we have seen,
have denounced and threatened, that Theodosius a most mild and merciful
Emperor should depart this world.

You are religiously wise to discern of what is said: when Christ suffered,
the Sovereign of all Sovereigns, there was a commotion of all the creatures:
All were moved to see and behold so dolorous a spectacle. Earth quaked, rocks
riued, the Sun was darkened, and the Moon became bloody, Stars fell from
Heaven, there was blood, fire, and the vapor of smoke, before that great and
notable day of the Lord came. And what was Jesus of Nazareth, other then a
King, then conquering our enemies for a better world? And what was Theodosius?
Queen Elizabeth with all of their rancks and Religion, less than Princes in
his stead, to tule in this world: And why may not the creatures of God condole
alike upon their dissolutions?

Next, it will be remembered whiles Chronicles can speak, how the earth was
bound by a prodigious frost, to Londons wonder, when Thames was paved for cart
and carriage, for horse and man, able in one day to support a weight of wonder,
and upon the other dissolved into weak Water. It pierced deep into the bowels
of the earth; and to this day, the flowers, herbs, plants and trees, (nay
more, man and beast, fish and foul) have not recovered their decayed strength,
but yet feel the effects thereof; all to warn us of our chillerie zeal to
God, more cold then the Isickles hanging at our doors: and strange it is,
that so many Sunne-shines as have been since, and showers of Gods mercies
still powered upon us, should not melt our frozen hearts to more speedy
repentance, and provoke us to prayer, with more devotion.

I pass by many strange Eclipses, both of Sun and Moon, more frequent and
universal than have been of old: darkesome sun, bloody Moon, prognostications
of our dearne light, and dead life in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
wherein with those glorious lights, the Sun of righteousness seems to be
vayled, as with the cloud and curtain of our sins: Alas, and woe is me
therefore, we are fallen from our first love, we work not, we shine not as
we did in the days of persecution, when fire and faggot fined us for our God.

And the late inundations with unseasonable weather in their extremities, as of
cold, so of heat, winds and tempests, are nothing less then prodigies of an
irefull God, to tell us of the deluge of our sins, Genesis 7. 20.
that of the old world, swelling but 15. cubits above the highest hills: this
reaching from the nethermost hell to the highest heave^s. The cry of our sins,
reaches the heavens, and even there works our woe, by turning them this
year into brass, to make the land barren, and the next year dissoluing them
into tears and showers, dropping down for fatness, death and dearth:
Quicquid id est timeo, whatsoever it is, I fear our rebellions against God,
will make a commotion of all his Creatures against us, both great and small,
Elements and all; never so much distempered as of late years, that a man would
think (but that God has promised, That Summer and Winter, Genesis 7. 22
and the seasons, shall uot cease so long as the earth remains) the very
foundations of the earth to be out of course, and which is more and worse then
all I have said, the army of our sins may bring upon us an host of men from
a far country, and of a fierce countenance, to tyrannize over us, as it fell
out often with the Jews: as may be observed in all the course of the
scriptures, still as they sinned, God raised up ever and anon one foreign
power or other to chastise them, till at length the whole army of their sins
joined in one, that is to say, come to the height of all impiety, called from
a far country, an other army, even the fierce Romans, who brought upon them a
final desolation. And have we no reason to fear the Romanists? having so many
of them already in our bosoms, swarming in all places of the land, never more
bold and co^fide^t then at this day: As I said before, so I say again,
quicquid id est timeo, I say no more. And so much out of my love and loyalty
to God, my Prince and country, as a watchman, and by virtue of my calling, I
may be bold to say, for Res est solliciti plena timoris amor. Love is full of
fearefulnes. Nor is it least in observance, though last in succession, which
fell out in the Northern parts of this kingdom, in April last, and in the
parish where I dwell, and have my pasteral charge, witness five hundredth more
besides my self, who beheld with astonishment that fearful spectacle. To
wit, a dead child, base borne, of lewd parents, having four legs, and four
arms, all out of the bulk of one body, with fingers and toes proportionable:
which body had two bellies and two nauels forward, with one plain back,
Buried at Standish Church in Lancastshire April. 17. 1613.
without seame or division, it had but one head, and that of a reasonable
proportion, with two faces, the one looking forward, and the other backward:
either face had two eyes, two ears, a nose and a mouth perfect, nor was there
in the several members thereof, any blemish or disproportion save in the
moulding, the sex was female, and the mother was delivered but half an hour
before this strange birth of a perfect woman child, which was baptized at our
Church and yet lives. To presage what may follow, I cannot, neithere dare I,
lest I seem disasterous; only let it tax our misshapen lives, so far
degenerate from the simplicity of the old world, wherein both virginal and
conjugal chastity, were prized with honor, where now with many it is almost
dishonorable to be honest. Judah with Thamar left his claoke, to verify his
lust, but Joseph with Potiphers wife lost his cloak to vilify his lust. Many
Iudaes, few Joseph's in these adulterous days, wherein men do rather solace
themselves, then sorrow for that sin, of which I may say, Lex Iulia dormis?
Nay Lex Iehoua dormis, O thou law of God? why sleep thou? The many legs
and arms may tax our intolerable pride, and auerise, reaching here, and
treading there yea in robbing well nere all Gods creatures, to fill the belly
and cloth the back, with costly and garish suits, madding the mind, and
making bodies monstrous, might Jacob and Rahel rise out of their graves, to
behold their children that tread upon them, they could not but deem them of a
monstrous birth. Two mouths taking in, and two bellies casting out, tax our
insatiable desire of belly cheer and drunkenness, exoticall sins, and never but
of late, a stain to this English Nation, In philtris philistinoru^ Sampson
fell, Et Ebrietas decepit que^ Sodoma non decepit, Wine made him sinful, whom
Sodom could not deceive. Lastly, two faces may tax the world of palpable
hypocrisy, devilish deceit, and damned equivocation: First, in us Protestants
whiles we say we believe, and yet do not live the life of the Gospel we
profess: wherein we do but Sophisticate with the Lord, and equivocate with
his Saints: for what avails it, a tongue to speak well, with a mental
reservation to do evil? Next, it may seem to tax the damnable doctrine of
our Romish equiuocators, who are double faced to deface all truth, and to
destroy all commerse both with God and man, whiles they say, Dafallere, da
Iustum, sanctumque videri, Lord give me to deceive, and yet that I may seem a
Saint. Pyrrus and Ulysses, as you may read in Sophocles being sent to Lemno^ to
take from Philoctetes Hercules his arrows; The two Legates advised, by what
means they might best wrest them out of his hands: Ulysses affirmed, it was
best to do it by lying and deceit: Pyrrus answered no, I like not of that,
because I never used it, but always loved the truth as my father and Ancestors
have ever done. Whereunto Ulysses replied, ye when he was a young man he was of
that mind: but now being old, he had learned by long experience, dearly
bought, that the surest way and best art in man's life, is, Fallere and mentiri.
Many of this age are of Ulysses mind, especially the Iesuited crew of damned
equiuocators: but true borne Israelites are of Pyrrus spirit: (great is the
truth and preuayleth, is the sweet poesy of their profession, both in
themselves, friends, and families) yea and they resolve upon the doctrine of
their master Christ, that the truth shall make them free: As also Quod non
patitur ludum fama, fides, occulus, that eyes honors and oaths, will not be ie
sted withal. But to proceed yet further, and make use of the prodigy, it is
respective, how when the Prince was dead this birth was borne, It was in the
Autum of the year, when Prince Henry that sweet blossom was blasted, with the
dampe of our sins, and so as with this fair flower, fell all the flowers of
the field, leaves of trees, and Roses in our garden, they would not flourish
while Henry was a falling, but fell with him. Woe unto us that ever we sinned,
so fair a Prince, so pious and so puisa^t to fall in a day, was such a stroke
as shook the Cedars with the shrubs and might yet well beseem our sack cloth
and ashes: but this base birth was borne in the spring following, to tax us, as
with the growth of our monstrous sins, so to teach us withal, that sithence
the fair feature of a Prince so well fashioned in his life, was so soon
forgotten in his death, the Lord would tempt us, with a prodigious birth for so
invaluable a loss: nor is it strange a sinful people should be so threatened,
because it is usual with God to punish our pleasures by contrary passions, as
he did the daughters of Sion, Isay. 3. 24.
when in steed of sweet savor: he threatened a stink, and in steed ^f a
girdle a rent, in steed of brothered hair, baldnes: in steed of a stomacher, a
girding of sack, and sunburning for beauty: and why not England, in steed of
a Royal and religious issue whereof we are unworthy, with a monsterous birth
and misshapen brood, of that whore of Babel, whose Romish faith and faction the
Lord he knows does daily breed even in the bowels of the kingdom, wherein
there are but to many doublefaced, double hearted, and double handed, fawning,
still upon us and yet threatening our destruction, both with eye, heart, and
hand, could they but gain the opportunity. I speak not this to dismay any,
but to charge us of unthankfulness: for yet we are blessed with the hopeful
issue of more Princes, and with many drops of much royal blood, and by the
grace of God, this strong gable of so many cords, will never be broken if our
sins burst it not, yet with this caution, that we repair the ruins of this
our late loss, with speedy repentance, and pray withal, that God would
establish the remain of our religious hope, for his sons sake, and Syons
safety.

O but he has left a desolate court! I answer, as Ambrose did of Theodotius,
Non sunt destituti, quos pietatis sua reliquit haeredes, they are not forsaken
or left desolate, whom he has left heirs and successors of his princely
virtues, Religion, puissance, piety, and clemency: the brightness whereof will
shine to Gods glory, and Englands honor, so long as Chronicles can speak, and
books be opened.

I might here observe as many more have done, what presages fell out upon the
fall of this fair flower and peerless Prince, how the two glorious creatures
of God, both Sun and Monne were troubled, the Sun scarce seen of twenty
days before his death, the Moon opposed with a mighty Rainbowe, in the dead
and and darkness of the night, bended over that house of mourning where he
died. I might tell how the air, earth, and clouds, seemed to be sensible of
his fall, and to condole his death, whiles strange winds, storms, and
tempests, with continually shewers, reigns, and floods. Many dark days,
Clouds, and foggie mists, were upon us, to warn us of our woe, as formerly
has been observed of Theodotius and Queen Elizabeth, before their deaths.
Nor can I pass without passion, what fell out in the summer before Prince
Henry died, at Chattam. Where and when a swarm of Bees knit upon the maine
mast of that Royal ship, he had made for Englands defense, tellng us, that ere
long Angels food from heaven, more sweet then Honey, or the honey Comb, should
fill the soul of this Saint to glory and Immortalie: yea and swarms of Gods
holy Angels should come down to fetch him from the maine mast of this earthly
kingdom above the heaven of heavens, there to reign with God and his Christ
for ever. A blessed Be dedeliuered from the sting of sin and death, to the
endless glory of life and immortality, never to sin or die any more. Nay
more then all I have yet said, Amos. 3. 6.
to make good that there is not an evil in the City which the Lord will not
reuale to some of his Prophets, that Prophet who preached in the morning of his
sickness pointed from above at the period of his life, when he uttered that text
and truth, Job. 14. 1.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery. It was powerful in the preacher, and passionate in the Prince, to
bring him to the thoughts of his mortality.

And so my dear brethren, to conclude and make use of all these fearful
signs and prodigies, let all these together strike out an allarum to prayer
and repentance, yea, and to godly sorrow, never to be repented of: by the sweet
perfume and privilege whereof, souls are saved, and bodies delivered from
threatened dangers. And not bodies only, that is to say, particular persons,
but states and kingdoms are preserved from all malice of the creatures, be
they never so implacable.

Are there monstrous and untimely birthes? 1. Peter. 1. 23.
pray to be regenerate and borne a new, not of mortal seed, but immortal by
the word of God, that lives and endures for ever.

Are there fearful thunderclaps making thy wild heart to shake like the
wilderness of Cades? stand in awe and sin not: common with thine own heart in
thy chamber, and be still: say withal, it is thou Lord only, that make me
dwell in safety.

Are the Son and Moon eclipsed deficient in their light, dark and bloody?
The fool changes like the Moon; So says Siracides; and thou art changeable
o Christian, when by the motion of Gods spirit, thou begins to be religious,
and by and by falls to be sacriligious, Sacriligium creatori committitur dum
imbecillitas ascribitur creaturae.

And therefore its not the Moon that labors for her light, but its thou
that labourest in thy sins, its thou that chaungest like the Moon.

O if I might say, we fools change like the Moon, for she shortly returns
to her fulness: we fools linger our conversation.

Illa velociter colligit quod amiserat lumen: tu nec tarde fidem recipis quam
negasti: The Moon does speedily gain again her light, that she has lost, we
fools do hardly in any time recover the faith we have denied.

What should I say more: Luna defectum luminis patitur; tu salutis: The Moon
suffers but the loss of her light, thou of thy salvation. Grauior ergo tua
quam lunae mutatio. More dangerous therefore by much is the eclipse of thy
soul, than is the eclipse either of Sun or Moon.

But it may be some man will say: does neither Sun nor Moon labor in the
eclipse, doubtless they do, and that continually. For we cannot deny but they
labor with other creatures, as the Apostle says, and groan with us, also
traveling in pain together, unto this present, desiring the day of their
deliverance out of the vanity of corruption, wherein they are. Leave off
therefore to look upon the defects of those glorious lights, unless thou look
upon the stains and blemishes of thy wicked life. For how is it possible for
the drunkard in his wine, the wanton in his lust, or the covetous man in his
wealth, to look upon the Moon, and see the things that are in heaven, when he
knows not rightly how to use or discern of things that are on earth?

Are there new Stars uncouth and unknown? Do they blaze in the heavens and
move thee to wonder, what may be the effect? Say with the Sages, and then art
thou wise, vidimus stellam eius in orient, etc. we have seen his Star in the
East, and are come to worship him: him, not it: lest any man might bake cakes,
to the Queen of heaven, and adore the creature, for the Creator. Yet follow it
till it come to the place where the babe is: then leave it, and offer of thy
Gold, Myrrh, and Frankencence: that is, when these signs in heaven, and
prodigies on earth, have brought thee to the sense of thy sin, and sight of
thy Savior, offer up the sweet perfume of thy prayer and praise, an evening
and morning sacrifice unto thy Christ.

Lastly, are there rumors of wars abroad in the world, or wars at home,
woes and wonders, even at thy doors, Hannibal ad portas, Is the enemy at thy
gates? Are the Barbarians abroad, and is the Turk in arms? Vibrans hastam in
Christianos, breathing after Christian blood: desine peccare and ciuitas non
peribit, cease to sin, and the city shall not be sacked. Quid fugis patriam
si vis saluus esse tua potius peccata subter fuge si tu peccare deseris victus
est inimicus. Why leauest thou thy country? nay rather if thou would be
safe, flee from thy sins, if thou leave off sinning the enemy is conquered.
And how is he conquered? Non Gladio Golias sed lapide, prosternitur: Goliath was
not slain with a sword, but with a stone out of a sling: that is to say, by
powerful prayer. For so says David, thou come to me with a sword, and with
a spear, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of
Hosts whom thou have rayled upon.

And thus you see how the Drum of devotion, in the hand of Gods creatures,
(though senseles of themselves, yet sensible of our sins) has stricken an
allarum to prayer. Now let us smell to that sweet perfume, and press both the
power and privilege thereof to save, out of these words: It shall be that
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. But because I have
wearied you overmuch in this, I will spare both my self and you till a further
opportunity. And so let us pray: O eternal God and most merciful father, etc.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND Sermon.
THE PERFVME OF PRAYER. THE ARROWE OF OUR deliverance in the days of danger,
when signs from heaven, and Prodigies on earth, are on us to move our
repentance.
Acts. 2. 21. And it shall be, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord, shall be saved.
Signs in heaven, and prodigies on earth (as I have told you,) are nothing
else but drums of devotion, provoking our prayer, in the sweet perfume whereof,
whiles we walk, the Lord will either deliver us from deserved judgments, or
give us patience to abide the fyrie trial, And therefore pardon me yet further
to ceaze upon your religious ears, and hearts, on Gods behalf, and in tender
of your saved souls. Pardon me to press you to powerful prayer, thereby to
make the Lord propitious, ayding, and assisting, when works of wonder, both
above and below, do threaten our destruction.

The wicked in that day shall wring their hands, rent their garments, tear
their hair, and cry upon the mountains to fall upon them: but the godly shall
have boldness in that day, they shall lift up their heads, and know that the
day of their redemption draws near: yea, and as it is in my text, they shall
call upon the name of the Lord, and be saved. I say, all such as fear God,
shall fear no fire, but call upon the name of the Lord and be saved.

Yet so, as the holy Ghost ever gives the gust, power, and spirit of prayer,
without which it is no perfume, but a stinch in the nosthrills of the Lord of
Host. And therefore as you may here see the blessed Apostle clearing the
imputation of Drunkenness, both in himself, and the rest his associats, even in
the height of that high feast of Penticost, does in ebriat the souls of Gods
Saints, with a pregnant prophecy of the abundance of the spirit which should
glad the hearts of the godly in the latter days. So then I may safely say,
that as the fire is known by it heat, the Sun by it light, and the tree by
it fruit, so may you by prayer, know whether the spirit of God be in you or no:
As also whether ye shall be saved when prodigies are abroad, wonders in heaven
above, and tokens on earth beneath, blood and fire and the vapor of smoke.
Much prayer, and much passion, is ever from a powerful spirit, and it argues
a Royal presence of the holy Ghost for even as: in water face answers face,
so in plea of salvation, spirit answers spirit, Gods spirit answers our
spirit, that we are his children, yea and the insence of our prayer; answers
the perfume of his spirit, in which sweet air we are carried and breath unto
salvation.

Why then it may seem, where there is much prayer, there is much spirit;
where there is little prayer, there is little spirit; and where there is no
prayer, there is no spirit; and if who soever shall call upon the name of the
Lord, has much spirit, and shall be saved; it will follow that whosoever
shall not call upon the name of the Lord, has no spirit, and shall not be
saved.

And I cannot but wonder, that since the vision is for an appointed time, and
now is the time (even in the latter days, which are the days of Christ)
wherein God has promised to power out his spirit upon all flesh, even the
spirit of grace and compassion, so as every one should weep apart, because of
him whom they have pierced; And yet our prayer should be so scanted, and our
spirits so dull, as we seem to be dead in our devotion. Surely we dire the
Deity with our sins, we quench the spirit, we grieve it; we despite it,
and therefore we pray not, because the spirit breathes not.

Some few drops of this heavenly fountain distilled upon the Patriarchs and
Prophets of old, but the cundits of grace were never so fully opened as in
these latter days of Christ, when with the effusion of his blood, he vented
out the abundance of his spirit, and powered it upon all flesh; and is it not
strange the^, that men should so live, as if they stood in doubt, whether there
be an holy Ghost or no; and in these last days of man's redemption, they
should breath more weakly, and pray more faintly then in the first days of the
worlds creation; when Abel was slain by Caine; it is of special observation,
that until the days of Enoch, men were silent in their devotion, and cared
not for their God, for then as it is in the Text, men began to call upon the
name of the Lord; Caines sin had so corrupted Seths seed and sanctity, that
till Enoch repaired the ruins by his holy profession, there was little prayer,
little spirit, little piety in that world. It is said of Enoch, that he walked
with God, and was no more seen: Genesis 5. 24.
It was his special privilege so to be rapt up, else more had followed after,
but they wanted his spirit, his prayer, and the familiarity he had with God;
it was a bad world, for the spirit breathed not, and therefore men prayed not.

When all flesh had corrupted their ways, so as God looked down from heaven,
to see if there were any that were good, and there was not one good, no not
one; then man's wickedness wallowed in the water of his destruction; Noah
prayed, and he was preserved, the rest called not upon the name of the Lord,
and therefore perished.

I might tell of Abraham, Isaacke, Jacob, Moses, Samuel and Joshua, how
plentiful the spirit was in them, and how powerfully they prayed in their
days: yet from a sparing spirit which breathed but upon few, besides their
own families. So might I speak of all the renowned Kings of Israel, and Judah;
of inspired Prophets, holy men, and godly Matrones, down to the days of
Christ, all of blessed memory, for fervent prayer, and frequent: yea, and from
a powerful spirit: yet limited to their peculiars, and as it were confined
within the borders of Paleftine, till Siloh came, mean our Christ, the Messiah
and Savior of all the world; who, as I have said, with the effusion of his
blood, powered out the abundance of his spirit upon all flesh; I say with
Zachary, the spirit of prayer and compassion, that the godly might mourn,
because of him whom they had pierced.

The Issue is sweet, and the doctrine is Orthodoxall, taken from the practices
of the godly in all ages; never was it yet seen or heard, that ever man prayed,
preached, or pray sed aright, but as the spirit gave him utterance. The holy
Ghost is the holy guide of all our holy actions, it is the seasoner of the
soul, and the moulder of all our sanctity; it is the mother of piety, and it
opens the door to all true devotion; where it breathes, there is the perfume
of Prayer; where it breathes not, there is sin in silence, without cry or
calling upon the name of the Lord, that they might be saved.

The creatures as it is in Paul, may groan, we may grieve and sigh in our
selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, in the
salvation of our so ules: but yet it is the spirit that helps our frailety,
and so, whereas we know not how to pray as we ought, the spirit it self
makes request for us, with signs that cannot be uttered; for he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the spirit, and he makes
requests for the Saints, according to the will of God.

If the Apostles could have told how to have prayed of themselves, they would
never have gone to Christ to have taken out the lesson, nor said, Master, teach
us how to pray: but they knew that the holy Ghost and he were all one, and
therefore would fetch that sweet perfume from his blessed breath, they knew
that grace was powdered in his lips, Ps. 45. 2.
because God had blessed him for ever.

Well then I say no more but this, to press out this sweet perfume of prayer,
to be practiced of all with unwearied diligence. 1. That there is an house of
prayer, and the Lord has purged it. 2. There is a day of prayer, and the Lord
has sanctified it. 3. There is an heart for prayer, and the Lord has
possessed it. 4. There is a mouth for prayer, and the Lord has opened it. 5.
There is a president for prayer, and the Lord has enjoined it. 6. There is a
premiu^ or reward for prayer, and the Lord has given it, even salvation to out
souls: for so says the text, It shall be that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved, Nay and if none of these were, yet because we
are fallen into the last and worst days of the world, wherein sin was never
so sinful, deferued judgments, never more doubtful, nor Satan so busy to
bestir himself, for that he has but a short time: It might move us to be no
less fervent then frequent in prayer, and the rather, for that wonders,
signs, and prodigies, harbingers of Gods wrath are upon us, yea Hanibal, ad
Portas, judgment is at our doors: Oh, pray, pray, pray, never more need to
pray.

But it may be ye know not how to pray, and therefore ye ask and have not,
because ye ask amiss, ye seek and find not, because ye seek amiss. For
every man seeks his own, either of pleasure, or profit, but few the things
that are of Jesus Christ: and therefore spare me, while I tender to your
religious ears and hearts, a model of prayer, where after if you fashion your
devotion, ye may be sure, both to have audience, and answer from the Lord.



that hinder prayer, which is your pollution.

Thirdly, respect the encouragement, premium and rich reward which is
salvation: for it shall be that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved.

And first for the manner, how must I call, that I may be heard? how must I be
prepared that I may make the Lord propitious, and ready to help in time of
need? how may I make him to return my prayers into my bosom, while I double
my plaints within my breast?

I must first call in faith, for without faith it is not possible to please
God: faith is the salt of the sacrifice that makes it sau^rie: it is the Star
guiding, it is the pillar of fire conducting, it is the hand reaching, it is
the spirit breathing, a passion from us more sweet then Incense in the
nostrills of the Lord of Host. In my faith I have full assurance that I shall
be heard, answered, and obtain my desires, for Christ so promised when he
cursed the barren tree, and blessed the batsome heart thus, Whatsoever ye
desire when ye pray, Mark. 11. 24.
believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you.

And James the Son of thunder, Math. 21. 22.
before the call of prayer sent out the fire of faith, like lightning, before
ye clap, when he said, Iam. 1. 5.
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him, but let him ask
in faith, and waver not, etc. Yea and David was of this consort, Ps. 145. 18.
when he sung to ye solace of his soul, The Lord is near unto all that call
upon him, yea to all that call upon him faithfully. What should I say more, our
faith is the victory by which we overcome the world, it is danted with no
difficulties, it passes for no impossibilities, it extent reaches far, even
from the nethermost hell to the highest heavens.

Secondly, 2.
as I must call in faith if I will be heard, so must I pray in humility, if I
will have answer: for he has regarded the low degree of his handmaid, it was
her virginal voice, and in the humblenes of her heart she was exalted with her
God. O its an excellent virtue, when honor is humbled, and humility is honored
with the title of blessedness, as it was with Mary.

Iudeths humility pulled down the Assirian pride, when pouring out her prayer
to God for the deliverance of her people, Iud. 9. 11.
she said. Thy power stands not in the multitude, nor thy might in strong
men, but thou O Lord art the help of the humble and little ones. Aron and Hur
must hold up Moses hands, lest he might seem to be exalted in his own
strength. And when Hester the Queen was to deal with her God by prayer, she
put off her princely robes, but when she went to the Kings Palace she put them
on: to teach us, that we may not deal with God as with men, for he will be
better pleased with our poverty then with our pride: with our sackecloth and
ashes, then with our silk and sables. I, and the child will go alone, so said
Abraham of his beloved Isaacke, I and my misery will go alone, so says the
humbled soul unto his merciful Savior. No plea with God like the pore man's
plea, and to go informa pauperis, is the best plea in heaven, though it be the
worst on earth.

Thirdly, 3.
as the Lord must be called upon in faith and humility, so must he be applied
with good zeal and affection: no perfume of prayer but from a passionate
heart, a broken and contrite heart God will never despise, his eye and his
answer is toward all such, according to that of the prophet, Isay. 66. 2.
To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a lowly troubled spirit,
and trembles at my words. Moses said nothing, and yet he cried unto the Lord,
it was a passionate prayer, not from Laodecean lips, but from a fyrie spirit,
as with Anna when she powered out her soul before the Lord in the day of her
barrennes.

David's affection in his prayer, was much kindled with the oole of zeal, when
he cried unto the Lord, it was more inflamed when he watered his couch with his
tears, for the sins of his soul, but most of all battered when he rored
within, for aflictions without, Oseah. 12.
Jacob wept and prayed and found. God at Bethel, Isay. 39. 14.
So did good Ezekias when he turned him to the wall and wept, saying, Attenuati
sunt occuli mei suspicientes in coelum, mine eyes are weary with watching upon
my God, and I had fainted in my misery, had he not turned to me in mercy, and
said; I have heard thy prayers, 2 King. 20 5.
and seen thy tears.

What should I say more, Mardoche in the midst of the city, cried to God with
a great cry and a bitter, and he was heard in that he desired: so was Christ
upon the tree, when grieved in soul, he washed away our stains in blood and
tears. It was Augustines sorrow, when thinking upon his vain passions, he
said, flebam Didonem morientem ob amorem Aeneae, I wept for Dido, dying for the
love of Aeneas. but alas and woe is me therefore, I seldom wept for my Savior
dying for my sin, nor yet for my self living in my sin. Surely tears and
prayers are church weapons, and I may conclude as Ambrose did with Monacha
Augustines Mother, when she wept after his conversion, vade a me ita viuas,
fieri non potest vt filius istarum lachrimarum pereat, Go from me thou
mournful mother, and do as thou do, it can never be that a son of all
these tears should ever perish So dare I say of the Saints of God, sorrowing
and weeping, either for their own sins or others, it can not be that
children of al these tears should ever perish.

I pass to the fourth, 4.
which is from our feruencie in prayer, to our frequent and often praying,
thereby to importune ye Lord, to be propitious, ever wrestling as Jacob did,
and never leaving him without a blessing. Nor as it is in the Prophet, Isay.
62. 7.
giving him no rest till he repair our ruins: for the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent catch it, yea and the Lord is ours by much
entreaty, as we are his by many allurements. O that our prayer were with more
assiduitie, much and continual, as ever needing, and therefore always begging.
Eliah when he prayed for rain, sent his servant seven times to see if ye Lord
would answer his sighs with a shewer, 1. King. 18. 43. 44
from the top of Carmell he crowched unto the earth, and put his face between
his knees, I say seven times he prayed with passion, and the Lord was
propitius, he fainted not, but continued crying, til the clouds dropped down
fatnes, he prayed with passion, while the king was at his repast, Ahab in his
chamber eating, but Eliah upon Carmel praying. Job must fast and pray, all the
while his children did feast and play, his prayers, his tears, and his
sacrifice still went out, as the days of their banqueting went about: Job. 1.
5.
for so says the text, thus did Job every day: Darius sealed ye decree, and
Daniel dread it not, but continued his prayer, and was instant with God, three
times a day upon his knees with his face toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 10.
and his window open that way: both to stir up himself with the remembrance
of Gods promise to al such as should pray toward that house. As also that all
might see, he dread no danger of the Lions den, but had rather die ten
thonsand deaths then yield to their Idolatry.

And surely, Ps. 55. 17
David was much in prayer, when he said, Evening and morning, and at noone day
will I pray, and make a noise, and he will heaere me. So Paul, 1. These. 5. 17
when he said, in prayer often, it was his daily exercise, and what he
practiced himself, he preached to others, when he said, pray continually.

Fifthly, as our prayers must be often in respect of times: so must they not
be limited in regard of places, whether in the great congregation, and in
public, or abroad in the field, less public, or in private at home, when
thou art shut in thy closet, and art still, there is a christian liberty, and
freedom in all, so thy deuction be done without schism, and separation; for
thou art not only tied unto the Temple, but thy chamber, field, and garden,
the mountains, dales and wilderness, dens, caves, and hollowes of the earth
are sacred for thy devotions.

When Jacob prayed against Esau his brother, in that his dangerous
peregrination to Bethel, he divided himself from his family, that he might
the nearer be joined to God in his prayer, he sent his two wives, and his
eleven children over the ^iuer Iabbocke, with all he had; and when himself
was left alone, there wrastled with him a man to the dawning of the day; he
alone a Saint, and in secret, wept and prayed, and found God at Bethel.

Moses meditations were mental, secret, and silent, when alone he cried to
God, and yet said nothing. And David a part made his prayer for the adulterous
child, when groueling upon the ground, he grieved and groned alone; Demissa
turba ascendit Jesus in montem solus orare. And Peter at Ioppa prayed apart,
when in an higher room he fell into a trance, and prayed so long, Act. 10. 9 10.
that he languished, yet saw the vision, and heard the voice that filled his
soul with solace; Iud. 8. 5.
I might tell of Judith her Cell, and secret, when she made her turret a
temple to pray in. All is but this as Bazil says, Oration secretu^ postulat,
Souls would be secret in their sanctity, and from every place, there is a
passage to his presence. The temple, the street, the chamber, the orchard,
field, and wild desert, the mountain, dales, and wilderness, the dungion,
den, and dunghill, are Sanctuaries to Gods Saints, are sacred for all our
prayers, praises, and passages, to God in the day of our affliction.

Thus have I told you how to pray, that ye may be heard, how to call, that
ye may be answered. It now remains, we beware of such impediments, lets,
and hindrances, as divide betwixt God and us, making the Lord less gracious in
heaven, by how much more graceles we are on earth. And so we come to the
second part.

Now that which lets first, 2. Part, and first impediment.
is the sin of not hearing the word. That wickedness is the first wall, or
partition; that beats back prayer, the arrow of our deliverance: I say,
wickedness, as in them that pray, so in them that are prayed for. It must be
purged from both, before the Lord will either hear or answer; Justified by
that of Solomon: Pro. 1. 14.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched forth my hand, and
none would regard, I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes. Where, and if ye read on, ye shall find, how such impiety
stops all passage to God, his care from hearing, his hand from helping, his
speech and presence from all relief; Then shall they call me, says wisdom,
but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

A woeful warning to all such, as either neglect, despise, or trample under
foot the blood of the covenant, I mean all such as are weary of the word of
God, and despise preaching, they shall call, and not be heard; they shall cry,
and not be answered; nay, that which is well worse, and yet more dolourous,
Pro. 28. 9.
He that turns away, his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. Some think they please God if they pray and hear not, they must
be warned, they pester not the Lords presence with so stinking a breath, in
stead of more sweet perfume, and while they would make themselves acceptable to
God for their much praying, they become not abominable for their seldom
hearing; they think to be heard, says our Savior, for their much babbling;
as and if he should say, correcting that error; nay rather, they shall be
answered for their diligent hearing.

Secondly, as the ear must be prepared for hearing, A second impediment
that our prayers may have passage; so must we lift up pure hands to God, that
we may have audience; for a good life must lead a good prayer, according to
that, Oration nisi bona vita praecedat non exauditur: or at least, ^hey must go
together without distraction; for as one has well said, qui recte nouit orare
recte nouit viuere, He that can tell how to pray well, knows how to live
well.

God by the Prophet taxes Israel of great impiety, in that their declining
estate, and therefore would endure no entreaty, Isaih 1. 15 etc.
but upon their conformity. When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear, for
your hands are full of blood: but wash you, make you clean, take away the
evil of your works from before your eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do
well seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend
the widow: Then come, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be white as snow, though they were red like
skarlet, they shall be as wool.

The same Prophet from the same God, and to the same people, yet further
presses Isreal's impiety against the Lord, whereby he seems less placable,
whilst they charge him of impotency, that he cannot help, and of dullness
that he cannot hear: but he yields them a more solid reason of his restraint,
even their wickedness, the wall of separation that keeps them asunder: For,
Behold says the Prophet, Isaiah. 59. 1. 2.
The Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither is his ear heavy
that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and your
God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

Sins? and what sins? read the words that follow, sins of Israel then,
sins of England now: what marvel then, if we pray and speed no better then
Israel then did; for if we blend in sin with Israel, why should we not
blend in judgments with them?

And these are the sins of Israel and Judah, wherewithal they are charged, o
that our English Judah were well discharged of them. Your hands says God by
the Prophet, are defiled with blood: cruelty is in your ways, your fingers
are full of iniquity, they receive bribes, and are nimble to spoil.

Your lips speak lies, who can be believed? mel in ore verba lactis, fell in
cord fraus in factis, there is honey in the mouth, but gaul in the heart, good
words, but evil deeds.

7 No man calls for justice, truth perishes in the street, equity cannot
enter, and he that refraineth from evil, makes himself a prey. The Lord saw
this, and was displeased with Israel, and yet their greatest vanity was in
this, that they thought their day of sinning would ever down, they dread no
judgment till it was at their doors, and fell upon them. Thus infected my
dear brethren with sin, how should we think not to be afflicted for our
sin? how may we expect from the Lord either audience or answer, when we pray?
Templum domini will serve no turn in this our temporising age, if our sins
make a separation between God and us.

When the cloud of Isreal's sin had shadowed the face of the Lord shining,
Jeremiah laid down his lamentation thus. Lam. 3. 4.
Thou have covered thy face with a cloud, that our prayers should nor pass
through. And it was the greatest grief that ever came to Saul's heart, 1. Sam.
28. 15.
when he said, sighing, The Lord is departed from me, and answers me no more.
Where if you mark the story, ye shall find how Satan found him, when the
Lord had left him, and when the holy Oracle was silent, the hollow vault at
Endor spoke: to teach us, that if we will not know there is a God, we shall be
taught that there is a devil. Zim and Ohim will haunt our habitations, and the
witch at Endor will endaunger our dwellings.

A third wall of separation stopping the passage of our prayer to God, 3.
Impediment.
is the sin of unmercifulness toward the poor: for as the wiseman says,
Prou. 21. 13.
He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he also shall cry and
not be heard, unmercifulness toward the poor, was one of the sins of Sodom,
and little do I doubt but it stopped the passage of Abraham's prayer, even from
fifty to ten merciful men not found in Sodom for whose sake the Lord might
spare the rest.

The use is good, I pray God the tears of the poor hinder not the prayers of
the rich: many are oppressed, and yet are not pitied: we can go to no pulpit,
but they press our hearts to provoke our speech, and all I can say is this,
take heed, for as ye know, he yt would not give a crum of comfort, was denied a
drop of mercy, and not to pity the poor on earth, it cannot but hinder your
prayer in heaven.

Fourthly, 4. Impediment.
if you long after audience, and answer from God, of that ye pray for, you
must beware of malice, and pick out that poison: you must forgive, that you
may be forgiven: yea and which is yet more, you must pray for your worst
enemy, that you may prevail with your best friend. That friend has well
advised thee as a friend, Mark. 11 25.
saying, When ye shall stand and pray, forgive, if ye have any thing against
any man, that your father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your
trespasses.

Ye ask says a brother of the Lord, and yet ye receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye might lay the same out on your pleasures: Its a foolish
pleasure on earth, that beats back a prayer from heaven: Its a foolish
passage with man, that stops a passage with God. And so for conclusion of this
point, be warned, that as you heighten your prayers upward, so you lessen your
sins downward. And with Siracides return unto the Lord, Eccl. 17. 23.
and forsake thy sins, make thy prayer before his face, and diminish the
offense.

Lastly, 5. Impediment.
as wickedness in our selves, and proper sins do hinder our prayers: So when
sin is in those we pray for, it often stops our passage unto the Lord, and
makes him inexorable. As in Jeremiah the Prophet, when the Lord said, I will
cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole
seed of Ephraim: Therefore thou shall not pray for this people, Jeremiah. 7.
16.
neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, for I will not
hear thee: See thou not what they do in the cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem?

As and if he should say, exemplarie sins, shall have exemplarie judgments,
for I will power my wrath upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon
the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground: it shall burn o
Jeremiah, and thy prayer shall not quench it. Nay, and as it is in an other
Prophet, Ezech. 14. 14.
If these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were among them, they should not
but deliver their own souls by their righteousness says the Lord God.

All I have said is but this, if our prayers be not heard, it is quia petimus
1. indigne 2. indigna, 3 pro indignis: either the thing is unlawful we pray
for, or we are unworthy, who pray, or they for whom we do pray. The mother of
Zebedes children, had not her boon at the hands of Christ, for that her demand
was not lawful. Esau had not that he prayed for, because he was unworthy. And
if you pour out ten thousand prayers, either for the devils or damned, ye
shall not be heard, for their sins are gone before them, to their just
condemnation.

And here spare me a while, and I hope it shall not be unprofitable to the
further sanctifying both of your will and skill in prayer, if I lay down
certain Rules whereby you may know how diversely ye Lord does answer the
requests of his Saints, and yet all to their endless comfort, if they can but
be patient of his answers.

ad voluntatem and non ad vtilitatem, he answers their pleasure, but not
their profit, what they would have, but not what they should have. As when the
people lusted after flesh in the wilderness, and loathed Manna, God gave them
their fill, yet while the flesh was between their teeth, Numb. 11 10. 30.
and before it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people, and the Lord smote the people with an exceeding great plague, in so
much as the place of their burial is called unto this day, 1. Sam. 8. 6. 7.
kibroth hattauah, graves of lust. Again, it was their desire to have a king
like other nations, Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
whereunto ye Lord yielded, yet told them it had been better for them if they
had not forsaken him, but kept him still their guidon. The use is good against
all such as pray for nothing but for the pleasures, and profits of this world,
beauty, wealth, and plodding wit, which oftentimes God puts into their
hands, like a sword into the hands of a lunatike man, wherwithall he
endangereth himself, and so, the Lord answers all such, ad voluntatem and
non ad vtilitatem.

The second rule is religious too, ad vtilitatem non advolu^tatem, answers I
say our profit, and not our pleasure. As he did Paul, who praying thrice, that
Satan's buffettings, which were the pricks of the flesh, might be taken from
him: Christ answered, no Paul not so: 2. Cor. 12. 7.
my grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is made perfect through thy
weakness. And this made the Saints of God to rejoice in nothing more then in
the cross of Christ, where by the world was crucified unto them, and they unto
the world, they rejoiced in their infirmities, anguish, and persecutions,
though buffettings of Satan, and pricks of the flesh, yet purging fire fyning
them for their God, whiles they were resolved that all the afflictions in this
world, were never worthy of that glory which should be reueiled, and all such
the Lord does answer, ad vtilitatem non ad voluntatem, whiles they seem to
shrink under the burden of their afflictions.

The third rule is not irregular with God, who for the most part ad voluntatem
and ad vtilitatem, making them glorious by deliverance in the days of their
afflictions, answering their pleasure with their profit, and what they should,
with what they would, as he did the Ninevites, when he delivered them from
their destruction. The woman of Sirophenishia from her devil, the children
from the fiery furnance, Lazarus from the grave, and Christ from his cross,
yea and all his Elect from death and doom, when they shall meet him in the
clouds, and be caught up to reign with him for evermore, with palms in their
hands, in sign of victory, and crowns upon their heads, in sign of glory.

Lastly, and not the least to our Jacob, who sought a leader to Haram, and God
showed him a ladder to heaven. And Saul who sought his fathers asses, and found
a kingdom: the Mary's sought Christ dead, but they found him risen, And that
Saint at Sychar sought but puddle water at Jacobs well, but she found, and went
away with the water of life. Surely the rule is true, vberior gracia quam
precatio, Gods grace is more abounding then either we can desire or deserve,
the thief upon the cross craved but a memento when Christ should come into
his kingdom, and he had a promise even that day, of a perpetuity in paradise.
To justify that I have said, Vberior gracia quam precatio, and therefore pray
with good hope to be heard, be your prayers never so many, powerful, or
piercing, yet shall ye find his grace will be evermore abou^ding, brimfull, and
flowing over.

I may not be long, and therefore Carbuncle, Topas, or Chrisolite. And seldom
have you heard or read of a powerful prayer from an holy heart, without
remuneration from the Lord: for as you here see, invocation is crowned with
salvation. It shall be, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved: who ever prayed and found not the Lord propitious? who ever
made entreaty unto his God, and had not a blessing returned into his bosom?

It is said of Augustus Caesar, that never suter departed from him
disconte^ted: and that Titus Suetonius thought the day lost wherein he did not
good to some. A milder and more merciful Savior is here then all the Caesar's
clapped in one, even our good God, called Deus a dando, God in creating, but good
in giving, for who has gone from him discontented? who has trusted in him and
been deceived? Come unto me all ye that travel, and be heavy laden, and I
will ease you: it is his gracious call, Be of good comfort my little flock, it
is your fathers will to give you a kingdom, it is his glorious crown, Ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you, it is his irreuocable promise, at which the gates of heaven fly open, and
against which the gates of hell shall never prevail: only wrestle with God for
a blessing, till you have wearied both God and your selves. The advertisement
is good from the prophet, Isay. 62. 6.
Ye that are mindful of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest till
he have repaired your ruins, and set up Jerusalem the joy of the world.

But what may be the different blessings we receive from God by our prayer? and
whereunto the Lord has tied himself by promise for the performance, not for
our merit, but for his mercies sake? Surely they are many, and they are
Remarkable, if you please to rank them thus.

First, by the sufferage of prayer, all the creatures of God are sanctified to
our use: so says the blessed Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5.
Every creature of God is good, and nothing ^ought to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer. Stamped with the word of God upon the one side, and with the perfume of
prayer upon the other, then is it a Shikel for the sanctuary.

Our meat, our drink, our corn, our cattle, our clothes, and lodging, our
wives, children, and families, our labors in our vocations, our King and
kingdom, our Church and Commonwealth, nay our lives and deaths must be
sanctified with our prayer, otherwise though the creatures be good in
themselves, yet are we profane in the usage. And therefore our Savior when he
had performed all to his death and passion, yet shuts it up with this
powerful prayer, Father now the hour is come, glorify thy Son.

As and if he should have said, I have prayed, I have preached, I have wached,
I have fasted, I have cured malladies, and saved souls, I have given life, and
forgiven sins, I have done my fathers business on earth, now let me be
glorified in heaven, I pray for that which is past, that it may be sanctified,
and I pray for that which is to come, that it may be glorified, Ioh. 17. 1.
Father now the hour is come glorify thy Son, etc.

Ierom, in his book, de laudibus Bethlem, does much commend the Christian
carriage of that place and people; in the usage of Gods gifts and creatures,
even from the Prince in his Palace, to the Plowman in the field. Of whom he
says, Arator ad Stiuam semper aliquid cantat dauidieum, The Plowman with his
stilt in his hand, does still folace his soul with some psalm of David.

And surely God speed the plowe were no bad prayer, when the labourer takes
the stilt in his hand, but I fear it is done of few: And if all our manual
trades were sanctified first and last every day with prayer, and praises for a
blessing, they could not but prosper much better.

There is much poverty in ye world, and it is no marvel, for that men work
not, yea but many work and yet are never the richer: that's possible too, for
that men pray not, they spend their thrift in drinking, when they should bestow
their time in praying: the creature is not sanctified with the word of God and
prayer. In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, is
neither fond begninng, nor foolish ending of all thy labors, blessed work so
begun, blessed work so done, so it be said of conscience, and not of course,
without hypocrisy in the heart, or superstition in the thought: surely such
perfume is like the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed, its sweet as
balm, and therefore break it: its fragrant as Myrrh, and therefore use it,
Cant. 5. 5.
ever dropping from the binges of thy heart, lips, and hands.

A second blessing that comes Moses his entreaty with God for the people,
Exodus 3. 32.
either to forgive the trespass Israel had committed, or else to raze him out
of the book of life: he had his prayer, and the people were both spared, and
pardoned.

Blood and prayer shall reconcile God and the people: for as the text says,
Leui. 4. 31.
the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him:
Father forgive them, for they wot not what they do. It was Christ his prayer
upon the tree, and he prevailed. And Demitte nobis debita nostra, is our daily
prayer, and who doubts of indulge^ce? Satan winnowed, Christ prayed, and
Peter's faith failed not. Nay that I may shut up this assurance, and close with
your religious ears and hearts, who hear me this day. This man says Paul,
Heb. 7. 24. 25.
because he indureth ever, has an eternal priesthood, wherefore he is also
able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. Mark I pray you, how grace abounds in our
Christ, a man of our mould and misery, ergo, merciful to save. A God of might
and majesty, ergo, able to save, yet not with shadows and Iterations like
Aaron, which argued his imperfection, but once sacrificed for all, which made
him an absolute Savior. And all this without limitation, either of time,
place, time, or person to all such as go to God by him.

Thirdly, as by the power of prayer, Abimelech had taken from Abraham his wife,
and so endangered his state, life, and kingdom, God by night warned him of the
wickedness by a dream, and said, Genesis 20. 3. 7.
Behold thou art but dead, because of the woman which thou have taken, for she
is a man's wife, now then deliver the man his wife again, for he is a Prophet,
and he shall pray for thee that thou may live: and if thou deliver her not
again, be sure that thou shall die the death, thou and all that thou have. You
see the sin, you see the danger, and withal, you see the means of
deliverance from both. Even Abraham's prayer powerful with God, to stay the
stroke of death from the king, and barronnes from every womb of the house of
Abimalech.

When Sodom for her sinning, was to feel the Judgment of God punishing, Lot
prayed that he might shift to Zoar, O let me escape thither, is it not a little
one, and my soul shall live? to whom God answered, Behold I have received thy
request: also concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this city, for
which thou have spoken, have thee, save thee therefore, for I can do nothing
till thou come thither. Where mark I pray you, how prayer opens the
fountain of grace, and beats back the ocean of Gods judgments, it mouldeth
him to be merciful even to Sodom, till Lot be safe in Zoar, for so he says,
I can do nothing till thou come thither: thy prayer has manacled my hands, I
cannot strike till thou be gone: have thee, save thee, escape thy life, fear
and fire are a falling, see thou saint not, either in thy powerful prayer, or
speedy passage.

Corath, Datham, and Abiram, with a rout of Rebels more, stand up against Moses
and Aaron, Numb. 16. 41. etc.
saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord: God saw the sin and hastened
on the judgment, when he said unto Moses, get you up from among this
congregation, for I will consume them quickly. Then as the text says, they
fell upon their faces. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take the censor, put in fire
of the Altar, cast on Incense, and go quickly to the congregation, and make
an atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is
begun.

Then Aaron took as Moses commanded him, and ran into the midst of the
congregation, and behold the plague was begun, but when he stood between the
dead and them that were alive, the plague was staid. O blessed Incense, blessed
prayer, blessed station, O blessed devotion, so readily running, to repair the
ruins of a dying, and decaying people, where fourteen thousand, and seven
hundred died, besides them that died in the conspiracy of Chora: yet as you
may there see by the sufferage of prayer, the rest were saved, and the plague
was stayed.

Elephas as it is in Job, urged much the power of prayer, to deliver from
punishment, Job. 5. 1.
when he said to Job, The Papists abuse this place to make good their prayer to
Saints, which is spoken not of the dead but of the living Saints.
call now if any will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn?

As and if he should say, to aggrauate his grief the more, O Job of all thy
miseries this is not the least, that neither thy God will answer thee, nor the
Saints will pray for thee, whither will thou turn thee upon thy tossed bed? if
there be no passage for prayer in the day of thine affliction, whither will thou turn thee upon thy tossed bed?

Let Paul conclude for all, to make good the power of prayer in this particular
of putting off the punishment of sin, with deliverance from danger, when he
pressed the people to pray for him. 1. That he might be delivered from the
disobedient in Judea. 2. Romans 15. 30. 31. etc.
That his service in the church might be accepted of the Saints. 3. That he
might always come to them with joy. 4. And that he together with them might be
refreshed with the shewer of all heavenly comforts. A needful prayer my dear
brethren, from you to God for us, who are your Pastors, that we may feed you
without peril, that our service may be accepted, that our presence may be with
joy. And that drops of grace distilling from above, may daily refresh our more
then dying and decaying plants.

And here I might seasonably press with Paul's peril, Peter's deliverance out
of prison by the prayers of the Saints. Who when he was in durance, and
imprisoned by Herod the king, Act. 12. 5. 6. etc.
earnest prayer was made of the church unto God for him, and prevailed, for
even there (as you may read) the prayers of the Church, ouerturned the counsel
of tyrants, obtained the presence of Angels, brake the prison, unloosed the
chains, put Satan to flight, and preserved the Church, yea and Peter too,
when by the prayer of men, and conduct of an Angel, he passed away without
peril, and was delivered out of the hand of Herod, and from all waiting for of
the people of the Jews.



For by it, the barren womb is made batsome, Genesis 25.
as in Sarah, Annah, the Shunamit, 1. Sam. 1.
and in Elizabeth, of all which it fell out, 2. King. 4.
as it did with Zachary, Luke 113.
when the Angel said, fear not Zachary, for thy prayer is heard, and thy
wife Elizabeth, shall bear thee a son, etc.

By it the enemy is conquered, as in Moses against Amalecke, of whom it is
said, Exodus 17.
plus fecit oration mosis orando, quam Iosue pugnando, 1. Sam. 7.
Moses prayer was more piercing then Iosuas pike. 2. Chron. 20. 6.
In Samuel against the Philistimes. In Iehosophat against Moab and Ammon. In
Iudeth against Holefernes. And in David against that Gyon of Gath, when he
said, what is this proud Philistim that he should revile the Host of the living
God, Thou come to me with a sword, 1. Sam. 17. 45.
and with a spear, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name of the
Lord of Hosts, the God of the host of Israel, whom thou have railed upon.

It would be too long to tell of all, but this is the sum, by the power of
prayer, devils are dispossessed, the dead are raised, maladies are cured, eyes
are opened, tongues are untied, and sinowes are losed, prayer fatched done fire
from heaven, and it stayed the sun in Gibion, it opens heaven, it shuts
hell, and shakes all the powers of darkness, it conque, reth God, it quieteth
the conscience, it sacketh sin, and to conclude, as it is in my text, it
saves souls, for it shall be, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved.

These words are three times mentioned in the scriptures of God, Joel. 2. 23.
to make us the more attentive, Romans 10. 13.
they are riuited with a stiddy hand, and a treble stroke, to make us ye more
apprehensiue of ye Lords mercies, they are driven in like holy nails of the
holy Sanctuary, whereon t^ hang our salvation on the days of trial, when
there shall be signs in the heavens above, and tokens in the earth beneath:
blood and fire and the vapor of smoke: then whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved And such privilege have all his Saints, but the
devils and damned, shall either be silent and dum in the day of danger, or if
they speak, they shall call to the mountains to fall upon them. The Lord God
of spirits prepare us ever to pray, and by that way and means give us passage
into the presence of our good God, there to have both audience, and answer,
for his sons sake, who has saved us from our sins, by shedding of his most
precious blood, thereby to redeem the world of his Elect. To that God and
Christ, with the power of the holy Ghost, proceeding from both, be all honor
and glory, this day and ever. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

