A Right profitable Book for all diseases, called, The Pathway to Health.

Wherein are to be found most excellent and approved Medicines of great
virtue: as also notable potions and drinks, and for the distilling of diverse
precious waters, and making of Oils, and other comfortable receipts for the
health of the body, never before imprinted.

First gathered by Peter Leuens, Master of Art of Oxford, and student in
Physic and Surgery: and now newly corrected and augmented.

Ecclesiastes. 38. Give unto the Physician that unto him belongs.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Roberts for Edward White, and are to be sold at the
little North door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1596.

TO THE READER.
IN my opinion gentle Reader (which also is the saying and writing of all the
Philosophers,) those things are most principal to be taught and maintained,
which in the common wealth are most profitable and necessary, then may I say
without just cause of reproof: if some think no shame to displeasure many,
for the pleasuring of a few, then I need not to blush, nor fear to profit
many, by hurting of none, by the publishing of this my book abroad: not pend
without pain, nor drawn without diligence, nor ended with ease, wherein are
such and so many notable, rare, profitable, and precious things, as never were
yet set forth in any volume in our English tongue, nay, diverse of them were
never hitherto imprinted. Although I have given the onset to publish in our
own natural tongue this most excellent work for all diseases, for the which
cause it should not be the less esteemed, although some, more curious then
wise, esteem of nothing but that which is most rare, or in hard or unknown
languages. Certainly, these kind of people cannot abide that good and laudable
Arts should be common to many, fearing, that their name and practice should
decay, or at the least should diminish: the intention truly of such persons,
seems much like them that gape for all, and would all have, leaving nothing
to any body, but that which they must needs forgo: not considering that we
are not borne for our selves only, as Plato says, but for the profit of our
Country. Surely, if I did not fear to be too long in this my Praeface, I would
prove, how all Arts and Sciences may be published in that tongue which is best
to be understood, as for example. Gallen the Prince of this Art, being a
Grecian, wrote in the Greek. Also, King Auicene he wrote in the Arabian
speech. Also Pliny, Celsus, Serenus, and other of the Latinists, wrote to the
people in the Latin tongue. Marcillius Ficinus, whom all writers assent to be
singulerly well learned, disdained not to write in the Italian language,
generally to all men. If then the intent of all that ever set forth any notable
study, have been to be read of as many as would, what reason is it that we
should keep secret among a few, the thing that was made to be common to all?
Christ says, no man lights a Candle to cover it with a bushel, but sets
it to serve every man's need: and these go about not only to cover it when it
is lighted, but to quench it before it be kindled, if they might by malice:
which as it is a detestable thing in any godly Science, so me thinks in this so
necessary an Art, it is exceeding damnable and deuillish, to debar the
fruition of so inestimable benefits, which our heavenly Father has prepared
for our comfort and innumerable uses, wherewith he has armed our impotent
nature, against the assaults of so many sicknesses, whereby his infinite mercy
and abundant goodness., is in nothing else more apparently confessed: by the
which benefits, as it were with most sensible arguments spoken out of heaven,
he constrains us to think upon our own weakness, and to acknowledge, that
in all flesh is nothing found but misery, sickness, sorrow, sin, affliction,
and death: no, not so much strength as by our own power to relieve one member
of our bodies diseased. As for the knowledge of medicines, comfort of herbs,
maintenance of health, prosperity and life, they be his benefits and proceed
of him, to the end that we should in common help one another; and so to live
together in his Laws and commandments: desiring all those which shall find
any fault herein, that they will friendly amend that is amiss.

THE PATHWAY to Health.
* For all the parts of the head.
For to make the hair to grow.
TAke a Mollwarpe, skin and all, and lap it in a cloute, and burn it to
powder in an earthe^ pot, then take Does dirt, and lap it in a clout, and burn
it to powder, and mingle these two powders together with Honney, and anoint
the place where you would have hair to grow. Also take and grind red Onions
very small, and annoint the place therewith, and the hair will grow up quickly.

For to make hair to grow where none is.
Take Hasel nuts, with husks and all, and burn them to powder, then take
Beech mast, and the leaves of Enula campana, and stamp the herb and the mast
together, then sees them together with Honny, and annoint the place therewith,
then strew the powder thereon, this will make hair grow.

Another experiment to make hair grow.
Take Mallows, and sees them roots and all, and wash the place where hair
wants, and it will grow in small time. Take Honny and Bears grease, and
mingle them together, and make an ointment thereof, and anoint the head
therewith. Also take a good quantity of Bees, and dry them in a sieve by the
fire, and make powder of them, and temper it with oil Olive, and annoint the
place where the hair should grow.

An experiment for to wash the head,
Take an ounce of Turpentine, and an ounce of white war, and a pottle of Burges
wine, of Storax calamitae, an ounce, and a little Cerus, and Mastick, and so
make good strong lie, and put therein those gummes, and so wash the head
therewithal. Also take the oil of Tartar, and warm it, and annoint any balde
head therewith, and it will restore the hair again, and that in short space,
this has been proved true.

Another for to wash the head, and to make the hair yellow.
Take the best and the strongest lie that can be made, then take a good
handful of red Fennel, of Margerum as much, of Sage a handful, Violets as
much, of Damask Roses a handful, of Red Roses as much, two Nutmegs, of Cloves
and Mace one ounce of each, Enula campana, as much, Orice powder, as much,
Licorice two or three sticks sliced, a handful of Lauender spike, and let the
lie stand nine days, and then strain it, and sees it one wave, and scum it,
then put all the herbs and spices therein, and so occupy it when you think
good, with a sponge wet your hair, and then let it dry in of it self: this
will keep your head from aching, and make your hair as yellowe as gold.

Another to make the hair yellow.
Take the rind or bark of Rubarbe, and take the scrapings thereof, and steep
it in white wine, or clear Lie, and after that you have washed your head
therewith, you shall wet your hair with a Sponge, or some cloth kept for that
purpose, then let your hair dry against the fire or sun, and the oftener that
you use it, the better it will prove, as I have often tried.

For to stay hair from falling.
Take and make strong standing Lie, and take a great company of Isope roots,
and burn them to ashes, and mingle the ashes and the Lie together, and
therewith wash your head, and it will keep the hair from falling of, and use
this often, it is well proved. Also if you take the ashes of little Frogs being
burnt, it staieth the falling of the hair, and the ashes of Goats dung,
mingled with oil, does increase hair.

Another for the falling of hair.
Take the ashes of Culuer-dung in lie and wash the head therewith. Also Walnut
leaves beaten with Bears suet, restores the hair that it plucked away. Also
the leaves and middle rind of an Oak sodden in water, and the head washed
therewith, is very good for this purpose.

For to kill Lyce in the head.
Take Frankensence, and Barrowes grease, boil them together in a pan of earth,
and with this ointment rub the head where the lyce is, and it will kill them.

Another to kill Lyce in the head.
Take Stauesaker, and beat it to powder, and mingle it with black Soap, and
annoint the head therewith, and it will be quickly clean.

For the Nits in the head.
Take the gall of a Calfe, and smere the head therewith, and it will kill the
Nits.

For woormes in the hair.
Take and rub Calamint on the head, and it will sley the woormes in the hair.

For to do away hair.
Take the head of Nettles, and stamp them, and temper it with Eysell, and
annoint the head therewith: but first shave or pull away the hair, for it is
better. After this you must sweat, and when that you are hot, then annoint
your head therewith, and do this three days, and there will grow no more
hair in that place. Also take the gum of Arabic, and annoint the place
where the hair grows, and it shall quickly fall away.

For to take away hair.
Take the shells of two Eggs, beat them small and still them with a good
fire, and with that water annoint the place. Or else take hard Cats dunge, dry
it, and beat it to powder, and temper it with strong Vinegar, then wash the
place with the same, where you would have no hair to grow.

An experiment for to take away hair.
Take the blood of a Snaile without a shell, and it hinders greatly the
growing up of hair. Also take Labdanum, the gum of an Iuie tree, Emmets Eggs,
Arsenick and Vinegar, and bind it to the place where you will have no hair to
grow.

Another for to take away hair.
Take the juice of Fumitory, and mix it with gum Arabic, then lay it on the
place of the hairs first plucked out by the roots, and it will never permit
any more hair to grow in that place. Also if you annoint your head with the
juice of a Gloworme stamped, it has the same virtue.

For the scurffe in the head.
Take of the decoction of Mallow roots, and wash your head often therewith,
and it will cause the scurffe to fall away. Also the decoction of the middle
rind of an Elm, the head being washed therewith, does mightily drive out the
scurffe.

Another for the scurffe in the head.
Take Vinegar, and boil it in wine lees a little, and annoint all over the
scurffe: but first cleanse it, and it will mightily heal and dry it. Also take
the branch of a green Fig tree, with the leaves, and stamp them in water, and
it will heal the scurffe being washed therewith. If the scurffe be new, use
this medicine daily with Vinegar, and annoint the head therewith: this has
been proved.

For wheales or pushes in the head.
Take and wash your head with Vinegar, or with water wherein Camomell has
been sodden. Also the leaves of Violets stamped with honny, does lightly heal
the same. Also town Cresses stamped with Goose grease, does speedily heal the
pushes or wheales that be in the head.

For a scald head.
Take a pennyworth of Lamp oil, and half a pynte of fair water, and boil
it well together, and when it is cold, put thereto half a pennyworth of
Quicksiluer, and temper it well together, and annoint the head therewith.

For a scald head.
Take the liver of a Thornebacke, and sees it by it self, then take six roots
of Enula campana, and sees the^ by the space of three hours in clean water,
of Houseleeke three handfulls, stamp them and mingle them altogether, and
strain them through a linen cloth, and make an ointment of them, and anoint
the head therewith, and if the hair be gone: take a handful of wool and
burn it to powder, and anoint therewith the head that is pilde, and the hair
shall grow as thick as ever it was before.

Another for a scald head.
Take Groundsell, and Barrowes grease, and chopps the Groundsell small, and
boil it with a soft fire with the Barrowes grease, and so clip off the hair,
and ther-withall annoint the scald head.

For to heal a white scald in the head.
Take Houndstung and Borage roots, of each a like quantity, wash them fair
and clean, then shred them, and chop them small in pieces, sees them in
vinegar about half a pint and more, then put in a little sweet Butter never
salted, and let them boil together till they be soft, then strain them
through a clean cloth, and it will be a pleasant salve, then take a feather
and annoint the Patients head withal, but you must use to wash the scald head
with Cow piss, or else with fair water: and this will heal the white scald
head.

Another for to heal the white scald.
Take green coperis, rosen, wax, sheep suet, honey, and beat them small
together, and boil them well, and it will be a very fair salve, and this will
heal any white scald: proved.

For the brain an experiment.
Take the Sirope of red Roses, with the powder of Lygnum Aloes, and the bone in
the Hearts heart, cloves, and the leaves of red Roses, or the Cakes thereof, and
seethe them all together with Snger, and give the patient thereof to drink
fasting, morning and evening.

For the brain another.
Take the smoke of Lignum Aloes, and it comfort the cold brain, and all
weak parts of the brain, and the head.

For to restore the brain.
Take and make powder of Betony, and use it in thy pottage, and it will restore
the brain. Also take and chew Mace in your mouth. Also put into thy nose the
root or juice of Galingall, and it is good for brain or memory.

For the weakness of the brain.
Take and smell to musk, and for default of stoppings of the nose when it
wringeth the heart and upper limbs, and causes them in a manner to sound: take
of the sum of the Musk beneath. Also to comfort the brain, use both Cloves
and Mace in your breths that they be sodden in, and also in your nosthrils. If
the Patient have the rume o^^pose: put the powder of Cardomonum, and the oil
of Musk into an Egs-shell till it sees, and therewith annoint the head.

For the fleame in the brain.
Take the juice of red Docks, with the juice of Rue, and put a little thereof
into the nosthrils, and use this in a stue or very warm place.

For him that has lost his mind.
Take the juice of Marigolds, of Sage, of Wormwood, of each of them a
spoonful, and take as much white Wine and put it thereto, and let him drink it
at even, and as much in the morning cold: and use it for five days.

Another for him that has lost his mind.
Take and sheare off the hair of the mold of his head, then take. Archangell
and stamp it, and bind it to his head where it is shaven, and let hun sleep
for a while, and when he awaketh: he shall be right meek and sober enough.

For to keep a good memory.
Take Mugwoort, and lay it in white Wine, and then take it and distill it, and
use to drink of it fasting, and it shall preserve the memory. Also to take the
juice of Zipulus and drink it fasting: causes a good memory.

Another for memory.
Take and grind Musterseede with Vinegar, and rub it mightily on the plants of
the feet: and it does quicken the memory of such persons as have been long
time sick, and will stir them up from all kind of forgetfulness of memory, and
makes them mindful of such business that they take in hand.

Against forgetfulness.
Take Rue, red Mints, oil Olive, and with very strong Vinegar let thy
nosthrils be holden over the smoke thereof. Also burn thine own hair, and
mingle it with vinegar and a little pitch, and apply it to thy nosthrils, for
it wonderfully stirs and quickneth the persons diseased with forgetfulness.
Also take the lytes of a Hog laid unto thy head being shaven: is very good.

Another for forgetfulness.
Take the gall of a Crane, being made warm in a leaden vessel, it does
thoroughly stir up the diseased body, if the nape of his neck be anointed
therewith. Also take the smoke of Galbanum, or of an Hearts horn which is best
of all for forgetfulues. Also the skin of an Hare burnt, and the ashes thereof
drunk with Calamint, heals the disease of the Lytargy.

Another for the same.
Take Sauery and beat it and sees it in Vinegar, and lay it in the form of a
plaster to the hinder part of the head: it does merely awaken those that are
very heavy with sleep, nothing does more and better quicken forgetfulness in
men or women. Also the fume of a Kidds skin does quicken forgetful persons,
and those that be infected with the falling sickness.

For the frenzy in the head.
Take oil of Roses, oil of Violets, of every of them xx. poys, and as much of
the water of a Cowturd, and put it in a new vessel of earth, and boil it till
all the water be boiled away: then put out that, and put in other: into the
same vessel, as much of that water, and boil it thus seven times, and then
put thereto half of the fourth part of the poys of Camphiere, and meddle it
well together, and use it on his head for the frenzy when it is new shaven.

Another for the frenzy of the head.
Take the juice of Smallage, veriuice or vinegar, oil of Violets or Roses:
being put together in a vessel of glass over the fire, all hot lay it to the
Patients head, and so annoint the head all over being shaven.

Another for the same.
Take and annoint the head with vinegar, and with oil of Roses put thereto,
and it is very good against lytargie or frenzy, and for vomit of blood, the
quantity of four drams taken with wine profits much.

For the frenzy in the head.
Take the hot lights of a Goat, and clap it to the head of the Patient that is
vexed with the frenzy: and it takes it away presently, and so does a sponge
dipped in warm wine, and put to the left pappe. Also the root that is called
Neproyal boiled and laid to the head, will draw forth all madness.

An experiment for the frenzy in the head.
Take a red stone that is found in a Swallow, and let the Patient carry it
about him fast tied in a linen cloth, and put it under the left arm, and it
does heal all frenzy and lunatic persons. Also a roasted mouse eaten, is
very good for frenzy. Also sees Henbans in sweet wine, and therewith wash the
frensies ears, temples, and nosthrils, and it proueketh sleep.

For the meigrim in the head.
Take four handfuls of red rose Flowers fresh in S^mmer, and in Winter: three
handful of Camomell, and as much of veruen, and break them small with your
hand, and boil them in a pottell of white wine or Gascoyne, if it may be had,
and if not: in Rochell wine, till it come to a quart, and put them in three
baggs, broched flat like a plaster, and lay it where as the pain is, as hot
as the patient may suffer it, and change them still hot and hot, during a day
and a night, and longer if need be.

Another for the meigrim.
Take half an ounce of Galingall, and an ounce of Ginger, Nutmegs half an ounce,
Cloves a quarter of an ounce, Aniseede a penny weight, Enula Campana a quarter of
an ounce, Licoris half and ounce, Sugar half an ounce, and beat all these
together, and let the sick use of this powder first and last a spoonful at once
and within four days God willing he shall be whole.

Another for the meigrim in the head.
Take an ounce of Stauesaker, and beat it to powder fine, then take the third
part of the powder, and of the white of an Egg, and a Nutmeg, and a little
Commin, a quantity of flax small hacked, beat them together, and lay it
plaster wise on his forehead, when that he goes to bed, if he bleed: he shall
be quickly whole, if not: lay it on the oftener until he bleed.

Another for the meigrim.
Take commin, and beat it as small as ye can, that so done: sift it through a
fine cloth, and take the finest thereof, and put thereto the quantity of the gall
of an Ox, and beat them together till that they be thick, and then make a
plaster thereof and lay it to the nape of the neck, and it shall help them.

For the same a medicine.
Take Daste roots, leaves and all, and beat them, and wring out the juice, and
put of the juice into the nosthrils of the person that is troubled with the
meigrim in the forepart of the head, so that the Patient may lie, that they may
void down the juice that discendeth from him or them.

For to know if that the brain pan be broke.
If the flesh be whole above: take and shave the head there as the sore is, and
double a linen cloth, and spread on the white of an Egg, and bind it too one
night, and on the morrow take it away, and look if the cloth be moist or dry,
for if it be moist the pan is broken and in the same place carue the flesh,
and let the blood out, and annoint it with an ointment made therefore, and thus
thou shall save him, or else he is but dead.

For the Fistula in the head.
Against the Fistula in the head: take and sees bitter Lupines in salt water:
and put Vinegar to them, and then strain it, and in the straining thereof: put
of the powder of Germander and wash the head therewith.

For the Fistula in the head.
Against the Fistula in the head, take and gather the roots of Egrimony, and
dry them in the smoke, and after that it is dry: take and hang it about the
neck of the Patient, and it will help him.

For the meigrim and for the impostume in the head.
Take the four penny weight of the root of Pellitory of Spain, a ob. weight
of Spicknard, and boil them in good Vinegar, and when it is cold: put thereto a
spoonful of honey, and a saucer-full of Musterd, and mingle them well together,
and held thereof in thy mouth a spoonefull at once, and use this nine times, and
use for to spit it out continually.

For an impostume in the head.
Take Galingall halse an ounce, Nutmegs a quarter of an ounce, Cloves a penny
weight, the flowers of Canell, a penny weight of Spicknard, a ob. weight of
Aniseede, a quarter of an ounce of Eoula Campana, half an ounce of Licoris, of
Sugar half an ounce, and beat them well together, and use of this powder first
and last: a spoonful at once.

Another for the impostume in the head.
Take Betony, Sage, red Mints, red Fenell, of eath three crops, and eat them
eight days together, or fourteen days: and after take the green rynde of
the Elder stick of one years growing, and put the juice thereof into thy nose
three days, three times a day lying upright, the space that one may go a mile.

For the head ache.
Take Rose Cakes, and stamp them very small in a mortar with a little Ale, and
let them be dried by the fire on a Tileshard, and lay it to the nape of the
neck to bedward: proved.

Another for the head ache.
Take Hemlocks, and seethe them till they be as soft as pappe, lay it to the
head where the pain is, and let it lie all night, and on the morning lay on
another hot plaster of the same, and use this four or five times, and by Gods
grace the Patient shall be eased.

Another for the head ache.
Take a Posset and lay it hot upon the head, and let it often be laid too, for so
cured a Physician diverse cures. And also take the oil of Camomell, and anoint
the brows and the forehead, and labor it very well, and lay the Patient
down, and make him sweat, and it shall help him. Also mingle a spoonful of
the juice of Betony, with as much wine, and as much honey, and put thereto nine
Pepper corns, and drink it four days together: proved.

For the head ache.
Take juice of black Iuy, and juice of Rue, the oil of Roses, white wine, and
Vinegar, and mingle all together, and anoint the temples therewith.

For the head ache.
Take an handful of red Sage, a handful of red Rose leaves sliced, a
handful of Camomell flowers dried, a handful of Bay Salt, a piece of leauened
bread, two Nutmegges, beat them all together, and make as it were a quilt, and
rub over the herbs, and then lay it over his head in the form of a plaster.

For the head ache proved.
Take white earth-bind, and make juice thereof, and put it into thy nose, and
it shall purge thy head of rume, and it does away the headache. Also Leeks
with leaves sodden in wine and emplaistred about the temples and the forehead,
it does away all the head ache. Also take Musterd seed, Saffron, Rose
flowers, or the leaves, and mingle them with Soap, and make a plaster thereof,
and bind it to the head. Also take Insence, Doves dung, Wheat meal, and temper
them with the whites of Eggs, and bind it to the forehead, and the temples, and
it does away all aches of the head. Also wash the head with lie made of the
powder of Colewoorts, of red nettells, and of white wine, and it does away the
ache without doubt, for this is a true experiment proved.

For aching of the head.
Take and make Lie of Veruaine, or of Betony, or of woormewood, and therewith
wash thy head thrice in the week, and it shall do thee very much good.

For the vanity of the head.
Take the juice of wallwoort, Salt, honey, wax, and Ensence, boil all them
together, and therewith anoint the temples.

For the vanity of the head, and to wash the head, and to comfort the brain
and memory, and for a fair face.
Take lie that is not so strong, and put two Pyls of Orenges, the Pills of as
many Citrons, the blossoms of Camomell, Bay leaves a handful, of maiden-haire
a handful, of Egrimonie two or three ounces, of barly-straw chopped in pieces,
a dishful of Fenegreeke, a pound of Wine lies, two or three dishfulls of broom
blossoms, put all these into the lie, and mingle them together, and so wash the
head therewith, and put a little Myrre and Cinnamon: this is proved.

FOr the Lytargie in the head in the hinder part, which maleeth it for to shake.
Take a pure black Cat, and flea her, and pull out her bowels, and pick away
the fat from the gutts, and put them into the body again, and fill the body
full of Musterdseede, well steeped in the juice of Nep, and Sage, and then sow
the body up, and roast it upon a spit, till it be so dry that it drop no more
moisture, then take the dripping that comes thereof, and put it in bladders,
and when you will occupy it, shave the Patient in the neck, and anoint him by
the fire in the joint next to the head, and it shall help the grieved.

Another experiment for the Lytargie in the head.
Take and make the decoction of Tutsan, Smallage, and of Sage in salt water,
and wash the hinder part of the head therewith. Also take and sees Castoreum in
strong vinegar, put thereto of the powder of Anacard, and anoint the hinder
part of the head therewith.

Another for the Lytargie in the hinder part of the head.
Take and chop the roots of Siperus very small, and sees them in oil till
the oil be nigh wasted, then lay the residus that is left on the hot coals,
and let the Patient take the smoke thereof at his mouth and nose, and it will
help him. Also bind the powder of Eustorbium in a fine cloth, and hold it so to
his nose that he be constrained to neese. Or else take and make an ointment of
Eustorbium, of Pepper, and of Castore, with oil of Musk, or common oil with
these powders, and juice of Gourds, and annoint and rubb the hinder part of the
Patients head: proved.

For to purge the head and to cleanse it.
Take Pellitory of Spain, and chew a good quantity of the root in thy mouth
three several days, and it shall purge the head, do away the ache, and
fasten the gumms.

For to purge the head an experiment.
Take the seed of Stoni sacrae, and beat it all to powder, and when it is
beaten small, take a fine linen cloth, and put the powder therein, and make
thereof a little ball, the quantity of a Hasell nut, and put it in thy mouth,
and role it to and fro betwixt thy teeth, chawing and holding down thy head
the space of an hour, and it will purge the head, and thy gummes, and keep
thy teeth from aching, this also cleanses all filthiness out of the head and
brain.

For to purge the head of what cause so ever.
Take a handful of Betony, a handful of Camomell, and a handful of Veruaine
leaves picked, stamp them, and sees them in black Woort, or in Ale, and in
the latter end of the sea thing, put to it a little Comin brayed, the powder of
Hearts horn, and the yolks of two Eggs, and a little Saffron, and stir them
well about, and lay a plaster thereof hot over all his forehead and temples
Also if you put to it a little Vinegar: it is a remedy for to purge the head,
and for the Meigrim beside.

Another for to cleanse the head, the breast, and the stomach.
Take three handful of Centory, and sees it in a gallon of water, unto a
pottell, and then cleanse it, and put thereto a pint of clarified honey, and sees
it softly to a quart, and drink thereof two spoonfuls at once, early in the
morning, and late in the evening.

For all manner of head ache.
Take Veruaine, Betony, Wormwood, Celidony, Wallwoort, Rue, and the bark of the
Elder, Honey, and Pepper, and all whole stamp them together, and sees them in
water, and drink it early and late: proved.

Another experiment for the same.
Take Rue, Hayhoue, Betony, Veruaine, Mintes, Hilwoort, red Fenell, Wormwood,
Sothernwood, of each a handful, wash them, and shred them small, then seethe
them with water in an earthen pot, and wash thy head with some of the water,
then mingle the herbs with Wheat bran, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it
on the mould of his head, as hot as may be suffered: then bind it too with a
Kerchiefe, and within five times dressing of the Patient, he shall be whole.

Another experiment for all manner of head ache.
Take Rue, Veruaine, Wormwood, Sage, Walwoort, Heyhoue, red Fenell, Planten,
the green of an Elder, between the bark and the tree, of each a handful, wash
them, and stamp them small, put them in a new earthen pot with a pottle of red
Wine, and a pottle of stale Ale, sees it to the half, put thereunto a quarter
of an ounce of Pepper beaten, and strain it through a cloth, and drink thereof
nine days eight spoonfuls at once, at eueuing hot, and in the morning cold,
and wash the Patients head with the liquor, and it will cure all manner of head
ache.

Against the turn or daseling in the head.
Let thy head be washed with the water of the decoction of three leaued Grass,
and lay a plaster of the herb to the Patients forehead. Also Mints laid to
the head, takes away the pains that come of a cold cause. Also Mistletow laid
to the head draws out the corrupt humors: and the juice of Onions cast into
the nosthrils, cleanses the head. Also seethe Peniriall, and lay it to the
temples, or pour Bawlme into the ears three or four times in the Sun, and
it will cure the Patient of daseling in the head.

Another for daseling or swimming in the head.
Take and make a plaster of Culuer-dung and Wheat branne, temper them with
the white of an Egg, and lay it to the contrary part of the head to that which
is payned. Also the juice of Iuie mingled with old Lard, is good for the
swimming in the head. Also the pith of bread which was baken with Coriander
seed, laid to the head is good.

Against the rume in the head.
Take and make a Pomander of the powder of Cucubes, Maces, Labdanum and Greek
Pitch: it does remove from the brain all superfluous humers: Maces and Cucubes
chewed in the mouth do the same. A plaster made of Garlic and Cloves:
stops that humor which causes the rume. Also Isop boiled in the embers and
so laid to the head, stops the rume, and a little bag full of Darnell, Salt
and Aniseede is very good.

A Gargell for the rume.
Take Vinegar, Musterd, a good quantity of Pepper, and boil them all together,
then let the party so grieved put a spoonful in their mouth and walk up and
down, and when it waxes cold spit it out, and take an other: and use it for a
time, and for every one spoonful, you shall void five: take it not in the
frest: this has been proved.

For the rume an other experiment.
Take juice of Colewoorts, and draw it into the nosthrils, and it purges the
head: Sorrel beaten with the oil of Roses is good for the ache of the head.
For the rume in the eyes, take Time and eat it, and it drives away the rume.

For the rume in the head, an other proved.
Against cold rume, and other passions and swimming of the head, and such other
quallities: take three Pills of Cassia, of Labdanum, and Storax Confecta, with
the juice of Wormwood, when the cause comes of the head, this comfort the
brain: also make a Fumigation of Cassia Ligna over hot coals, and receive
the smoke thereof at thy mouth.

A quilt for the rume, a speedy remedy, proved often.
Take of Olibanum, Bengeum, Storax Calamita, of each of these half a dram, of
Labdanum two drams, of Nutmegs, and Cloves, of each half a dram, of Commin a
scruple, Masticke half a dram, of Maces half a scruple, of Iugula Romana a
dram, of Bay berries a scruple, of the flower of Roses, of Camomell, of
Violets, of each a dram: of the flowers of Betony a scruple, beat all these
into gross pouders, and so let them be quilted with good red Scarlet flocks,
in a piece of black Sarcen^t, and so be laid upon the head to the nape of the
neck, and let it lie there the space of twenty hours, and then turn it, and
thus for the rume it is most excellent.

An experiment for wounds in the head.
For to cease the ache and swelling wounds that be sore in the head, or in any
other place, so that the bones be not broken. Take Mallows, Wormwood, Betony,
Egrimony, Hilwoort, of each of these a handful, wash them and stamp them, and
put thereto three ounces of wheat flower, as much Honey, and as much Barrow
grease, and stamp them together, and put thereto red Wine, and fry them, and
lay them warm to the sore, but lay a red Cole leaf between the plasters and
the wound, and it shall cease the ache, and take away the swelling thereof.

For all manner of evil aches in the head.
Take Betony, Veruaine, Wormwood, Waybread, Rue, Wallwoort, Sage, the bark of
the Elder tree, three corns of Pepper, and temper them together in wine, and
drink thereof each day a draught, early and late, till that the Patient be
well. Also take the gall of an Hare, and temper it with as much honey, and
anoint therewith the temples. Also Rue, and Eysell, and smere thy head
therewith, is wholesome. Also Camomell is good for the burning Fever that
holds a man or woman in the head. Also Feuell sodden in water, swageth the
ache in man or woman's head, when that the head is washed therewith.

Another for all manner of evil aches in the head.
Take the grease of an Heart, and mingle it with Barly^ meal and Sorrel, bind
them and temper them all together, and plaster it to thy temples: for this
has been proved a right good medicine. Also take the juice of Primrose, and
the milk of a Cow, and with a pen draw it up into thy nosthrills, and it shall
purge the head, and shall heal the party so grieved of the head ache.

For to make a man to sleep.
Take the leaves of white Poppy and red Nettles, and stamp them together, and
put to it a little Bean flower, and lay it on a cloth, and so bind it to the
forehead, and he shall sleep quietly.

To make one sleep that slept not in a long time before.
Take white Poppy seed, Aniseed, of each a like quantity, and beat them to
fine powder: then take Rose Water, the white of an Egg, and woman's milk, and
mingle all these together: but first beat the white of an Egg very much: and
take away the froth, then take flocks as many as will lie over your forehead,
and wet them in the liquor aforesaid: then sprinkle of the powder upon it, and
then lay it in a pewter platter upon a chasingdish of coals for to make it
warm, and so lay it to the forehead, and the party shall take his rest and
quiet sleep.

For to make a man to sleep.
Take the leaves of Elder, and warm them between two tiles, and bind it to the
nape of the neck, and it will make him to sleep. Also take the leaves Scala
caeli, put them in a pot, and sees them well a good while, and at even wash
well thy feet and legs up to the knees with that water, and no higher, then go
to bed, and thou shall sleep soundly.

For to make a man to sleep.
Take a quart of Almonds blended, and half a pound of Hempseede, three times
washed in clean water, and sixteen Dates, stamp them together, and put thereto
good stale Ale, and take an ounce of Poppy seed bruised, and lay it in Ale three
or four hours, and sees them together, and strain them, and give the sick
to eat of it, and it shall make him sleep.

For to make a man sleep, and for to come to quiet rest.
Take red Roses, Violets, the water of Mellilot, Lettice, of each a like
quantity a handful: white Poppy, white Henbane, of each half a dram, a little
Dill seed for to comfort the brain, bray all these together: then put them in
a soft linen cloth twelve inches long, and three inches broad, quilt it and
tie it to his forehead. Also take oil of water Lillies, Poppy, Nightshade,
Rose Water, Vinegar, and woman's milk, dip flax therein, and bind it to his
temples: this has been often proved.

For pain in the ears.
Take the juice of wild Cowcumbers, and put it into the ears, and it asswageth
the pain. Also put the wood of green Ash in the fire, and save the liquor
that comes out at the end, and put it into the ears, it causes the pain
for to cease, and amendeth the hearing. Also beat the juice of Wormwood, and
drop it into thy ears: proved.

For pain in the ears.
Take and mingle the juice of Betony with oil of Roses, and put it warm in
the ears with a tent, and stop them well. Also take fair oil Olive, and let
it be blown out of a man's mouth that is clean and fasting into the ears of a
sick man, let this be done three or four times, and let that side of the head
be turned downward, that the odor of the head may run out. Also take Almonds
and the kernels of Peaches, and let them be clean pilled in hot water, and
make oil of them, and let the oil be put into the ears of the Patient so
grieved.

For the pain in the ears.
Take oil of Roses, and a little Vinegar, and put it to the ear: then make a
bagg of Camomell and Mellilot, and lay it thereunto. Also Goose grease being
taken with a little honey, asswageth the pains of the ears. Also oil of
Almonds is very good for the pain in the ears: Also if there be water in the
ears, take a little Goose grease, and the juice of Onyons, commixed together,
and so lay it to the ears: proved.

For deafnes in the ear.
Take a piece of green Ash and put it in she fire, and take the droppings of
that water, and take the droppings of a fresh water Eele, the oil of bitter
Almonds, of every one a equal portion, warm it by the fire, and let it drop
two or three drops in the ear so grieved, then take black Ewes wool, and dip
the wool therein, and put it into the same ear, and it will help the Patient
so grieved, by Gods grace. Also take Betony, and Horehound, stamp them in a
mortar, and wring out the juice, and let the Patient lie on that side, and so
pour it into his ear, and let him take his rest: this has been proved.

For deafnes in the head.
Take a Hedghog and roast it, and take the droppings thereof, and put it to the
Patients ears so grieved, and stop it with black wool, et fiet. Sometime there
chances deafnes by wind, which is in the ear, the which causes tynkling in
the head, then take a little Aloes in hot water, or in white Wine, and distill
it into the Patients ear, then put a little Eustorbium in powder into the
parties nose so grieved, to make him for to neese, and to avoid as much filthy
humors as you may.

Another for deafnes in the head.
Take Secados, Bay berries, Betony, Bay leaves, of each of them a handful,
sees them in white Wine to the half, and for an old man in Maimsie, then put
it in a vessel that has a narrow mouth, and hold your ears over it being
unstopped, as hot as you may suffer it, being not too hot nor too cold: also
three drops of the oil of Almonds, does the same.

For woormes in the ears.
Take the juice of Woorm-wood, Rue, So wthistle, and put it in the patients
ear, and he shall be whole. Take the juice of Elder, and drop it into the ear
of the patient grieved. Or take the juice of Cockle, and mingle it with the
juice of Arssmart, and put it into the ears so grieved.

For ach and worms in the ears.
Take the juice of Henbane and put it into thine ears, and it will take away
the ach, and kill the woormes. Also take the powder of wild Gourds, and the
juice of Arssmart, and put it into thine ears: Also for the worms in the
ears, take Centory and Leekes, the juice of the^ both, and put it into the
ears, and stop it with black wool of a Sheep, that grows between the
legs, and it will help the patient.

For woormes in the ears.
Take oil of Roses, oil Olive, oil of Exeter, Aqua composita, of each of
them a like quantity, and compound your Aqua vitae with other oils on the
fire: then take Rue, and the eggs of Ants, beat them small, and compounde
them altogether being well boiled, and then put it into the ears, dropping it
in three or four times, and he shall find ease.

To cause a man to hear well.
Take and make a round loaf, and fill it full of Sage, and bake it, and when
it is baked, then break or cut the loaf in the midst, and bind it to the
ears as hot as you may suffer it: let this be used three or four times, and
it will cause the patient so grieved, for to hear well.

For the running in the ears.
Take the juice of Elder, and drop it in the ear of the party grieved, and it
cleanses the matter and the filth thereof. Also the juice of Violets used, is
very good for the running of the ears. Also take the gall of a Weather, and
Honny, of both a like portion: mingle them and put them into the ears.

For the running in the ears.
Take the gall of a Goat and woman's milk mingled with Honny and Mirrh, and it
will help you. Also boil the juice of Sengreene, and put it in a hollow Onyon
in the fire, then put of the same juice strained into thine ear, and lay the
Onyon likewise over thine ear in manner of a plaster. Also the urine of a man
child being poured into the ear, dries the humors, and takes away the
running of the ears.

For the impostume behind the head.
Take Beans and mingle the^ with meal, and the juice of Fenegreke, and it
helps the patient so grieved with the impostume behind the ear, but it must
be laid plaster wise.

Another for the same.
Take Milk and Allom and make a posset, and when the Allom has turned the
milk, lay the posset curd to ye impostume, and it will break it. Also to
destroy an imposiume in what place soever, take the root of Hollock and wash
it clean, then sees it till it be tender, then put out the water, and put to
the root Linseede and Fenegreke, and Barley meal, mingle them well together,
and fry them with Bores grease, and lay it to the impostume plaister-wise, and
it will cure the same.

For all manner of sore eyes.
Take Fennel, Rue, Verueine, Enfrance, Endive, Betony, and red Roses, lay all
these a day and a night in white wine, the second day still them with a soft
fire, then keep it in a glass, this water is as good as Bawme, for all manner
of evil eyes.

Another for the same.
Take Fennel, Rue, Verueine, Enfrance, Betony, Endive, Sengreene, Hill-woort,
Peneriall, red Roses, Maiden hair, of each a like much, also four ounces of
oil Olive, stamp them, and put them in a vessel of glass, and still them in
a stillatory, and as it stilleth, part it in three parts, the first water you
must keep by it self, for it is as precious as silver, the second as gold,
the third as Bawme: all these waters must be kept in very clean glasses,
close stopped, and so use any of them.

A precious water for the sight of the eyes, made by King Edward the sixth.
Take Smallage, red Fennel, Rue, Verneine, Betonie, Egremony, Pimpernell,
Enfrance, Sage, Selondine, of each a like quuntity, first wash them clean,
then stamp them, and put them in a fair brazen pan, with the powder of xv.
Pepper corns, fair serced into a pynt of good white wine, then put the^ into
the herbs, with three spoonfuls of Honny, and five spoonfuls of the water of a
man child that is an innocent, mingle all together, and boil them over the
fire: and when it is sod, strain it through a fine linen cloth, and put it
into a glass, and stop it well and close till you will use it, and when you
need, put a little thereof into the sore eyes with a feather: but if it wexe
dry, then temper it with white wine, and it profits much all manner of sore
eyes: this water was used by King Edward the sixth.

For the pin and the web, and the fellon in the eye.
Take the gall of a Hare, and Honny, of each a like much, mingle them together,
and take a feather, and put a little into thine eyes, and it will heal the^
within two or three days, and save the sight on warrantise: this has been
often proved.

For the pin and the web in the eye.
Take a quart or a pynt of Strawberries when they be ripe, and put thereto
as much white Wine as Strawberries, then put them in a clean vessel, and let
them stand nine days hot, stir them very well every day twice or thrice,
and the tenth day put it in a bag of Canuas, and let it go through hot, you
must not wring it hot, let it go through of it self, the^ take the clear,
and put it in a vial of glass, then take Calamint, that is, a stene, and put
it in the fire, til it be red hot, and the^ quench it in white Wine nine
several times, and when thou have done thus, take the same stone and beat it
to small powder in a brazen mortar: if you have a pint of Water, then put
therein one ounce of the said powder, and mingle them well together, and keep
it well, for this is a precious water for the pin and she web in the eye.

Another for the same.
Take Enstras a good quantity, and stamp it well, and wring out the juice
through a cloth, and use it. Or take Bores grease, Capons grease, Goose grease,
and melt them together in a pan, stir them well with a staff till it be well
boiled, then let it cool, and put it in a box, and at night use to put a
little thereof in the eye when thou go to bed, lying upright.

Another for the pin and web in the eye.
Take an Egg and roste it hard, and in the white thereof put as much Coporas
as a pease, then being hot, wring it through a cloth, and let it drop in the
eye one good drop, this has often been proved good both for old and young.

For to clear the eyesight.
Take and chafe the grease of any manner of fresh fish water against the Sun,
till that you have the slime thereof, mingle it with Honny, and therewith
annoint thine eyes.

For to clear the eyesight.
Take and drink the juice of Rue, and it will so clear the eyesight, that if
the Sun do shine ye shall see the stars at noone day. Also take the gall of
a Swine, or else the gall of a white Cock, and put it in a glass, and annoint
the eyes therewith nine days, and thy sight shall be as clear and perfect as
ever it was, this bath been proved.

For the pearl in the eye.
Take white Ginger, and rub it on a whetslone of Norway, into a pewter sawcer,
and do thereto white Wine, and then take a feather and wash the eyes
therewith: proved.

A precious water for the pearl in the eye, and for red bleered eyes, and for
to keep a man young.
Take Lumuell of Gold, of Silver, of Laten, of Lead, of Iron, of Steel, of
Litargie, of silver and gold, with a little Camomill, and as much Colombine, put
these into the urine of a male child, and let it stand a day and a night, the
second day, in warm white Wine, the third day in the juice of Fennel, the
fourth day in the juice of Eggs, the fifth day in woman's milk, the six day in
red Wine, the seventh day in the white of Eggs, the eight day put them together
and still them, then put the water very close in glasses for your use. This
water destroys all evil in the eyes. Also if it be drunk, it keeps a man
young, and is of wonderful great virtue.

For bleered eyes.
The juice of Cowslips, and the water thereof distilled, being taken and the
eyes anointed therewith, helps all blered eyes, and takes away the rednes.

For heat and swelling in the eyes.
Take white Bread, and Southernwood sodden in water, and therewith bathe the
eyes, and it will draw away the heat and swelling of the eyes without any
pain. Also for swelling or running of bloody eyes, take and sees red Snailes,
and gather the grease thereof, and annoint thy eyes therewith, and they will be
whole by Gods grace.

For smarting of the eyes.
Take Woman's milk, and the juice of Centory, and mingle them together, and wash
well the eyes therewith. Also the juice of Betony is very good with white
wine: proved.

For a man's eye that is blew or black, with a blow or a bruise.
Take the white of an Egg and Parsley, and beat them together, and make it as
thick as an ointment, and lay it to the eyelids all cold. Also take the gall
of a Hare, and temper it with Honny, and annoint the eyes therewith. Also take
red Snailes in water with Capons grease, and annoint the eyes therewith.

For running or waterie eyes.
Take of Betony and Honey, a like quantity, fry the^, and strain them through
a cloth, and annoint the eyes therewith. Take also Colombine and wring out the
juice and annoint the eyes therewith. Also take a red Colwoort leaf, and the
white of an Egg, and annoint therewith the watery eyes when thou go to
bed. Also to make the eyes clear and bright, take the blood of small Birds
and Honny, and annoint the eyes therewith, and thou shall clearly see.

For blood-shotten eyes.
Take the tops of white Woormwoode, and the leaves of Filladane, stainpe them
and mix them with the white of an Egg and Rose Water, and make thereof a
plaster, then bind the same to your eyes at night when you go to bed, and it
will help you.

For to drive blood from the eyes.
Take the powder of Commin, of Warmote, and the white of an Egg, make a
plaster hereof upon hard Flax, and lay it to the eyes. Also for to clear the
eyes, take Wall-woort, Rue, red Fennel, stamp them together: and temper them
well with white Wine, and strain it through a linen cloth, and so drop it at
night into thine eyes, lying upright in thy bed.

For bloody or watery eyes.
Take a quart of white Wine, and put thereto the fat of xvi. pieces of Bacon,
the breadth and thicknes of a groat, and a good sawcer full of Honny, and put
them in a Latin basin cleene scowred, and s^ir them well together, and cover
them with another basin the space of nine days: then take of the basin and ye
shall find a cream, break the cream a little, and pour out the water that
is underneath softly into a glass, and that water will help all manner of red
eyes and watering, use it daily, and put one drop into thine eyes twice a day.

Another for bloody eyes.
Take the juice of Rue, and powder of Commin, mingle them together, then take
Cotton and dip it well therein, and lay it to the eyes, and also annoint the
temples, the brows, and the lids of the eyes therewith. Take also the roots
of red Feuell, stamp them and wring out the juice, then temper it with
clarified Honny, and make thereof an ointment, and annoint thy eyes therewith,
and it will take away the rednes.

For the eyes that are blasted.
Take Tutty and Calamint, and wash them with white Wine nine times, then grind
them upon a stone with some of white Wine, and with Goose grease, and Capons
grease, put hereof in the eyes early and late: this has been proved.

A medicine for a man's eye that is broken with a staff, or bruised with any
stroke: this has been often proved.
Take a pint of white Wine, and a handful of red Roseleaues, and as much
Commin as thou can hold in thy hand, and put all together, then sees it well
til most part be consumed, then take that licquor and put it into a glass, and
put thereof into thine eyes, do thus five or six days, also wash the sore
eyes therewith: and at night make a plaster of the same leaves that be sod,
and lay them likewise upon the sore eyes, and this will certainly heal the
eye, though the ball thereof be cut or hurt with a rod or staff, or any
other kind of bruise in the eye, coming of what cause soever. Proved.

For the itching of the eye.
Take the oil of Tutly, and annoint the eyes therewith. Also Sumace is good for
the itching of the eyes caused of hot humors, and wash them with that water
before expressed.

A precious medicine proved, for man, woman, or child, that has any sore eyes.
And this medicine never fails, but restores the sight.
Take a stone called Calamint, and make it red hot nine times, and quench it
four times in Rose water, and five times in white Wine, then take this stone
that is thus quenched, and make of it small powder in a brazen mortar: then
take Frankensence, as much as of the powder of the stone, and make it also to
powder, and look that you have of them two even portiens, as much as you will,
then take Rose water, and water of Rue, and water of Fennel, of each of these
three two portions: of the water of Strawberries, and the water of Veruaine,
and the water of Enstras, of each of these three, three portions, and put all
these waters together in a clean vessel, and then look how many ounces thou
have of thy powder, to ounces of the aforesaid waters that be mingled. Grind
the powder of Calamint and of Frankensence on a Marble stone, as you would
grind Vermillion, but you must grind each one by it self, then take fresh
Swines grease of a Barrow-hog, and wring the same very well through a clean
cloth, and look that you have as much weight of cold grease, as of the mingled
waters: take then the powder of Calament, and boil it with the grease, and
with the mingled waters, over a soft fire of Char-coles, without any smoke.
And when thou have boiled these well together, put unto the same the powder of
Frankensence, and then boil them all together, till the smoke of the boylings
cease, and then take it from the sire and let it cool: but from the time that
you set it first to the fire for to sees, be always stirring it very
busily, till it be cold and thick. Then take Camphire, and pare it in small
pieces, then take of thy ointment even as much, and grind them together by
parcels on a Marble stone, and when they be well mingled together, then put it
in a box, with one ounce of Calamint, and one ounce of Frankensence, Enfrance
three penny worth, and three penny worth of Camphire; and he that has any
greeuance or sickness in his eyes, at night sitting on his bed, let him take of
this ointment with his finger, as much as a Wheat corn, and hold it in his eye
until it be relented, and then dip his finger with the ointment softly between
the lids of his eyes, and then let him lie down and sleep, and on the morrow
when he rises, wash the eye with Rose Water, or with Enfrance water, or with
Fenell water, or with Rue water: these waters be good therefore, but ere thou
wash the eyes therewith, heat the water a little over the fire, but look that
you wash not with fasting spittle, nor with no other thing, but with one of
these waters before said, and thou shall be whole: this has been surely
proved.

For the Impostumes in the head.
Against the Impostume of the eyes, and web of the same, put the juice of
Hony-suckle often therein, or mingle it with pure honey and strain it, and it
wastes the Impostume and the web maruailously, and it was thus proved. One
took a Cock and a Whelp, and pricked their eyes with a crooked Iron or needle,
so that they seemed that their eyes were out, and then he bruised this herb,
and put it in their eyes, and they became fair and clear as they were before,
at the which he did marvel: and proved it many times upon diverse persons.

For worms in the eye lids.
Take Salt and burn it in a cloute, and temper it with honey, and with a
feather annoint the eye lids, when the party goes to bed.

For worms in the eye lyds.
Take Bay Salt and burn it in the fire, and then stamp it: and do thereto
clarified honey, and the water of Allom, and a little Copperas, and annoint the
eye lidds when thou go to bed, and this medicine shall kill the worms that
be in the eye liddes: proved.

For stinking at the nose.
Take Cloves, Ginger, and Calamint of each a like much, and seethe them in
white Wine, and therewith wash thy nose. After that put in the powder Piritrum
to provoke one to neese, if there be replection fleam in the head: first you
must purge the head with Pylls of Cochie, or of Hiera picra. Also if the
stinking of the nose come from the stomach: first purge the stomach, et fiet.

For the polix of the nose.
Against the polix of the nose, make a suppository or tent of a plaster called
Apostolicon, and put powder of Copperas thereon, and put it into thy nose, or
make that tent of cotton, and wet it in Salt Water, and lay of the said powder
thereon, and put it in thy nose. The said powder is also good to fret the proud
flesh of superfluity of blood of the nose, but first burn it, then put it in
old Parchment and make powder thereof, and take Mastick, and then make a tent
of Bursa pastoris, with part of a stone called Emachitas, and put it in thy
nose.

For the polix of the nose.
To take and put the juice of Iuy into thy nosthrils, is very good. The gum of
Iuy made in an ointment called Dialthera, has power to chase and to consume.
Also against the polix make a tent of Apostolicon, and the powder of burnt
brass, and lay it to the nose, et fiet.

For the pose in the head.
Against the rume or pose, mingle the powder of Cominseede, and Bay berries,
and put them all hot in a bag, and lay them so to the head for the pose.

For the nosthrill a medicine.
For the highness of the nosthrils, and rednes caused in flux of humors: take
the broth that Olibanum is sodden in, but first in the morning Pills of
Olibanum, and at night to bedward the said broth: these Pylls comfort
digestion, and purges the stomach.

For bleeding at the nose.
Take and mingle the powder of Betony, with as much salt, and put as much as
you can take between two fingers and a thomb in the nesthrils, and the blood
will staunch: also take and wet cotton in the juice of Bursa pastoris, and cast
powder of Antimonium upon it, and the bleeding will frent.

For bleeding at the nose.
Take a dram of Bolae armoniacke washed, and mix it in Rose Water, and Planten
water, and drink it, then bind the extreme parts as hard as you may, and
after make a tent of green Nettles, and put into his nose. Moreover if so be
that the Patient do hold in his hand Egrimony the root and all, and drink the
juice of Knotgrasse, the blood will staunch.

For bleeding at the nose.
Against the bleeding of the nose that comes by ebulition, or boiling of the
blood in the liver and veins: in Summer make Beans wet in the juice of
Rose Water, and lay them to the forehead, or temples: it has been proved.

Another for the same.
Take Peruincle and chewe it in the mouth, and it will staunch the blood.

Against the bleeding at the nose.
Take and wet the pith of an Elder in the juice of Bursa pastoris, and cast
powder of Sumac thereon, and put it to thy nose. Also take and wet cotton in the
juice of Bloodwoort, and put it into thy nose, and it stauncheth blood. Also
take the juice of Nettles, and rub well thy forehead therewith, and it will
staunch it. Take the seed that hangs upon a Hasell bow and burn it, make
powder and blow it into thy nose, with a Goose quill, or drink the juice of
Planten, and the blood will stanch presently.

An experiment for the tooth ache.
Take Betony and wild Gourds, and put them in wine, or in Vinegar, and then put
it into thy mouth as hot as thou may suffer it, and hold it a good while in
thy mouth, and it will take away the pain. Also take Henbane and bruise it, and
hold it between thy teethe a good while, or lay it also upon the tooth that
aketh, and it will assuage the pain. Take three or four Rases of Ginger, and
bruise them with half a pint of Ale, being sodden therein till it be wasted to
a quarter, and put it into the parties mouth as hot as he may suffer it: and it
will take away the tooth ache.

For the tooth ache.
Take strong Ale, and Musterd of the best, and gum Elder, and put it in a
Porrenger and set it over the fire, and stir it, and when it is thick, take it
and hold it on that side that the pain is. Also take Henbane seed, and seed
of Leeks, and Frankensence, of each a like much, and lay these three on a
glowing hot Tilestone, then take a pipe of Laten that is wide at the lower end,
and small above, then set the wide end to the stone, and the small upward, and
let the smoke go into thy mouth: for this will kill all the worms: it has
been proved.

For the tooth ache.
Take the root of Henbane, and sees it in Vinegar till the third part be
sodden away, and with the same wash thy mouth, and hold it in thy mouth a good
while, and it will kill the ache. Also take the root of Henbane, and hold it
between thy aching teeth, and it will do away the pain thereof.

For hollow teeth.
Take Assa fetida and put it in the hollow tooth, and it shall help them. Also
take Rue and lay it to the hollow teeth, and chew it in your mouth, and lay
thereof into the hole, and it shall assuage the pain thereof.

For hollow teeth.
Take Vinegar and Mustard, powder of Pepper, and Pellitory of Spain, and the
curnell of a Nut gall, and boil them all together, and put it in the hollow
teeth, or else about the gums hot, and thou shall be whole. Also take the seeds
of Henbane, and beat it to small powder, and mingle it with War, and make a
little pellet that it may be full of powder, and put it in the hole of the
tooth that aketh, and it will kill the tooth ache that is hollow: this has
been proved.

For worms in the teeth.
Take Pepper and stamp it, and temper it with good wine, and sup thereof warm,
and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, and then spit it out, and thou shall
be delivered of all anguish of thy tooth ache. Also take the seed of Henbane,
and cast it on a chafingdish of coals of Charcole fire, and hold thy mouth over
the fire that the smoke may enter into thy mouth over a a basin of fair clean
water, and thou shall see upon the water as it were small worms, that shall
come forth at thy mouth. Also take Tansie, bray it, and stop the hollow tooth
therewith, and it will kill the worms, and take away the pains thereof.

Another for the same.
Take the root of Pellitory of Spain, and wash it clean, and stamp it, and
make thereof three small balls in thy hand, every ball the greatness of a plum,
and lay the first ball between the cheek and the tooth that aketh, by the
space that one may go a mile, and ever as the water gathers, spit it out,
and when thou think it has been there so long, put it out, and put in
another, and so do till thou have spent all three, and then lay you upon your
bed, and cover you warm, and when you have slept you will be whole: this has
been often times proved true.

To make teeth to fall out of them selves.
Take ground Worms, and a red hot Tile-stone, and burn them to powder, and
put the ashes into the hollow tooth, and cover it with war, and they will fall
out themselves. Also take the root of Henbane, and make it in powder, and touch
the tooth, and it will fall out, take heed that thou touch not any but that
which is sore. Also burn to powder a Hearts horn, and rub thy teeth therewith,
and they will fall out. Also make dowe of Wheat flower, with the milk of
spurge, and lay it about the tooth that is pained, and it shall fall out. Also
take a water Frog, and a green Frog, and sees them together, and gather the
grease, and smere therewith thy gums about the teeth, and they will fall out
quickly.

For yellow stinking teeth.
Take Sage a quantity, and do as much Salt thereto, and then coffin it, as thou
would make a Pasty, and bake it in an Oven all to coals, and thereof make
powder, and therewith rub thy teeth. Also take green branches of Broom, and
burn them, and make powder thereof, and do thereto of as much of the powder of
Allom burnt, then mingle them together, and temper them with water, and
therewith rub well thy teeth, and that will do away the yellownes and
blacknes, and the stinking of the teeth. Also take a handful of Comin, and
stamp it small, and sees it in Wine, and give the party so grieved to drink
twenty days, and it shall help them. Also Mastick chewed within a man's mouth
takes away the tooth ache.

To make teeth white that be yellow or black.
Take flower of Rye, and Salt, and Honey, and mingle them well together, and
therewith rub well thy teeth every day two or three times, and after wash thy
mouth with water, this will do away the yellownes, and make the teeth white.
Also take white Marble, Cuttle bone, white Coral, Salgeme, Bay salt, Mastick,
and the Pylls of Citeron, of each of these a like much, make them in very fine
powder, and rub the teeth therewith every morning, and afterward wash your mouth
with white wine, wherein Dill or Camomell has been sodden. Also take Vinegar
of Squils, and dip a little piece of cloth therein, and rub thy teeth and gums
withal, the said Vinegar fastneth the ginns, and comfort the roots of the
teeth. Also scuruy Grass does the same. Also distill a water in a Limbeck of
two part of Salgeme, and the third part of Allom, and rub the teeth with a
cloth dipped in the same, and it makes the teeth white, and cleanses the gums.

To make the teeth clean.
Take Rosemary, Sage, and a quarter of Allom and Honey, and boil them together
in fair running water, and when it has been well boiled, strain out the
fair water, and keep it in a glass, and use it sometime to wash your mouth
and the teeth therewith, and it will make them clean. Also wash the teeth with
the decoction of our Lady thistle root, and thy teeth shall be fastened, and
also kept clean, and thy gums being sore about the teeth shall be made whole.
Also the root of Horehound drunk or chewed of a man fasting, does quickly
heal the gummes, and makes the teeth clean. Also Strawbury leaves takes and
cleanses the teeth and gums: a sure and tried experiment.

For the gummes.
Against swelling of the gums, wash them first with Vinegar and Allom confect
together, but first set Ventoses, or bores with scarification on the neck or
shoulder, or set the Ventoses in the hinder part of the head, and scarifie it
three days, then lay Horseleaches to the gums, and wash the gums with Vinegar
wherein Allom, Nutgalls and Roses has been sodden in, and with the same
vinegar wash thy mouth three or four days twice or thrice a day; and it will
ease thee. Also against the rottennes of the gums: take Cingstile and rub the
cheek therewith, and it takes away the rotting of the gums.

For the gummes that bleed.
Against the bleeding of the gums take powder of Coral* and of Anthero that is
in the midst of the Rose, and lay it upon the gummes: or confect it with
Honey, and annoint the gums therewith. The powder of Coral put to the gums,
heals them. Also for the gums that rotteth: rub them with Myrrh, and it will
help them. Also the fume of Myrrh received at the mouth comfort and purges
the brain.

For the gummes that are gnawne.
Take and seethe Cloves in water of Roses, and then dry them, and make thereof
powder, then temper the powder with Rose Water, or with Roses, and that is
best, and then dry it again in the Sun, and do so three or, four times,
and then temper the powder again with Rose Water, or with the juice of Roses,
and annoint the gummes therewith, and lay the powder on them.

For Blisters in the mouth, and swelling of the lyps.
Against the blisters in the mouth, and swelling of the lips: take and sees
the leaves of Mastick in Vinegar, and with the same make a Gargorisme thereof.
Also against fleaing or rawnesse of the mouth coming of Feauers, and against
small blisters and swelling: sees yolks of Eggs in water, and then fry them
till oil come out of them, and with the oil confect the powder of Pennets, of
Dragagant and Amidon, and annoint the grief: this powder Confect with sirop of
Roses or Violets, is also very good therefore.

For chapping of the lyps.
For the chapping of the lips: take Pennets and delay them in water of
Dragagant, and annoint the lips therewith. Also for lips that be broken with
the wind, take the oil of Almonds and Propolio, boil them over the fire, and
let it be fomwhat hard, and therewith annoint thy lips so chapped with wind.
Also for new clifts or chapping of the lips: lay the powder of Canell in the
clifts, and keep well thy lips together, and bind a cloth thereto.

For swelling of the cheek that comes of the tooth ache.
Take the juice of the seed of Nettles, and the white of an Egg,
Frankensence, and Wheat flower, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the
sore cheek, and it will do away the swelling thereof.

For the great heat in the mouth.
Take a pint of water, and as much as a Nut of white Allom, and as much of
Sage, and a spoonful of honey, and boil all these together, and wash thy mouth
with it.

For the canker in the mouth.
Take a pint of white wine, and as much running water, and the crops of Sage,
two spoonful of life honey, and as much Allom as an Egg, boil all these
together, and skim it well, clarify it till the Allom be consumed, and when it
is somewhat cold, put it in a glass, and use it. Also take the root of
Selendine, and sees it in white wine, and when it is well sod, take the pot
down, and let the sick hold over his mouth, and let the breath go into the
body, and it shall kill the canker.

For the canker in the mouth.
Take the juice of Woodbind, and the juice of red Woorts, Honey, powder of
Camomell, and powder of wild Sage burnt, also take red Wine a pint, a quarter
of a pint of honey, and as much Allom as a Doves Egg, and sees them till the
third part thereof be wasted: proved.

Another for the same.
Take Vinegar, Allom, Musterd, Rue, Auence, Isope, herb Robert, and sees and
strain them through a cloth as hot as you may suffer it, and wash your mouth
oftentimes therewith, and it will heal the canker.

For the canker in the mouth, and for stinking breath.
Take a handful of Woodbind, as much Planten, and bray them small, then take a
pint of Eysell, and another of water, and a quantity of honey, another of Allom,
keep all these waters together in a glass, and wash well thy mouth therewith,
and hold it in thy mouth, and it shall destroy all cankers and slinking
breath, and save the teeth from rotting.

A very good medicine for a canker or sore mouth.
Take a handful of Woodbind, as much Planten, and half a handful of Lauender
cotton, as much Sage, an ounce of white roch Allom, and three spoonful of honey,
bray all these in Vinegar, let these be moderatly warmed, and put into a still
with the herbs and softly distilled, and after meals wash your mouth therewith
three or four times a day. Proved.

Against clifts and sores in the mouth, steep Dragagant in Rose Water, and
wring it in a cloth, and with a glewy substance that comes out, mingle the
powder of Amidum, and with a feather wet therein, annoint the sore mouth
therewith, and it will heal quickly.

Also for a man that cannot well eat, take Ambrose, Peniriall, Aunce, Ach,
Organum, Rue, swill these together with water, and drink the water morning and
evening till thou be whole. Proved.

For evil in the mouth or throat.
Take the leaves of the white Vine, and boil them in fair water, and when it
is well boiled, hold thy mouth over, that the air may go into thy mouth, and
then sup of the water, and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, and then put
it out and take more, and do so seven or eight times a day, and use this two
days together. Also do in like manuer with the five leaued Grass, and use it
seven or eight times in a day, and three days together, but it must be sodden
somewhat more then the leaf of the Vine, in fair water, and it will heal the
Patient: this has been often times proved.

For unsavory mouths.
Take the juice of Endive with Sugar, and if the juice be thick or troubled,
clarify it, and so may all other juices in this wise. Sees the juice of
Endive a little, and let it stand, and that which is thick will go to the
bottom, then take the thin liquor, and strain it often through a cloth, and
wring it, and with that juice in the bottom, make Syrop with Sugar: if you will
make it thinner, put the white of an Egg thereto.

For stink in the mouth.
Take and make Pills of Cassia lingua and eat of them, and they be good for the
stink of the mouth. Also for the stink of the mouth caused of rottennes of
the gums and teeth: take and wash the mouth with water that garden Mints be
sodden in, and rub the teeth with the Mints, or else with the powder thereof.
Also chew Musk, and it will do away the stink of the mouth. Also take the
juice of Vorueine, and bruise it, and put it in thy mouth, and hold it a good
while close in thy mouth, and it will take away the slinke. Proved.

To take away the stinking of the mouth.
Take and wash thy mouth with water and Vinegar, and chew Mastick a good while,
and then wash thy mouth with the decoction of Aniseeds, Mints, Cloves, sodden
in Wine. If the stinking of the mouth come of a rotten tooth, the best is for
to have it drawn out. Also you must wash your mouth before meat and after with
warm water.

For to cleanse the mouth, and to purge the humors from the mouth, which descend
out of the head, it is good every morning fasting to wash your mouth, and to
rub your teeth with a Sage leaf, Pills of citron, or with powder made with
Cloves or Nutmegs, You must forbear all meats of evil digestion, and raw
fruits.

For a stinking breath.
Take oil Doret, Turpentine, Honey, oil Olive, Virgin wax, as much of the one
as of the other, and boil them all together, and make an ointment thereof, and
use it every day in the Patients nosthrills, and let it be put into the nose
every day with tents made of lynt scraped of fine linen cloth, and he shall
be whole.

For a stinking breath.
Take the juice of Hilwoort, or else take Butter, and the juice of Featherfoy,
and temper them with Honey, and every day give the Patient a spoonful.

Another for the same.
Take two handfuls of Comin, and stamp it to powder, and boil it in Wine, and
drink the Syrope thereof morning and evening warm, the space of fifteen
days, and thou shall amend: this has been proved.

For a good breath.
Take and wash thy mouth with the water that the shells of Citeron have been
sodden in, and thou shall have a good breath. Also these confections make the
breath sweet, the electuarie of Aromatikes, and the pills of Citrons. Against
letting of the breath caused of cold humors: take and drink the herb Dawke, or
the liquor that dry Figs have been sodden in, and it will make the breath sweet
and wholesome. Also take red Mints and Rue, wring the juice in the sick bodies
nosthrils when he goes to bed.

For the tongue.
Against the sharpnes and dryness of the tongue, put this gum in water which
is called gum Arabike, till the water be slymie, and with that slyme moist the
tongue, or bind the gum in a thin cloth, and put it in water till it begin to
melt, and with she same cloth rub thy tongue, and it will take away the pain
thereof. Also for the roughness of the tongue, put the seeds of Quinces, or
the curnells in a fine cloth, and wash thy tongue therewith: also Psillium or
the seed thereof.

For dryness of the tongue, and for thirst.
Against dryness of the tongue of the Fever Ague, put the seed of Fleawoort,
and bind it in a fine linen cloth, and then put it in cold water, and therewith
wash and rub thy tongue, and scrape it with a knife. Also for thirst put the
seed of Fleawoort in a bag, and lay it on the tongue.

For thirst in the tongue.
Against thirst in the tongue, give Ptysan or Dragagant, and it will be
dissolved in a night, or make syrope with water that Barley and Dragagant is sod
in, and it is conueniable for Fever Agues, or if Dragagant be holden under the
tongue.

For the palsy in the tongue.
Take and use great strong ground Musterd, the powder of Piones well scalled,
powder of Sage, Nutmegs, and Sugar, do these powders in the Musterd, and eat
every day at meals thereof, and it will take away the palsy of the tongue.
Also Musterd seed sodden in oil or wine, is very good against the palsy.
Also take the powder of Casterium, and hold it under the tongue till it be
molten or dissolved.

For the palsy in the tongue.
Against the palsy of the tongue, that is, when the tongue is full of holes,
and the Patient cannot speak, because the sinews of the tongue is full of
humors, as it appears often in Fever Agues, for the same, chew the seed of
Cresses, and hold it under the tongue: proved.

For him that has lost his speech.
Take Sage, Pimpernel, stamp them well, and anoint his tongue underneath with
the juice thereof, else take the juice of Sage and Pimpernell and do it in his
mouth. Also take Ach, Mints, red Betony, and lay them into Goats milk, drink
it morning and evening. Also take three ounces of Betony, and sweet milk of a
Goat, temper them together, and drink it three days together, this for the
palsy is most precious.

To restore speech that is lost suddenly.
Take Peniriall, and temper it with Eysell, and give the sick to drink it:
lay also a plaster of this to his nosthrills so grieved.

For a man that sleeps and cannot speak.
Take Galbanum and set it over the fire with a candle, and make it smoke, and
put the smoke to his nose, and thou shall cause him for to speak. Also take
the juice of Sage and Printrose, and do it in his mouth, and he shall speak
by Gods grace. Also take the juice of green Morrell berries, and clarify it
well, and drink thereof, and thou shall speak.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Sothernwood, and temper it with wine, and drink it when
thou go to bed.

Another for the same.
Take the crops of Rue, and the crops of Verueine, of each a like much, and
drink the juice thereof when thou go to bed.

For Sun burning.
Take the juice of Lemons, with a little bay salt, and wash your face
therewith, and let it dry in, and do so three or four times, and it will
help you. Also take half a pot full of rain water, and fill it up with
Veriuice, and sees it till it be consumed away, and in the time that it is a
boiling, fill it with the juice of Lemons, and when it is sodden, take it off
and let it cool, and then take eight new laid Eggs the whites of them, and beat
them fine, and put fine Sugar to it, and so occupy it for Sun burning.

For red pimples in the face.
Take a little Roch Allom, and break it in small pieces, then take the white
of a new laid Egg, and put it in a pan that is leaded within, set it to the
fire till you see it boil, and stir it all the while with a little stick till
you see it wax hard, take this and wash your face therewith. Also take
Rose Water, and water of wild Tansie, and mingle them together, and therewith
wash thy face, and thou shall be whole.

For pimples in the face.
Take and wash your face when you go to bed with warm water, and let it dry
in: take the white of an Egg, and put it into a Saucer, and set it upon a
chasingdish of coals, and put into it a piece of Allom, beat it together with a
spoone till it become thick, then make a round ball, and therewith anoint the
parties face where the pimples be.

For heat and blaines in the face.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and beat them with an Allom stone till they come
to curd, then take it, and set it upon a few embers, and always stir it as it
does gather to a curd, then take it off, and put it upon a Painters stone, and
put thereon Vnguentum populeon half the portion, and of Allom as much as your
thomb, so fine beaten as may be, and this grind with all the other ingrediens a
long while, and put it in a glass or pot, and therewith annoint thy face.

For a rich face.
Take three yolks of Eggs raw, as much in quantity of fresh butter, or Capons
grease without salt, Camphire, two penny worth, red Rose Water half a pint, two
grains of Siuet, and boil all these together in a dish, and then strain them
through a clean cloth, and so set it to keele, and take the uppermost and box
it. Also take Populeon, Brimstone, and fresh butter, and a handful of red
Sage, and stamp and strain them, and then melt all together, and put it in a
box. Also take white Copperas one ounce, one pint of running water, and boil
them altogether to the halse, and skim it clean, and strain it, and put it in
a glass, and set it in the Sun, then wash thy face with a feather, and
anoint thy face therewith morning and evening till it be whole.

For a sauce flamed face.
To annoint it by day, take eight penny worth of Camphire, and as much of Bores
grease as a costard Aple, and mingle them together finely till you can perceive
none of the Camphire, then put it into a box, and keep it as close as you can
from the air. Also to annoint the face by night, take a quantity of Deares
suet, and put thereto a little Bores grease, and a quantity of Brimstone, and
boil them together with a quantity of Copperas, and a pint of Vinegar, or
claret Wine, and after they have been boiled, use to annoint thy face therewith.

To make a good ointment for a sauceflamed face.
Take an ounce of oil of Bays, and an ounce of Quicksiluer, and do them in a
bladder together, with a spoonful of fasting spittle, and then rub them well
together, that nothing of the Quicksiluer be seen, and then take of this
ointment when that it is made, and anoint the sauceflame face therewith, and it
will heal it well and fair, on war rantise, proved true.

Another ointment for the sauceflame face.
Take the roots of Louach, and of Dock roots, the tops of Nettles, and
Cellendine a like much, the quantity of three ounces, half a pound of the
beans of Parsley, and bray them well in water, and do thereto two pound of
Bores grease, and stamp them well together, and let them stand still four
days, after set it over the fire till it sees, then strain it through a
fair clean cloth, and then put thereto fine Frankensence, Myrrh, and Mastick,
of each an ounce, and let it boil eftsone with a easy fire, and stir it well
with a slyce, and then let it keele, and when it is cold put thereon two ounces
of Quicksiluer, and mingle them together, and therewith annoint the saucefleame
face, and this will heal the same, as it has been often proved.

Another medicine for a saucefleame face.
Take the p^tty Morell and still thereof a quart of water, and take a quarter
of a pound of Camphier, and heat the water a little, then put the Camphire
therein and mingle the^m very well together, then put it in a glass and stop
it well, but you must bruise the Morell a little in a Mortar before you still
it, afterward with this water use to annoint the sausefleame face, and it will
heal the same. Also with this water you may heal any manner of sausefleame
face whatsoever, as by experience has often been proved.

For heat or swelling in the face.
Take and boil the leaves or the blossoms of Rosemarie either in white Wine or
fair water, and use to wash thy face and hands therewith, and it will preserve
thee from all inconveniences, and also make both thy hand and face very smooth.

For wrincles in the face.
Take white Wine, and a little Brionie, and a dry Fig that is fat, and
annoint your face therewith, then travail upon the same till you sweat.

For a man that sweateth too much.
Take Linseede and Lettice and stamp them together, and lay it to the stomach
of the party that uses to sweat much, and it will help him.

For to make the face fair.
Take the flowers of Rosemarie and sees them in white Wine, with the which
wash your face: also if you drink hereof it will make you have a sweet breath.
Also to make the face white, put the powder of Sepia in ointment Citerium, and
annoint the face: Or make powder of the root of Serpentine, and of this bone,
and mingle the same with Rose Water, and let it dry: and then put it to the
same water again, and let it likewise dry, do this four or five times, and
then use to annornt the face therewith.

For a child that is iaw-fallne, or mold-fallne, or rooffallne.
Take a handful of Chickweede, and wrap it in a red Colwoort leaf, or else a
linen cloth, and roast it in the hot embers in the fire, and it will become a
green salve, then lay thereof to the bone of the neck as hot as may be
suffered, and take sour leaven of white Bread, and crum it on the molde of the
childs head as a plaster, and it will raise up the bone or molde, by the
grace of God within nine hours.

For shortness of breath.
Take a gallon of Ale, and put thereto a pennyworth of Lycoris scraped, and a
half pennyworth of Annyseed, a little Linseed, and a handful of Isope, and
as much Penneriall clean washed: let them sees to five pints, and drink
hereof morning and evening till you have ease.

For a hoarce voice.
Take the broth that red Colwoorts have been sodden in, and mingle it with
seven or eight Penydis, and one ounce of sirrop of Maiden-haire, and give it
the patient when he goes to bed. Take Dyairis simple, and a losing of the
same at morning, and also at night.

Another remedy for a hoarce voice.
Take great Raisons, Figs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each a small
quantity, sees them in good Wine, and give the patient to drink thereof
morning and evening, two ounces at a time, except he have a Fever. It is also
good to take morning and evening a spoonful of the strrop of Iniubes, mixed
with a root of Licoris in manner of a Locsanum, if with the said hoarcenes
there discende abundance of water to the mouth. Also it is good for to make an
clectuarie of half Dyairis, and half Diadrigantum, and use hereof first in
the morning, and last at night.

A very good medicine for to open the pypes, and to make the voice clear.
Take a Fig, and put it in the powder of Isope, and eat every morning one
at a time till you be well. This will help you on warrantise.

For a sore throat or mouth.
Take Cinckfoile a good quantity and stamp it, and boil it in fair water in
a posnet, then hold thy mouth open over the fume thereof as hot as possible
thou can suffer it, that it may enter into thy throat, and still as it
cools in thy mouth, spitte it out, and so take fresh and fresh.

A sirrop for a sore throat.
Take half a pynte of the juice of Mulberries, a pynte of clarified Honny, and
a quarter of a pint of good Claret Wine, sees them altogether till the liquor
be consumed: take also sage, Sugar, Woodbine and Roses, of each a handful,
sees them in fair water till the strength of the herbs be sodden, then take
ten or twelve spoonfulls of the foresaid strrop of Mulberries, and put
therein, and with this use to gargell your throat lukewarm oftentimes, and
spit it out again: proved.

For a sore throat.
Take oil of Camomile and oil of Violets, and the oil of Almonds, and the
grease of a Hen as much as of all the others, first wash it well and pick it,
then mingle all together, and annoint the throat therewith. Take the dunge of
an Ass, and the dunge of Swallows, and make it in powder, and put the same in
wine, and gargel it in your mouth and throat as hot as may be suffered, Take
also the Swallows in the nest, and a pound of the oil of Cammomile, and the
oil of Almonds, as much of the one as of the other, and lay it to the place.

For the swelling in the throat.
Take the green bark of the Elder tree, and a little Bay salt, beat them
well together till they be somewhat small, thou lay the same to the swelling of
the throat.

For the Quinsie in the throat.
Take Cinckfoile, and sees the same in running Water, and put it in a pot with
a narrow mouth, and let the party grieved hold his mouth over the mouth of the
pot, so that the fume may pass into his throat, and when the water waxes
cold, wash the throat well with the same, both within and without, and the
disease will vanish away: proved.

Another for the same.
First let the party thus diseased, be let blood on the left arm or in the
liver vain, three or four ounces, and let him gargase it with Wine-vinegar
and water warmed together, of each a like quantity, gargase it often times,
and spet it out, and let him have Methridatum in white Wine, and let him sweat
upon it an hour or two. And if the Quinsie be swollen already in his throat,
then let him use this remedy following. Take a Swallows nest as you find it,
with Birds, or with Eggs, or without either of them, and put to the same eight
handfulls of Mallows, with as much Watercresses, boil them all together in
milk until they become soft, and till the milk be clean consumed, then beat
it in a bowl until it come to a plaster, then take as much as your fist of
the same and while it is warm spread it like a plaster, and bind it as hot
as may be suffered about the place where the swelling is, and so change it
often til the pain be gone.

Another for the same.
Take hot Bread and put it in Honny, and lay it to the place as hot as may be
suffered, and it will drink it up. Take also the juice of Planten, and gargell
it up and down thy throat and it will case the pain thereof. Also take the
berries of the Mulberrie tree and make juice thereof, then sees them in a
little Oil and Wine, and put Vinegar thereto, and so gargle it. Also an
electuarie made of the juice of the same Berries, with a quantity of scummed
Honny, is good for the same: and it may be kept ten years in seeds of
Dianorum, for the Quinsie.

For the Cough.
Take Isope, great Raisens, and Figs, of each a little handful, and one
eunce of Liceris: boil them in fair water till the third part be consumed,
then give the party grieved for to drink thereof twice a day, in the morning
two hours before meat, and at night two hours before supper: also it is good
for to eat a losing of Diairis or Diapeaideon. If you will have it stronger,
put thereto the decoction of a little Colewoorts, Annyseedes, and Fennel
seeds, with the seeds of Nettles, of each two drams.

Another for the cough.
Take Sage, Rue, red Fennel, Isope, Comin, and the powder of Pepper, of each
like much by weight, and sees them well together in Honny, and make thereof an
electuarie, and use thereof a spoonefull in the evening, and another in the
morning till the cough be gone.

Another medicine against the cough.
Take the root of Enula campana, Horehound, Holihock, of eath of them a like
much, sees the^ all together in white wine, with a dozen of fat Figs, and
with a little Licoris, and use to drink hereof a draught at a time every day
twice.

For a dry cough.
Take Annyseedes, Ash seeds, and Violets, and beat them to powder, and
stamp them with even portion, then sees them together in fair water till
they wax thick, then put the same into a bore, and as you need, let the
sick eat first and last of the same till he be well.

For the Cough or stoppings.
Take the powder of Isope, the powder of Anny-seed, the powder of Ginger, the
powder of Licoris, and mingle the^ with clarified Honny, and eat daily hereof
till thou be whole. Also for the cough take a little Brimstone, and make
powder thereof, and put a little of the same upon a board or trencher, and take
a stick or coal of fire, and put it in the Brimstone, and let the party
grieved, hold his nose over the fume of the Brimstone, and it shall break the
force of the cough and stoppings. Also this is good for the pose and the rewme
in the head, as has often been pooued.

To make a powder for the Cough.
Take Sugar-candie, Enula Campana roots dried, but nothing so much Enula
campana as Sugar-candie, the^ take two or three crops of dried Isope, and one
race of Ginger, and beat all these together, and afterward use to eat of
these powders till thou be whole.

To make a sirrop for the Cough.
Take a pynt of Isope water, half a pynt of clipped Rosemary, a quarter of a
pound of Sugar-candie, three spoonfuls of Anniseedes bruised, three sponfuls of
Licoris sliced, sees al these together upon a soft fire until it come to a
sirrop, then strain it, and take a spoonful thereof morning and evening, and
let it go softly down by gowlpes.

For the perrillous Cough.
Take white Horehound and stamp it, and wring out the juice, and mingle the
juice with Honny and sees it, and give the sick to drink hereof. Take also a
Garlike head and roast it, then take away the pills and eat it. Also take a
Colwoort leaf and strike the inner side thereof with May butter, and lay it to
the sick man's stomach or belly every morning and evening, and give him no
Milk, Butter, nor Cheese, nor any kind of salt meat, nor fat pottage, nor
Nuts, nor Apples, but make the party pottage with leaves, and roast him an
Onyon, and let him eat it with a little Pepper and Honny put therein, and use
it osten, and it will help him.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Sage, and the juice of Rue, of each like much, and a
quantity of Commin, and as much of the powder of Pepper, and sees them all
very well in clarified Honny, and so make an electuarie thereof, and let the
party grieved, use of this medicine daily, three spoonfuls at night and three
in the morning until he be whole.

A good medicine to help the cough speedily.
Take two or three Garlic heads well pilled, stamp them, and put them into
Hogs-greace or suet, and stamp them well together, and at night when thou go
to bed warm well the soles of your feet, and annoint them with the said
confection as hot as may be suffered, and also the small of your legs, and put
a warm cloth about your feet, and within three nights he shall be helped. Also
take Brimstone and put it into powder, and put a little thereof into a new
laid Egg soft roasted, and mingle it well together: then put thereto of
Bengemin as much as a fitch pease lightly stamped, and drink it in the morning
at your breakfast, and at night.

A remedy for the dry cough.
Take a pound of Licoris, and scrape it clean, then stamp it in a mortar, and
put it in an earthen pot, and put thereto three quarts of the best woort that
may be gotten, and one ounce of Sugar, and a quarter of an ounce of Ginger in
powder, and a pynt of clarified Honny, and sees them all together till they
be half wasted, then strain it through a clean cloth into a fair vessel,
and let the party grieved use thereof first and last, at night hot, and in the
morning cold, till he be whole.

Another for the dry cough.
Take Anny-seedes, Smallage seeds, and Violet seeds, of each a like much,
beat them all together in powder, and temper them with wine as the quantity
gives, then sees the^ well till they wexe thick, and so use it. Also if you
take the seeds of Nettles, and sees them in Oil, and afterward annoint your
hands and your feet therewith, it will do away the cough. Also take the
strrop of Violets and of Iniubes, and drink thereof. Also it is very good to
take first in the morning and last at night, a losing of Diadragagant, and
after ward to drink a draught of good P^isan, and this is a present remedy
for the cough when it proceeds of a hot cause.

A dyer for them that have the cold cough.
Ye must abstain from Vinegar, and all salt meats, from fruits and raw
herbs, from Fish, Lemmons, and all kind of gross meats, and too much
replexion. Also ye must drink no Wine between meals, nor sleep in the day
time, especially after meat.

For the stopping of the pypes, and for fleame, a medicine proved.
Take a good bowle-full of Barlie, and put to the same a gallon of clean Well
water, and boil them together till the Barley be as soft as any Wheat or
Formentie, then strain it through a clean cloth, and take that water, and put
thereunto as much good Woort, with a pennyworth of Licoris bruised, but not made
into powder, and a good handful of Isope, another of Sage, and boil them
altogether till one half of the liquor be boiled in: then strain that liquor
through a cloth, and that that comes through the cloth, put into a close
vessel, and let it stand a day, and then let the patient drink thereof a
spoonefull or two every morning, and so much likewise every evening until he
be well. This has been often proved.

For straitness in the pypes.
For straitness in the pypes or in the breast, take dry Isope, roots of Enula
campana, of each one handful: sticks of Licoris scraped and soft bruised four
ounces, and boil altogether in a gallon of running water, till half be wasted,
then strain it, and to all the above said liquor hot, put half a pint of
clarified honey, and drink thereof milk warm, a good draught every day first
and last.

A medicine for to stay a vomit.
Take half a pint of running water, an ounce of Sugar, and a good race of
Ginger, pick it and scrape it clean, and shred it in good handsome pieces, and
so put it to the water and the Sugar, and boil them together from half a pint
to a quarter of a pint, and so give it to the party to drink, for it will stay
the vomit in a very little space.

For them that may not digest their meat.
Take Horshoue and Hilwate, of each of these a like much, wash them clean, and
stamp them, and put thereto the powder of Pepper, and sees them together in
fair water, and let the Patient drink thereof luke warm, first and last.

For a vomit a remedy.
For them that have vomit, and for them that have not their breath at will, and
has stopping in their breasts: take a dram and a half of the powder of
Betony, with a Goblet full of water, and drink it fasting.

Another for the same.
Against the vomit caused of weakness, heat, or odor chollerick, mingle the
powder of the three leaued Grass with the white of an Egg, and roast them on a
tyle, and give it to the Patient to eat. Also for the vomit caused of
retentiue weakness: take the powder of gum Arabic, and powder of Canell.

For a man that vomiteth too much.
Take Roses and boil them with strong Vinegar, and make a plaster thereof, and
lay it to his stomach all hot. Also vomiting comes sometimes without great
violence, and thereby one gets health, wherefore ye need not give him any
remedy, for it is a good action of the natural virtue of the stomach, sometime
vomiting comes by a great violent moving of the virtue expulsive of the
stomach. For the evil things contained in the same, a remedy: one may well
help a man to vomit, giving him water warm with a little oil to drink, or
else to put thy singer in his mouth very low, or a feather wet in oil the
better to vomit, and to mundifie the stomach, if so be the person have a wide
throat, and that vomiting does not hurt him much, as they be that have but
small and strait throats, and long necks and lean, for all these are evil to
vomit. Sometimes vomiting comes by weakness of the stomach, caused of a hot and
evil complexion, ye shall cure it after this manner: take sirop of Roses,
Quinces, Mirtles, with water sodden and cold again, or else water of Pursian
to quench the thirst. Also it is good to annoint the stomach before dinner and
supper, with an ointment of the oil of Roses, and Quinces, and the juice of
Mints, and a little wax, or else make a plaster of Mints, Roses, Wormwood, and
oil of Roses, and lay to his stomach as hot as ye may.

For to make a man cast and perbreake.
Take two parts of the juice of Fenell, and one part of honey, and sees it till
it be thick, and drink thereof morning and evening, and it will cause a man for
to cast or perbreake.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of spurge, and use to drink thereof, and it will cause you to
cast. Also the juice of Stoncrop put into white wine, causes a man for to cast
presently.

For to comfort the Patient after his vomiting.
Take and give the Patient in the morning an ounce of the sirop of Wormwood, or
Mints, in steed of which it is convenient to take a losing of Aromaticu^
rosatum, or Diagalanga. Also take evening and morning three hours before meat
two Cloves in powder, with a spoonful of the juice of Mints, or half a
spoonful of Rue dried with a little wine. Also it is good to take powder of
Cloves, and Lignum aloes the weight of a crown, two hours before meat.

For one that abhors his meat.
Sometime there chances in the stomach a disease called Fastidium, or
abhorring of meat, whereby the person against his will takes in hate all manner
of meats that is offered unto him, like as the whole man takes pleasure and
delight in the same. The cause of his disease is replection of chollerick
humors, or phlegmatic, gross and viscouse which are in the stomach: and the
Patient has great thirst, a dry tongue, the mouth bitter, and sometime does
vomit yellow choler. And if the veins be full, let the Patient be let blood
on the right arm, and give him to eat and drink such things as are fit for a
party so grieved, also you may give him the juice of Pomgranets.

For to provoke an appetite.
Take Sage, Parsley, Pepper, and Mints, and stamp them, and temper them with
Vinegar, as you do make sauce for ^^shes, it will cause appetite: also flesh
eaten with Vinegar, comfort and gives appetite. If Vinegar be used with a
full stomach, it vnbindeth the womb, with an empty stomach binds it. It
is good for them that be weak with sickness, if it be taken in this manner:
tossed bread, and wet it in Vinegar, and with the tossed rub the mouth and
nosthrils, and bind it on the pulsable veins, for it comfort the Patient,
and the appetite, but for the appetite only, it were better wet in the juice
of Mints. Also to them that have lost their appetite by sickness, two drams of
the powder of Betony, with four Ciote roots in drink, takes away both sadness
and evil taste of meats. Also take and confect Cardomomum, with the juice of
Mints, and use for to wet your meat therein, it provoke appetite.

Against the letting of the breath.
Take and lay Orpiment upon hot embers, and let the Patient stoop down, and
receive the smoke thereof through a pipe or funnell. Also take three drams of
Orpiment, with rear Eggs, or with wine or woman's milk, once or twice in the
week.

Against pain of the breath called Asma, caused of cold, take the powder of
Philixendula, with the powder of Gentiana, and use it in his meat and drink.

Another for the same.
Against the pain of the breath if it be of a long continuance: take the
powder of Gentiana with Wine, and Barley water, or else with meats or with new
bread. Also take two drams of Galbanum, with a rere Egg, or with Barley water.
Also to take Figs and sees them in wine, is good against the letting of the
breath, and against cold rume or humors in the breast. Also Pancakes made of
Docks with meat or Eggs, is very good for letting of the breath called Asma, if
you cate thereof.

An ointment for the shortness of the breath.
Take two ounces of the oil of sweet Almonds, and one ounce of May butter
unsalted, a little Saffron, and new Wax, and make an ointment therewith, and
annoint the breast eucning and morning.

Also for him that lacks wind.
Take Mallows, Mercury, and Borage, sees them together in a piece of Pork,
and make thereof pottage, and eat and drink of this broth with wine, or with
Whey that is good.

For arms being consumed and fallen away.
Take Dear suet, and thine own water being dissolved in a basen warm, then
therewith wash thy arms every day morning and evening.

For the mary being cold and numd in the arms.
Take three spoonful of Mace, three spoonful of Aqua vita, and three
spoonful of Urine, and three spoonful of Capons grease, and put them all in a
Porrenger, and warm them on the sire and wash your arms morning and evening.
Also if that you be sore in any part of the arms, take Roch Allom, and Madder,
and boil them with Conduit water, from a pottell to a pint, and so wash your
arms.

For aching of the hands and deadnes of the fingers.
Take a handful of red Sage, as much red Fennel, as much red Nettles with a
quantity of Bay leaves in powder, and long Pepper, stamp all these together in
a Mortar, then strain the same through a Canuas cloth with Aqua vita, and with
this liquor annoint thy hands when you go to bed.

For swelling of wounds in the hand.
Take Wormwood, stamp it, and strain it, and boil it with Vinegar, and put
thereto Wheat bran, and make a plaster and lay it to the sore hands.

For worms or heat in the hands.
Take Chickweed and bruise it a little, and sees it in running water till the
half be wasted, and wash your hands as hot as the party can suffer it, for the
space of six days, and it will drive away the heat or worms in the hands.

For to make your hands white.
To make the hands white and soft, take Affodill in clean water till it wax
thick, and put thereto powder of Cantarium, and stir them together, then put
thereto raw Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this ointment annoint
your hands, and within three or four days using thereof they will be white
and clean.

For itching of the hands with worms.
Take and annoint the place that itcheth with the juice of Mints, or of Rue,
and it shall put away the worms. Or else take the berries of the less
Morrell, and therewith annoyist the worms and the hands.

For to make nails to grow.
Take Wheat flower, and mingle the same with honey, and lay it to the nails,
and it will help them.

For nails that do fall off.
Take powder of Egrimony, and lay it there as the nail was, and it shall put
away the aching, and it will make the nails for to grow.

For cloven nails.
Take Virgin Wax, and Turpentine, and mingle them together, and lay it on the
nail, and as it waxes or grows, cut it away, and it will heal.

For nails that are rent from the flesh.
Take the lesser Violet, and stamp it, and fry it with Virgin wax, and
Frankensence, and make a plaster, and lay it to the nail all whole.

Also anoint the fingers with the powder of Brimston, Arsnick, and Vinegar, and
in short time you shall find great ease.

For stinch under the arm holes.
First pluck away the hairs of the arm holes, and wash them with white Wine,
and Rose Water that Cassia ligna has been sodden in, and use it three or four
times.

For to destroy the heat of the stomach.
Take fair clear water, and boil it well, and skim it, and put therein
shiuers of brown Bread, and let them lie therein an hour, till the water be
almost cold, and drink thereof two or three days, the oftener a day, the better,
and eat green Parsley, and Galingall, and it shall help thee.

For to avoid fleame out of the stomach.
Take the powder of Pellitory of Spain, and the powder of Comin, powder of
long Pepper, powder of Ginger, Musterd Vinegar, and mingle them together, and
chafe them. en. the fire till they wax thick, and then as hot as you can
suffer it, put part thereof in your mouth, gargling it in your throat up and
down, but let none enter into your stomach, do this diverse times, spetting it
out by the space of an hour, and this is a Gargarisme proved.

For the stomach that is hot and swollen.
Take the root of Smallage, stamp it, and put it in sweet Wine, or in other
good wine all a day and a night, and strain it through a fair linen cloth,
and put it in a clean vessel, and use to drink a little thereof every day
fasting, take this eight or nine days.

For rising under the stomach.
Take long Pepper, Grains, Saffron, Ginger, Aniseed, Licoris, and Sugar, and
sees them al in good Ale till it be thick, and give it to the party to drink,
and he shall be whole.

A plaster for rising under the stomach.
Take Yarrow, Milfoyle, red Fenell, red Mints, Rue, Borage, Fetherfoy,
Cloteler, Pellitory, Egrimony, of each of these a like much, and the grease of
a barow Hog, that is a Sow kind, and sees them all together in good Ale, and
make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the stomach as hot as it may be
suffered, two or three times, and he shall be whole God willing, the hetter the
better for to be taken: this has been proved.

For the gnawing of the stomach.
Take and seethe Betony in the juice of Wormwood, and let the party drink it
with warm water, if his stomach be not well. Also drink wine that Nep has
been sodden in next to the heart fasting very early.

For the stomach that aketh.
Take an herb that is called Poleo, and dry leaves, and a handful of
Houseleeke, and as much of this Poleo, and put it in a vessel. with fair
water, and let it boil on the fire till the third part of the water be sodden
away, and put thereto stone Sugar, and a little honey, and let the Patient
drink thereof six days fasting, and he shall be whole.

For to force the stomach.
Take three parts of Cannell, and one part of Mastick, and one part of the
parings of Pomgranets, and half a part of Galingall, and stamp all these
together, and temper it with honey that has been clarified on the fire, and
well scummed, then use as much of this as a Nut, every day during ten days
together: this has been proved.

For the wind chollick in the stomach.
Take a handful of Time and wash it clean, and put it into a cup of Ale or
Beer, and let it stand all night, then take three sticks of Licoris bruised,
and let the party so grieved drink thereof morning and evening.

Another for the same.
Take Onyons and put them into running water, and change them into four waters
seething, and when they are tender sod, take them and wring them between two
trenchers, and butter them, and put theren gross Pepper, and so eat of them
morning and evening, until you do find your self eased of your stomach.

For fleame in the stomach.
Take red Nettles a good quantity, a good quantity of clarified Butter, and
seethe them in fair running water, till the herbs be tender, then take them
up, and eat the herbs, and drink the liquor: proved.

For to make losings to comfort the stomach.
Take a pint of Rose Water, a quantity of Rubarb, grate it upon a Grater, twice
as much Setwell, as much Calomus aromaticus, as much Spignard, a little Sinamon,
as much Enula campana, as much Ginger, and a little clean water: put to these
Spices one pennyworth of Sugar, and let all sees on the fire till it wax
very thick, and be well sodden, then use hereof both morning and evening.

For all manner of evil in the stomach.
Take Ash seeds, Linseedes, Comin, of every of them a like much, give these
to the sick to drink with hot Woort, or else with fair hot water.

For the Fever in the stomach.
Conserve of Roses, is very good for the Fever in the stomach: also it is good
for all evils in the stomach, that is engendered of hot humors.

For the swelling in the stomach.
Take the roots of Fennel, and the roots of Smallage, of each of them a like
quantity, then stamp them and strain out the juice, and temper the same with
good Wine, and use to drink thereof first and last, in the evening warm, and
in the morning cold.

For impostumes in the stomach.
Against the impostumes in the stomach and of the bowels, sees Fenegreke very
soft, with water that Mallows have been sodden in, and lay it to the stomach
in manner of a plaster, and this will ripen and break the impostumes that be
in the stomach. Proved.

For impostumes that be in the stomach, or in the liver, or in the bowels.
Take the juice of Morrell with Prisome and Barley, and give it to the patient
to drink, and it will both ripen and destroy the impostume in the stomach. Also
take the oil of Mandrake and annoint the grieved stomach therewith.

For an impostume in the stomach.
Take Barlie, dried Beans, and Lycoris, and let them boil all together, of
each of these a like much, drink thereof with Sugar every day fasting, and at
night when thou go to bed, let the patient use this seven or eight days
together, and it will cast out the impostume in his stomach.

For to cleanse the filth in the stomach.
For the filth and dyrt in the stomach, which rests there by reason of the
impostume that has been in the stomach or in the bowels, take the powder of
Salnatry with warm water, or else with Honey.

For a stomach ouer-charged with raw meat.
Take Stonecrop that grows on the wall, and it purges both upward and down
ward: it purges the stomach of evil humors, and helps the Dropsy, the
Stone, and the Flix. Also for the Spleen, for the Tissick, and for the Fever,
it is a precious medicine.

For the stomach and head, and for a man that may not well speak.
Take and give the sick to eat nine days in May, Scabbias, Mugwoort,
Smallage, Morsus diaboli, Iuie, Mylfoyle, Wormwood, and Fetherfoy, stamp all
these together, then sees them, and when they be well sodden, take whites of
Eggs, and purge the patient evening and morning.

For a man that cannot digest his meat in his stomach.
Take Centorie, and sees it in water, and drink thereof warm every night
when thou go to bed. Also take Sage, Rue, Commin, and Pepper, sees them
together with Honny, and eat every day a spoonful thereof. Also drink the
wine that Nep has been sodden in, Or sees Betony in the juice of wormwood,
and drink it with warm water.

For wind in the stomach and bowels.
Take three ounces of Scene, half an ounce of Ginger in powder, Commin and
Anniseedes, three pound weight of both, mingle all these together, and eat
thereof every day a spoonefull. Also take Calamint ginger an ounce made in
powder, with a little Honny, and eat thereof first and last.

For unkind heat in the stomach.
Take Lettice, and drink it with Wine every day, or else eat thereof, and it
will take away the heat of the stomach, also to eat Rue every morning, is good
for the stomach.

For the weakness of the stomach.
Take Mastick and Labdanum of each one ounce, take also a dram of the powder
of Wormwood, and Turpentine as much as needs to encorporate them together,
make a plaster hereof and spread it upon Leather, then lay it to the stomach.
It is good to annoint the stomach with the oil of Spignard, and Mastick, or
to lay upon it hot bread steeped in good wine, on the which bread strew the
powder of Cloves and Nutmegs. Also it is wholesome to eat before your meat,
Anniseedes, and Fennell-seedes: and when you begin to eat, take a toste dipped
in sodden wine, or else in good Malmste, without drinking of the same Wine,
except it be a very little draught after meat.

A medicine for the bulk.
Against pain of the members in the bulk, as the longs, and other that serve
to the breath, and against apilation of the liver and Milk of the bladder, and
pain of the stomach, drink the Wine that the root of Ireos has been sodden
in.

Another for the same.
Take and make a manner of pottage with Barley and water, and put the powder of
Bawme-mint thereto, and give it to the patient: and it will help him.

For the bulk and the stomach.
Use to drink the Wine that is sodden with Dragagant, it warmeth the parts of
the bulk and cleanses them. Also it warmeth the stomach and the bowels, and is
very good against the Colic, and to open the milt, also it is very good
against the hinderance of urine, be it either Strangurie or Dissury. There be
two kinds of Secadors, that is to wit, Arabic and Cytrine, and both of them
approved to the sinnewes and brain.

For spetting of blood.
For the party that uses to spet blood, caused in the bulk, make Pills of the
powder of Dragons blood, and gum Arabic, and Ptysome that Dragagant has
been molten in, and let the patient hold it on his tongue, and when it is all
relented swallow it down. Also for them that spet blood because of the disease
in the bulk, take Pills made of the powder of Sumac, and gum Arabic confect
in Rose Water. Also for them that spet blood, take Honny and Vinegar, and it
helps the same.

Another medicine for the spetting of blood.
Take Pills confect with the powder of Mummy, and with a little Mastick, and
confect them in water that gum Arabicke has been molten or laid in: and hold
these Pills in thy mouth till they melt, and then swallow them down. And if
the blood come to thy mouth by reason of the nutritine members, as the
stomach, the liver and the milt, eat this powder with a raw Egg, and drink
it with the juice of Plantine.

Another for the same.
For them that use to spet blood at the mouth, out of the belly and stomach,
and against the pain thereof, take and beat the root of Sowthistle small to
powder, and drink it with wine. Or else take two drams of the powder of Betony,
with Ciats of old Wine for three days, and it will help the patient that is
grieved here-with.

For spetting of blood.
Take Ach, Mints, Rue, and Betony, of each a like quantity, and sees them
well in good Milk, then give the patient thereof to drink, and it shall help
him.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Betonie, and temper the same well with Goats milk, and let
the party troubled, drink thereof three days together. Also take Smallage,
Mints, Rue, and Betony, and give thereof to the patient to drink in Goats
milk, and let him sup up a good draught at a time, as hot as he may well
suffer it.

For straightnes of the breast.
Take a quarte of good stale Ale, and a quart of fine Woort, take also half a
handful of Liuer-wort, and half a pennyworth of Licoris sliced very fine,
and scraped clean, then bruise it, take also a half pennyworth of Figs, and
wash them clean, and half a handful of Isope, a quantity of clarified Honny,
a quantity of Set well, and three roots of Parslie, and cut them small, with
half a root of Fennel, cut likewise very small, boil all these together
till half be consumed, then use to drink hereof morning and evening
reasonable hot.

For the party that is incombred in the breast with any kind of fleame or glart.
Take the powder of Betonie, and drink it with warm water, it voideth and
purges the fleame wondrously, and does away the glart or fleame.

For pain in the breast.
Take and gather a good quantity of ripe Slowes, and grind them small in a
mortar, then put them in an earthen pot, and sill it full of new Ale, and so
drink thereof.

Another for the same.
Take Isope, Parsley, and Sage, stamp them and lay the^ to the breast of the
patient very hot. Take also the marrowe of a Calfe, Fenegreke, Linseedes,
bray them small in a mortar, and mingle the powder with the yolks of Eggs,
then temper all these together with fresh grease or Oil, and lay it to the
sore as hot as you may suffer it.

For the breast that is incombred.
Take Isope, and sees it in a pottle of Wine till it come to a quarte, and let
the patient use thereof first in the morning cold, and last in the evening
hot.

Another for the same.
Take three pottles of running water of a Well that springs, and boil it to a
pottell, then take half a pint of Honey, and one pound of the powder of
Anniseedes, a pound of the powder of Licoris, one pennyworth of Sugar, and
cast all these into the liquor, and let them boil well, then put it into a
vessel and stop the mouth thereof close that the air go not out, and let the
patient drink thereof in the morning, but not fasting at night, and he shall
be whole.

For the breast and the lunges.
Take a quantity of clarified Honey and boil it, and when it is boiled, put
thereto an ounce of the powder of Enula campana, and one ounce of the powder of
Licoris, and let them boil till they be somewhat thick, then take it from the
fire, and when it is cold put thereto an ounce of the powder of Ginger, and
stir it well together, and use this first and last.

For a man that is stopped in his breast or pypes.
Take Enula campana, Isope, and Licoris, dry them well, then beat them in a
mortar as fine as flower, then take Ginger, Anniseeds Sinamon and Galingall,
beat them also, and when thou have done, take a quantity of Honey and boil it
well, and seum it clean, then take the Enula campana, the Isope and the
Licoris, and boil them well together in the Honey, afterward, take the Ginger,
Anniseedes, Galingall, and Sinamon, put them al in Honey, and let them sees
together: then put it in a dish, then take Sugar and put upon it while it is
hot, and eat a quantity thereof morning and evening, but drink not till two
hours after, and it will help thee. Also if you take and sees Rue in Vinegar
and drink thereof, it will likewise help you.

For swelling of the breasts.
Take Wormwood, Sage, and Calamint, of each a like much, and stamp them well,
put thereto a quantity of Vinegar, and temper them well together: then take
white Bread, and toste it till it be brown, and grind it small: then boil
them together, and stir it that it burn not to, and lay thereof to the
patients breast as hot as may be suffered.

Another for the same.
Also if a plaster be made of Chestnuts with Barley meal, and Vinegar or Wine,
and laid to the pappes, it will assuage both the swelling and the pain thereof.

For all manner of evils and pain in the breast or the ribs.
Take and bruise Mugwoort with Vinegar, and lay it to the breast, and it will be
whole in three days. Also take the water that guin Arabic and Mirth has been
sodden in, and wash the breast therewith. Also take the electuary called
Diapenidion, made into pennets, it is very good for the same purpose, as has
often been proved.

Also for drought in the breasts and the members in it, and for them that be
Costisse, so that the breast be not stopped, nor the brath short, lay Psilium
in water a certain space, and then pour out the water, and take the same
seeds with other clean water that is cold, and use it to the patient.

Also take and make a plaster of Knotgrasse and Butter, and lay it to the sore
breast, and it helps the same.

For veins broken in the breast.
Take the root of Camphire and secth it, and when it is sodden slice it with a
knife, then hang it in the Sun to dry, this may be kept three years in
goodness and virtue, and if a vain be broken in the breast or guts, it will
resound and knit it, and reioyne it meruailously, if that the powder thereof be
taken green with Wine or water: or if you fry the root green like a fritture
with Eggs or Meal, and so cate thereof.

For impostumes in the breast.
Take and fill a bag with meal of Fenegreke, and sees it in water that
Lysmachie and Hollihock has been sodden in, and lay it often to the impostume
of the breast.

Another for the same.
Take the water that Licoris has been sodden in, or the juice thereof, and it
is very good being used, against the impostumes of the breasts or ribs,
called the Plurisie.

For blood of the breasts.
Take two drammes of Leekes seed and Mirth, it stancheth the blood that
comes out of the breast by spetting, although it be grief to the teeth and
throat.

For the Canker in a woman's pappes.
Take picked Garlic, and Rye-meale, or Barly-meale, and bray them together
wish Vinegar, till they become as thick as a plaster, then lay it to the sore
till it be white, then take Pimpernell and beat it small, and put thereto
Life-honny, and lay the plaster to the sore pappe, and it will heal it fair.
Or else take the fenne of a white Goose, and the juice of Ellidonie, and bray
them well together, and lay it to the pappe, and it will kill the Canker, and
heal it soundly.

Another for the same.
Take Wormwood, and the white of an Egg, and skin it, then temper it with
oil of Violets, and let her blood on the veins about the paps.

For the fester in the breast.
Take the juice of the root of Fox gloves, and temper it with man's urine, and
wring it through a cloth, and wash the sore oftentimes therewith, and it will
cure it.

To make a woman to have soft breasts.
Let the party that desires to have soft breasts drink in Ale, Nettle seed,
and Salt, and it shall quickly help her.

For a woman that has her breasts rancled.
Take Lint seed, and bray it with the white of an Egg, and lay it on her
breasts, and then take the juice of Ache, and of Rye meal, and lay it on her
breasts, and let her drink the juice of Veruaine, Fenell seed, and Amber.

For to make a drink for woman's paps that are rancled, and be full of ache.
Take Groundsell, and two times as much of Brouswort, and wash them both, and
stamp them, and temper them with stale Ale, and strain it through a cloth, and
give to the Patient thereof first in the morning, and last at night.

For the evil swelling in a woman's breast.
Take Oak apples, and stamp them in powder, and put them in oil of Roses, and
lay it to the swelling: or else take the juice of pety Morrell, and Dasies, and
the dregs of Vinegar, and a hard Egg sodden with the shell, and Barley flower,
and so make thereof a plaster, and lay it on the sore.

For biles on a woman's breasts.
Take the juice of Morrell, the oil of an Egg, and Bean flower, make thereof a
plaster, and lay it cold thereto.

For a woman that desires to have great plenty of milk in her breasts.
Let her take the juice of Veruaine or Fenell, and use to drink oftentimes
thereof, and she shall have great plenty of milk. Also if she drink the broth
that Whitings have been sodden in, it is very good for the same purpose.

For pains in the breast with over too much milk.
Take very clean water without any gravel in the same, and mingle it with
Vinegar, and the yolke of an Egg, and a little Saffron, then lay it upon a
cloth plaster wise, and lay it to the breast, and when it is dry take it away,
and lay another in the place.

Another for the same.
Take Vinegar and honey hoyled together, and spread it upon a cloth, then lay
upon it a little powder of Comin, it will assuage the milk.

For the milk that is curded in a woman's breast.
Take Wheat mingled with Rue, and sodden in water, and lay it to a woman's hard
breasts that be curded with milk, and it will soften them.

Another for the same.
If the seeds of Lentiles be mingled with water of the Sea, they be good for
milk that is curded in women's breasts.

For the heart burning.
Take a crop of Fennel, and chewe it in thy mouth, and suck the juice thereof,
then spet it out, and take another, use this very often, and it will help him
that is heart burnt.

For the pain at the heart.
Take Centuary and sees it in stale Ale, and when it is well sodden, stamp it
in a mortar, and sees it again with the same liquor, then cleanse it through a
cloth with two spoonfuls of the juice, and three spoonfulls of Honey, and then
boil it well together again, and put it in a box, and give it to the Patient
every day three spoonfuls fasting till he be whole, and this shall do away the
glut from him, and make him have an appetite to his meat.

For weakness of the heart.
Take Rose Water, and mother of Pearl beaten small to powder, and mingle it
with Sugar, and give it to the Patient to drink three or four days, and he
shall be whole.

For faintnes at the heart.
Take the filings of Gold, and the powder of the bone of a Hearts heart, and
mingle them with the juice of Borage, and Sugar made in sirop, for it is very
good for sowning.

For all sicknesses about the heart.
Take Rosemary, Isope, Centory, Betony, and Iris, and sees them in fair
water, and strain the water and the juice of the herbs, and put thereto honey,
and boil it again, and scum it, and put thereto as much butter as honey in the
seething, and mingle them together, and take it down and cover it well, and
drink thereof at even hot, and in the morning cold.

An Electuary for the heart.
Diantes: this Electuary is good for the heaviness in the heart, and for
feeblenes of complexion in a man's stomach, for the Cardiakle, and for the had
lungs, et alia causa.

For evils at the heart.
Take Hartwoort, Galingall, Hearts tongue, and Sauine, stamp them, and wring
out the juice, and temper them with good Wine, a good quantity of Roses, and
give it to the party so grieved to drink first in the morning, and last at
night, and he shall be whole God willing.

A sirop for the pain of the heart.
Take and stamp Betony, and herb Benet, Horehound, and Veruaine, sees them in
fair water, to the third part, then put thereto honey, and make thereof a sirop.

For all diseases in a man's heart.
Take Sage, and Mints, by even portion, sees them in white Wine, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it to his heart till he be whole: take also the Wine
that it was sodden in, and give it to the Patient to drink evening and morning,
and he shall have good desire to his meat within six days after at the
furthest.

For to comfort the heart.
Take the powder of Setwall, and put it in the sick man's meat, it comfort
the heart, and is very good for them that have weak hearts, and be disposed to
sowning.

Another for the same.
Temper the Patients Wine with water that Spicknard is sodden in, and with the
same water make a sirop, and let the sick drink thereof, it is good against the
disease of the heart, and for sowning. And for weakness of the brain, smell it
at thy nose. Also sees the flowers of Rosemary leaves mingled with Rosewater,
and give it to the Patient to drink.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Rosemary leaves mingled with Rosewater, and a little of the
juice of Panay, and make sirop thereof: it will also be good if some of the bone
in the heart of an Heart be put thereunto, and given to the Patient.

For all pains in the heart
Take the powder of Galingall, with the juice of Borage, and the seeds of Ireos
with the milk of a Goat, and drink it warm: it will assuage the pain of
the heart.

Another for the same.
Take the powder of Cannel, with the powder of the leaves of Ielliflowers, it
is very good against the passion and sowning of the heart being given to the
party.

Against the passions of the heart.
Take and make sirop with the juice of Borage, and put thereto of the powder of
the Hearts bone in the heart of a Heart.

Also take Buglosse, and eat it often either raw or sodden, it drives out
the noisome humors.

Also against the passion of the heart and sowning: take sirop made with Cassia
ligna and Roses, and the bone of a Hearts heart, and give it the sick to eat.

For feeblenes of the heart.
For them that are weak in the heart, and do take their breaths in manner of
sighs: take and give them the juice of Buglosse with honey, and it shall help
them.

Against the fainting of the heart.
Take and make Pills with a dram of Amber, and an ounce of Lignum aloes, and two
drams of the bone of a Hearts heart beat to powder, and beat the Pills in
Rose Water, and give two or three of the said Pills to the Patient when he goes
to bed.

Also to take the quantity of four drams of Cucubes, with the juice of the
root or the leaves of Parsneps is very good.

Also for them that be faint at the heart or be like to sown: give them
Rose Water for to drink, and also bedew their faces therewith. Also if the
faintnes come from the brain or liver, or pain of the stomach caused of cold:
take two Wheat corns of Musk in wine, and it will help the same.

Against sowning.
Against sowning and faintnes of the heart: take Rose Water, that this herb
Bassell is sodden in, and for the same: take wine that the herb is laid in all
night.

Also against sowning take the powder of Roses, and put it into a rear Egg.

Also take the powder of Ginger in your meats, and it is good against sowning.

Against sowning: make sirop with the juice of Borage, and Sugar.

Also against sowning of the heart coming of cold: take and sees this herb,
Cardomomum in sweet smelling wine, with a little Rose Water, and use it.

For sowning.
For sowning and weakness of the heart, be it in Feauers or sicknesses, or if it
come of either cause, stamp Mints with Vinegar, and a little Wine: if the
Patient have no Fever, then tossed a shiuer till it be almost burnt, and put it
therein till it be well steeped, then put of it in his nose, and rub his lips,
his tongue, gums, teeth, and the temples, and let him chewe it, and suck the
moistnes thereof, and swallow it.

For the pain of the lungs.
Take Figs, and let them be sodden with Isop: they cleanse the lungs, and heal
the old cough.

Also take the root of the wild Rape, and sees it with Licoris, and the water
that it is sodden in given to the Patient to drink, is very good to cleanse the
lungs.

Also take this herb Southernwood, and mingle it with Isop, and sodden in wine
or water, make it sweet with Sugar, and so drunken, is very good for all
diseases of the lungs, and the breast: when sickness comes of cold, annoint
the breast.

Another for the same.
If you take the broth of Creues, it is good for pain in the lungs, named
Perpleumonia, vr consuming of a man called Prosis, because when a man has a
swelling about the lungs: then he comes to dryness, and consuming of that
natural moisture till he dies.

For the liver and lungs.
For the liver and the lungs wasting with over unkind heats, take water made of
Borage, and of red Fenell roots, Ach, Isop, Endive, Betony, Calamint, Lettice,
Nutmegs, Mace, flowers of Camomel, Cloves, Aniseeds, by even portions: one ounce
of Licoris, and Aniseeds half a pound, make of all these herbs and spices a
water, and it shall restore you meruailously, and if you cannot get all these
herbs, then take the more of Borage. Also to restore his kind, make a
confection of the flowers of Borage, and of red Roses with the foresaid spires,
and with Sugar.

For the heat of the liver.
Take Spodium vt eborij in rose, Coral, Barley meal, Triacendaly three penny
worth, mingle all these with the juice of Endive, S. Mary berry, and Housleeke.

Another for the same.
Take red Roses Sandalorum cum Iuery, and water of Lillies an ounce, stamp them
small, and put thereto Barley meal, and the juice of Marigolds and Vinegar, and
the juice of Wormwood, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the liver.

For chafing of the liver, and of the spleen.
Take yellow Rubarb, Barley meal, and Vinegar, and temper them together, and
make thereof a plaster, and lay that plaster to a man's right side, let him
blood in the vain of the spleen, and give him to drink in Winter Sugar
rosset, and in Summer Scabious.

For the chafing of the liver.
For the chafing of the liver and opilation of the milt caused of humor: take
Rubarb with warm water, but it is better to mingle it with Trifera sarazenica,
and this you may use with the juice of Endive, and so give it to the Patient.

Also take and annoint the liver with the oil of Roses, for the chafing of the
liver.

Against chafing or heat of the liver: take and wet a cloth many times double,
and lay it to the liver.

Also the oil of Violets is good against the chafing of the liver. Proved.

Against the chafing of the liver: scrape the uppermost of the Gourd, stamp the
said scraping and wring out the juice, and put Vinegar thereto, wet a cloth
therein, and lay it to the liver outwardly.

Also take Endive, and lay it in water, and use it in your brothes for the
Patient so grieved.

For the heat of the liver.
Take Fenell, Endive, Succory, Planten, of each a like much, and still them
with red Wine or milk, and use it every morning nine spoonfuls at a time,
with a draught of Wine and Sugar, or else five spoonfuls thereof alone.

For the liver wasting, which causes a scabbid face.
Take three gallons of sweet Woort, and put thereto four handful of
Lyuerwoort, and four handfuls of Violets, two handfuls of Hearts tongue, four
handfuls of Marigolds, four handfuls of Matfelon, and stamp all these
together, and boil them a pretty while in the Woort, then take them up, and
when they are cold strain them, and put thereto Barley meal: use this fasting at
night, the space of a month, then take an ointment that is made for a dry
scab, and therewith daily annoint thy face, and using of this drink aforesaid:
the party shall find help.

For the unkind heat of a man's liver, which causes his color to wax
yellow.
Take the water of Chiccorie, and the water of Lettice, and the water of the
leaves and small branches of a Moryer tree, take the herbs and stamp them all
together, as much of the one as of the other, and take the juice thereof, and
as much Sugar as will suffice, boil all these together till they be as thick
as a sirrop, and put unto the same a poys and a half of Rewbarbe, and use a
quantity of this sirrop in cold water every day fasting, till he be whole.

For the liver that is corrupted and wasted.
Take a quantity of Liuerwoort, and bruise it a little, then sees it in good
strong Woort with a quantity of Rewbarb, and use this medicine till thou be
whole.

A drink for the Spleen.
Take Hart's-tongue, wild Hoppe leaves, and Borage, with the flowers of
Femitory, and Parflie roots, sees them in Whey and clarify them with the
white of an Egg, and strain it, drink thereof morning and evening, and so
continue a fortnight, and it will help you many ways.

A plaster for the Spleen.
Take three or four Hollihocke roots, two handfulls of Mallows, and sees
them well together, then stamp ye roots by themselves, and strain them with
the same water wherein they were sodden, then stamp the Mallows together with
the juice of the Hollihock roots, and put in eight or nine Figs, and two
ounces of Sugar, a little leauened Bread, and half a dish of sweet Butter,
then lay part of the same upon a woollen cloth, and as hot as may be suffered
lay the same to the side, and roll it very fast with a strong rowler, and
every day once renew the same with a fresh plaster very hot, until such
time as the party be well.

Another plaster for the Spleen.
Take Wormwood, Mallows, Cammomile and Melilot, of each of these a good
handful, boil them in fair water till the liquor be half consumed, then put
unto the same half a handful of Wheat branne or more, and boil it to the
thicknes of a plaster, then quilt it, and as hot as you may suffer it, lay it
to your left side.

An aluarie for the Spleen.
Take a pint of Ale clarified, and put therein a crust of Bread, then take
the powder of Gentiana, Spignard, Gallingall, of each two penny-woorth, let
them have a boiling or a waulme, then take it off the fire, and drink thereof
morning and evening, and it will cure the Spleen.

A restoritie for the liver, lungs, and spleen.
Take two parts of Fennel, and three parts of Honnie, sees them together till
they be as thick as a lectuarie, and let the sick use this morning and
evening.

For the stopping of the Spleen.
Take the Elder root, and sees the same in white wine, until the third part
thereof, and drink of the same, and it cures the Spleen meruailously.

Another for the same.
Take the lunges of a Fox, and make it into powder, and use to drink thereof,
and it will certainly cure the Spleen.

For the Spleen a good experiment.
Take two pound of Bores grease, and two pound of ashes made of Ashen wood,
and one gallon of fair running water, and sees them all together til half be
consumed, the^ strain them through a cloth, and let it stand all night, and in
the morning fleet of the grease, and cast away the water, and mingle the
grease well together, and put it in a box, and there-with-annoynt upon the
Spleen. You must likewise give the patient this drink following: Take the
reotes of young Ashen plants, and a good quantity of Wormwood, and sees them
well together in a gallon of Wine till the one half be wasted, and let the
patient drink thereof in the evening hot, and in the morning cold: and let
the patient use of this ointment, and drink of this drink the space of nine
days, and it will help him: proved.

Another for the Spleen, proved.
Take the inner rine of the Ash tree, stamp it and sees it in Wine, and it
will doubtless help the Spleen.

For the heat of the liver.
Take the inyce of sour Apples, and sweet Apples, of each a pynt or more, and
two pound of Sugar, and mingle these together, and let it boil on a soft fire
till it be as thick as a sirop, and use of this a little every day fasting,
being first made luke warm at the fire.

To purge the liver of choler and salt sleame.
Take the weight of a gold Noble of Rubarbe, and cut it in small pieces, and a
half pennyworth of Spignard, and the weight of two groats of Scene in the
codds, lay all these in soke in nine spoonfuls of Whey, by the space of twelve
hours, and so give it to the patient.

For the liver that is chafed.
Take and use Saunders in thy pottage or broth, and drink it, and wash thy
right side with cold urine, but first boil it and scum it, and put thereto
Vinegar, and lay it to thy right side, but not hot, for it will chafe the
liver.

For wasting of the liver.
Take Watercresses, Red Fennel, and Sorrel, with a Chicken in a pot nine
days, and use it.

Another for the heat of the liver.
Take a quart of Barlie, and put thereto a gallon of well water, and boil them
together till the Barley be as soft as any Wheat or Formentie, then strain it
through a clean cloth, and take the same water, and put thereto as much good
woorte, with a pennyworth of Licoris beaten, but not to powder, and take a
good handful of Isope, and a good handful of Sage, and boil all these
together, till the one half thereof be wasted, then strain them again
through another clean cloth, and that which comes forth, put it into a
clean vessel, and let it stand a day and a night, and drink of the same
first in the morning, and last at night when you go to bed.

For stoppings in the liver and the milt.
Take and sees Hart's-tongue in water or Wine, and drink it: or if the herb
be eaten, it is very good for the same. Also to unstop the pypes of the liver
and of the milt, take Smallage and sees the same with a like quantity of
Elder leaves, then strain it, and drink the broth thereof.

Another for the same.
If you use to drink the juice of Chiccorie, it opens the oppilation of the
liver and milt caused of heat. Or if you take the Wine that Silios has been
sodden in, and drink thereof fasting, it is a very good medicine against the
stopping of the Liver, Milte, and Raines, and against the let of urine.

Another for the same.
Take and drink the Wine that wild Time has been sodden in, and you shall
find it very good against the stopping of the Liver, Milte and Raines, and the
hinderance of urine, as has often been proved.

Also if you take the juice of the bearbe called Witminte with Honny, and the
Wine that it has been sodden in, it is very good to unstop the conduit of the
Milt, and the liver and urine.

Against the oppilation of the Liver, the Milte, the urine, and the bladder,
use the decoction of Cassia ligna, or the sirrop that it is made with.

To use also the juice of Nightshade made in sirrop with a little Sugar, is
very good for the liver and the milte.

Also if you make sirrop of the juice of Fennel, and the decoction of the
herb called Dawke, it is good against the stopping of the Liver, and the
Milt, and against the Dropsy.

For the liver and the milt.
Against the opilation of the liver or of the milt, take Aloe Epatick, with the
juice of Smallage warm. Or make a decoction of the roots of Smallage,
Parssie, Fenel, Bomwoort, and Spurge, with two orammes of Mastick, and use this
two or three times in the week till you be well.

Another for the liver and the milt.
Also who so uses often to eat the herb Cheruell, it causes the stopping of
the liver and the milt to cease. Or if the patient take the seeds thereof and
make them into powder, and afterward either eat or drink of the same, it will
help him.

Also if the juice of Wolst-thistle be drunken with Wine, it is very good for
the liver.

Also to drink the water that Louage has been sodden in, is likewise good for
the liver and the milt.

Also against the stopping of the liver and milt, take the powder of Barbaries,
with the juice of Morrell, and drink often of the same.

For the liver, milt, raines, and bladder.
Against the opilation of the liver, milt, and raines, and the hinderance of
urine, take and sees the herb Germander and Canuphithis in oil, and lay it
to the place where the party is grieved. Also take an electuary confect with
Honny, and two parts of these herbs, and so use it.

For the liver, the milt, and the Iaundise.
Against the opilation of the liver, milt, and Iaundise, take the juice of
Wormwood and Sirrill, or else make them in sirrop, and use it with warm water:
also against opilation of the milt, take the juice of Wormwood, and the powder
of Costy, it is also good for the same.

For all pains in the milt.
Take of the drink that Gold has been quenched in red hot, and it helps
the pain in the milt.

Also an ointment made of Assa armonia, and Wax, softneth the hard milt, and it
dissolueth the milk curded in the paps.

Also make juice with Smallage, and put thereto Oil and Wax, and confect it
into a sirrop.

Also for the Milt, take Annoniacke and Galbane, of each of these a like much,
soften them well in Vinegar and with wax, then put thereto powder of Cost and
of Wormwood, and make thereof an ointment, and use therewith to annoint the
place against the milt, and it will help the same.

Also take Egrimonie, and eat thereof oftentimes, and it heals the pain of
the milt.

Against the opilation of the milt or Dropsy, take the Wine that Abrosiana
has been sodden in, for being oftentimes drunk, it heals the pain of
the milt coming of cold.

Also against the ache of the milt, drink the wine that Betonie has been
sodden in, and it profits.

Also make an ointment with the herb called Bears-foote beaten, and then lay
it long in Oil, and with wax make an ointment: the leaves ought to be used
while they be green.

Also the herb Amios, with the roots of Ciats in wine helps much the pain
of the milt.

Also for the milt and liver, take the juice of Fennel sodden in an Apple, and
take the powder thereof.

Also for the pain of the milt and liver, take the Wine that Coperis has been
sodden in.

Also for the pain of the milt and the liver, drink the wine that Cassia
ligna has been sodden in.

Also for the pain of the milte and liver, take the electuarie that Diocostum
has been sodden in.

Also for the pain of the milt, use a dram of Cammomile in powder with Wine,
forty days.

Also for the pain of the milte, use to drink the Wine that Honny-suckle has
been sodden in.

Also sees Iuie in Wine, and then strain out the juice, and drink thereof,
it helps greatly.

Also the water that the root of Fearne has been sodden in, is very good for
the same.

Also you may use the water or Wine that the rind of Fennel roots has been
sodden in.

Also the Water or wine that the bough of an Ash has been sodden in, is good
for this purpose.

For to soften the milt that is hard.
Take the root of the wild Vine and stamp it with Porks grease, then melt it
on the fire, and strain it, and take meal of Linseede, and oil, and put
thereto: and this ointment is very good for the hardness of the milt and
liver, and to ripen unpostumes.

Another for the same.
Take the rind of the root of Hore-hound, and steep the same a fortnight in
Wine and Oil, and then let it be sodden and strained, and in the straining,
put thereto water and Oil, and make thereof an ointment, and use the same at
your need, for this purpose.

For ache in the gutts and belly.
Take the powder of Mugwoort, and let it be drunk with Wine and Honny, it
eases greatly the ache in the bowels, and is good against diverse other
diseases. And for the pains in the guts, take a ciate of the juice of Clot
leaves, and it will ease thee.

For pains in the belly.
Take and stamp Mugwoort, and lay it to the belly, it helps the same
meruailously, take also an ounce and a half of Wartwoort, with as much wine, and
it will likewise assuage the pain in the belly.

For the pains in the belly.
Take and make an electuarie of Honny, and sees it with water to keep it from
cleaving to, then put to the same two ounces of Hermodates, and one ounce of
Fennel seeds, and give thereof to the party so grieved that has the pain
in his belly, and it will help him: proved.

For the pain in the belly.
Take wild Time, and sees the same with Wine and Oil, and it is very good
against the pain in the belly. Also if you take the brain of a Hare roasted,
and eat thereof, and drink some good Wine afterward, it is good for the pain
in the belly.

For the pain in the belly.
Take three pynts of Malmesey, and a handful of Oris powder, and a handful of
Commin, with a handful of Red-rose leaves dried, a handful of Cammomile
flowers, and one dishfull of Wheat branne, sees all these together, and put
them in a bag, and make it plaister-wise, then lay it to the belly of the
patient somewhat warm.

For the griping or pulling in the belly.
Take half a pint of Malmesie, a big root of Turmentile, and grind the
root into powder with a little Treacle, and make it blood-warme, and so give
it to the party to drink. Or else take a penny-pot of Malmesie, and a little
Treacle, and two pennyworth of Mirrh, and grind it to powder, and so put the
Treacle and Mirrh into the Malmesie, and make it reasonable warm, and give it
to the patient.

Another for the same.
Take a little quantity of the earth that worms cast up out of the ground,
(which most commonly you shall find in some soft foote-path-waie, or else in
some Garden path,) and when you have gathered the same, mingle therewith a like
quantity of Honny, and give the patient half a spoonful in the morning,
causing him to fast two hours after: this within four mornings eating
thereof, will certainly help the same, as has been by sundry persons proved.

To break wind in the belly, and for wringing in the same.
Take Commin seeds, Fennel seeds, Anni-seedes bruised, and sees all in Wine,
and drink thereof in the morning, at noone, and at night. Also take Pellitory
and boil it in broth, and give the sick thereof to drink.

For Women that have very great bellyes, being not with child.
Take a handful of Isope, a handful of Hearbe-grace, a handful of Arsmert,
and sees all these herbs in a quarte of Ale till it come to a pynt, then
preserve the same in a glass, and give the woman so grieved, a quarter of a
pynte at once, first in the morning, and last at night.

Another for the same.
Take Sauerie and stamp it, and put thereto good Ale, with a little Iet and
white Amber made into powder very small, and give the woman thereof to drink
with the Sauery: also make a plaster of Sauerie, of Isope, and of Leekes fried
with fresh Butter, and lay it to her belly, and to her raines, and she shall
be whole.

For a woman that her womb is hard.
Let the party grieved, drink the juice of Waybread with old Wine, and she
shall be eased.

Another for the same.
Take Cinckfoyle, that is to say five leaued Grass, and stamp it, and strain
it with hot Milk, and give the woman thereof to drink, and it will help her.

For a swollen or aching womb.
Take the juice of Rue, and let the patient drink thereof with Wine or Ale,
and it will help her on warrantise. Proved. Also take Sothernwood, Tansie, Rue,
and eat the^ with salt, and she shall be whole.

For to unbind the belly and the womb.
Take Honny and sees it till it wax black, and put thereto powder of salt,
and mingle them both together, pour it upon an even stone, or some other even
thing, and then being made an ointment, put thereof into the parties
fundament, and it will cause him to go to stool very well.

Sundry other medicines for to unbind the belly.
Sees the root of Mulberry in water, and drink thereof, and it will losen
the womb and the belly, and drive out the worms that be rough and short.

Also you may use a Gargarisme of Vinegar and water, wherein Assa fedita has
been sodden, it abateth the swelling of the womb or belly.

Also if you lay the leaves of Hollihocke very hot upon the womb, it helps
the same.

Also you may use the Wine that Rosemary and Comin has been sodden in, against
the ache of the womb.

Also to take Pears and dress them in your meat, comfort the womb and
vnbindeth the same.

For to lose the belly and womb.
Take the juice of the herb called Britanica, as much thereof as you think
necessary for the strength of the patient, and it will loose the womb without
any danger. Also if you take Mallows and sees them, and make pottage of them,
it loses the womb, as has often been proved. Also the heads of Leeks being
sodden in the oil of sweet Almonds, or of oil Cockil, called Zizanium, loses
the womb and keeps it moist.

Against worms in the belly.
Take and make pancake or frittures of meal, with the leaves of small
Tapsebarbe, and eat thereof, for they are very good against worms in the
belly. Also the juice of Scabbious being drunk, is very good for the same.
Also a plaster made of parcht Beans, with a little Vinegar, Mints and
Wormwood, and laid to the navel, is good against the worms in the womb.
Likewise the juice of Plantaine being drunk, kills worms in the womb. The
juice of Mints and of Horehound being drunk, does the same.

For worms in the belly.
Take Bettonie and Sauine, and dry the^, and make powder of them, and let the
patient drink thereof in hot water, and as soon as the powder is in the
belly, it will kill the worms and bring them out on warrantise. Proved.

Another for the same.
Take Sengreene, Fetherfoy, and Mints, stamp them and drink the juice thereof
in warm Wine, and it will kill the worms, and bring them out.

For worms in the belly.
Against worms in the belly, take Garlic, Pepper, a little Parsley, and the
juice of Mints, make of them sauce, and wet your bread therein. Also for worms
in the belly, make Pills of Galbanum, and annoint them with Honny, and use
thereof. Also for the worms in the belly, take Armoniack made in powder, with
the juice of Wormwood and Arsmert, and it will help the same.

Against the Flux of the belly.
Take small Reysons, and use to eat of them often with your meat, it takes
away the belching, and helps greatly to stop the flux in the belly.

Also for the flux in the belly, let the patient take the root of Turmentile
and stamp it and strain out the juice thereof, and drink thereof warm, with
the Water of Plantaine, and it will help him.

Also, if the party grieved take the roots or beards of Leekes dried on a
hot Tyle-stone, and receive the sm^ake thereof beneath, it is good for to
close the flux of the belly.

Also the juice of the crops of Briars taken with a glister, is very good for
the same purpose.

Also the juice of Sloes given to the patient to drink in wine, helps the
pain thereof.

The powder of five leaued Grass, being put into the juice of Plantaine, and
given unto the patient to drink thereof fasting, stops the flux in the
belly.

A very good experiment to stop the flux of the belly.
Take the roots of Fearne, Roses, wild Cresses, Figgetree leaves, and flowers
of Camomile, of each a like much, and beat them together, and sees them in
rain water til the half be wasted, and then receive the smoke thereof
beneath, and wash your feet also in the same water.

For worms in little children.
Take the herb called Rodalia, and stamp it, and make a plaster thereof,
and lay it to the child's belly, and it will help the same. Proved.

For the worms in childrens bellyes.
Take a pennyworth of Aloes siccatrina, and as much of Colla curtadia, and make
them both in fine powder, and boil these two powders on the fire with half a
pound of sweet Butter, and so dress the child three or four times over the
stomach and the belly, against a good fire, but remember first to strain this
medicine through a fine cloth after it is boiled, and the^ use the (...) in
manner as is aforesaid.

A drink for worms in children.
Take of Wheat flower as much as will cover a French crown heaped three times,
and put it into a goblet, then take of fair water almost a pynt, and set it
to the fire and let it sees, and scumme it very clean, then take of Penidis
two ounces in powder, and put it into the water, and let it boil well, then
take the same from the fire, and pour thereof in the flower, and stir it
always in the pouring, that it may be as thick as milk, and no thinner, then
give the party to drink thereof warm, a good draught at a time.

A plaster for worms in children.
Take of Aloes siccatrina, the quantity of two Beans beaten into very small
powder, and put it into a spoone, with as much of the juice of Wormwood as
will make the same moist like unto a salve, then take a piece of red Leather,
as much in breadth as your three fingers, and smere the ointment thereon, then
warm it a little, and lay it upon the navel, and bind it fast, letting it
lie there unremoved the space of three days, and then take it away, for it
will help the child on warrantise, as has often been proved.

For a stitch in a man's side.
Take a reasonable piece of white leauened Bread, and toste the same on both
sides, and then spread it on the one u^de with the best Treacle you can get,
and cover it with a fine linen cloth, and so lay it warm to the sore side
where the pain is, and it will help you God willing. This medicine cost five
pound the learning.

Another for the same.
Take Oats, and fry them with Vinegar, then put them in a cloth, and lay them
very hot to the parties side, and it will help the Stitch. Proved.

For broken sides.
Take and stamp the roots of Mallows, and put thereto the blood of a Goat,
and fry it together, and lay it hot to the side, renew it but once in three
days.

For sore sides within or without.
Take Alisanders, Parsley, Louage, Red-fennell, Smallage, Burnet, and Gromell,
and sees them in white Wine till the one half be consumed or wasted, then
strain it, and let the patient drink thereof first and last, in the evening
cold, and in the morning hot.

An ointment for sore sides.
Take a handful of Mallows, a handful of Groundsell, a handful of
Sowthistle, as much of Nightshade, a quantity of Varuaine and Dill, these
herbs must be stamped as small as may be, and tempered well with May butter
or Sheep suet over the fire, and so make it an ointment, and annoint the
body or side that is stiff by the fire, the oftener the better: proved.

For the Impostume in a man's side.
Take Wormwood, Mint, Calamint, herb Bennet, Mallows, Cheruell, Sage,
Rosemary flowers, pound them together, and put thereto Commin, and crummes of
leauened Bread, and boil them in Wine or piss, and make a plaster thereof,
and lay it to the side.

For the Impostume in the sides.
Take Rue and drink it oftentimes. Also stamp Figs with oil Olive, or with
grease, and plaster it to the sore side.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Scabious, and half a pound of the powder of Corrall, and
mingle them together, and drink thereof, a good draught, and it shall break the
impostume of the side.

Another for the same.
Take March Radish, Rue, Wormwood, Centory, Sauine, stamp all these together,
and drink it fasting, and thou shall break the impostume inwardly, and avoid
it outwardly.

For ache in the side or ribs.
Take and annoint the sides and ribs with the juice of Knotgrasse, and with
the oil of Roses, and it will help them.

For ache under the sides.
Drink Sage with Wine a little warmed, and it will ease the ache under the
sides, and of the womb, and it is good for the Dropsy, or the Palsy. Also
Cheruile drunk with wine, eases greatly the pain in the sides.

For all diseases in the sides.
Take Woorts, and make balls thereof being sodden, and grind them to powder,
and brew them in a new earthen pot, and after that gather them together with
Honey, and smere them well together, and make a plaster for the sore side.

For women's sides that be sore.
Take Hilwate, Alisander, Parsley, Louage, red Fennel, Radish, Enula campana,
and sees all these herbs together in white Wine, from a pottle to a quart,
and let the patient drink thereof morning and evening, till the pain be gone.

For the plurisie, and for such as are used to be let blood, to save them from
letting of blood, and to dissolve all ill blood.
Take Rye-bread, and cut it in small shiuers, and set it in the wind for to
dry, and when ye shall be pained with the Spleen, put the Bread in the
strongest Vinegar that you can get, and let it steep therein four howr^s,
till it is well soked, then set it on the fire and sees it together, and
make a plaster thereof, and lay it on the side whereas the grief is, as hot
as the party may suffer it, and it shall dissolve ill blood, and take away the
pain in their ordure: this has been proved for the Plurisie.

A notable plaster for the Plurisie.
Take the roots of wild Mallows, the grease of a hog, the grease of a Fexe,
and of a Goose or a Ducke, of each a like much, but not above an ouce of
either: of fresh Butter, half an ounce, of Terrebanthium half an ounce, of the
fat of Veale six drammes, of the oil of Dyll half an ounce, of the mary of
a Dear, half an ounce, the powder of the seeds of Flax, Vinegar and Bay
berries, of each three drammes, and eight Figs, beat all in a mortar, then put
all in a pan, putting Flax therein to bind it together, and stir it with a
stick upon the coals, then take the whole, or part thereof, and spread it
upon Leather, and cover it with silk, and bast it with thread like a quilt,
and so apply the plaster to the place so grieved, as close as may be: and by
Gods grace you shall find great ease. Proved.

For the ache in a man's back.
Take Burre roots, and make them clean, and stamp them, and temper them with
stale Ale, and boil it well, and strain it, and drink thereof in the morning
cold, and at night hot.

For the pains in the back of either man or woman.
Take Walwoort and sees it, and press out the Water, and ^ray it in a mortar,
then fry it with Sheep tallow, and put thereto clean bran, and plaster it
to the back either of man or woman, and it shall help them by Gods grace.

For the raines of the back.
Take two new laid Eggs, and put away the white, and fill the shell with the
juice of Clarie, beat it well and strain it, and stir well the yolks and the
juice together, over a few coals for the time it is boiling, and then take one
and eat it, and use this nine days fasting and it shall strength your raines,
and comfort nature, although the Patient be right feeble, it has been proved.

For a sore back.
Take Mallows and sees them in fair water, and lay it upon a red cloth to
the sore as hot as ye may suffer it.

Another for the same.
Take kernels of Hasell nuts, and the dung of the house Pidgion, and May
butter, stamp them together, and it shall make any sore for to break and to
heal, and for the great pain in the back: often proved.

For the raines of the back.
Take two gallons of strong piss, and still it, and take a handful of sappy
Sage and Hemlocks, Mallows, Rue, Egrimony, Scabious, and still all these
together to a pint, and when it is stilled put thereto four spoonfuls of oil
Olive: this is made principally for the raines of the back.

For the raines a good drink.
Take the juice of Betony, of Wine an ounce, and of the Betony a spoonful, and
the powder of Pepper, mingle these together, and drink it for three days
fasting.

For the wasting of the kidneyes, and for pains of the back.
Take a handful of Planten, a handful of Parsley, a handful of Betony, a
handful of water Betony, a handful of Sorrel, a dosen crops of Rosemary,
sees these in three pints of Ale, till it be wasted, and strain them, and put
thereto a pint of Sack, and a good piece of Sugar, and burn it well together,
and so give it to the party all hot evening and morning: proved.

For the whites or the running in the raines.
Take white washed Turpentine, and make it up in balls like Pyls, then take
Cinnamon, and Ginger, and roll the balls in it, and take them as you would do
Pylls morning and evening. Proved.

For the whites.
For the whites or weakness in the back: take an earthen vessel, and put it in
a quart pot of fair water wherein you must quench two or three gads of sreele
being red hot, then steep therein an ounce of Lettice seeds four and twenty
hours, then strain the same, and sees it half away, and scum it very clean,
and keep it in a covered cup, and drink this morning and evening with powder
of Iuory.

Another for the same.
Take Archangell and sees it in drink, and drink it morning and evening, it
is very good, the red for the woman, and the white for the man.

For all manner of aches in the back.
Take Egrimony, Mugwoort, both the leaves and roots, and stamp them with
Swines grease and Vinegar, and seethe them, and lay it to the back.

Another for the same.
Take a good quantity of Peniriall, and put thereto Vinegar, and oil Olive that
is green, and lay it to thy back plaster wise.

For him that has lost his complexion from the back.
Take Linseed and stamp it small, and temper it with Goats milk, and strain it
all warm, and drink it three or four times fasting, and thy complexion will
come again.

For the pains in the back.
Take Vnguentum rosarum, and chafe your back morning and evening, and lay to
this plaster following: take Fethersoy, Tansie, Housleeke, of each a handful
shreded and stamped fine, then fry them well together with a saucer full of
honey, and two ounces of Deues dung, of the newest you can get, when it is thick
like a plaster, put it in the end of a small sleeue, and so lay it to your
back all warm.

For all manner af ache in the back.
Take Smallage, Egrimony, Mouseare, and stamp them all together, but wash them
well first, and temper them with Ginger, and fry them well in Bores grease, and
make a plaster, and as hot as the sick may suffer, lay it on the ache, and
he shall have ease.

Another for the same.
Take Lilly roots, Camomell, Anniseedes, and stamp them all together, and fry
them in Bores grease, and put a little Wine therete, and in manner of a
plaster lay it on a cloth, and bind it fast to the back or raines all hot,
and after three or four days remove it, with renewing of the plaster thereto,
with more fresh.

For the running of the raines.
Take Pellitory of the wall and stamp it and strain it, and drink it with
Malmsie or white Wine or Ale, and do this often till that thou be all whole.
Also if the Patient make a Tansie of Clary, and eat thereof, is very good for
the same disease: as has been proved.

For women's terms.
Take Selondine and let a woman put it in her hose under the soles of her
feet, and it will help her.

Also Mollet leaves, and the red flowers of Hollihocks is very good for this
purpose.

Also the great leaves of Burres being sodden in strong Ale, and the same
afterward drunk, is very good.

For wasting of nature.
Take a pint of Malmsie, and put thereto a penny worth of Sinamon and another of
clean Mace, and boil them over the fire with Wine, but first make powder of
your spices, then take Treakle as much as a Damson, and put thereto, and stir
altogether, and let the sick drink thereof hot at all times, and it shall avoid
all fleame and wind in the interior parts of man to restore his nature: proved.

For all Impostumes in the body.
Take Centory, Rosemary, Wormwood, Horthound, and make it in sirop with white
Wine, and let the sick take thereof, and it shall cause the Impostume to go
down, and when it is broken: let him use to drink of the same sirop warm.

For to destroy all Impostumes either in man or woman.
Take the root of Hollihock, and wash it clean, and sees it till it be
tender, and then put the water into a vessel, and then take Linseed and
Fenegreke, of each of them a like much, and see that thou have as much of them
two as the root that is sodden, then sees them in the same water till it rope
as it were Birdlime, then stamp the root and do thereto Barley meal, and mingle
them well together, and fry them with Bores grease, and lay it to the sore,
plaster wise, as hot as you may suffer it, and within nine days ye shall be
whole. Also take Turmentile, and let the Patient drink often of the juice
thereof, and it shall cure him: proved.

An experiment to take away the mother.
Take a great deal of Mugwoort, and as you gather it, sliue the leaves
downward, then wash them clean, and boil them in running water till they be
soft, and when the party goes to bed let him or her wash themselves therewith,
from the navel downward both flanks and members, and also the mother so hot
as is possible to be suffered, remember the parties that they wash not upward
at any time, and within three days washing, the parties either he or she
shall be whole God willing. Proved.

Another medicine for the mother.
Take a handful of Mother-time, a handful of Motherwoort, a handful of Isop,
a handful of Sage, sees all these in a gallon of fair water until it be
half consumed, then mash it upon half a peck of Malt, so let it stand an
hour, then take the woort of it as you do for drink, and put yeest to it, and
being thus made, let the party drink it morning and evening.

A drink for the pain of the mother.
Take a dram of Methridatum, and dissolve it in an ounce and a half of water of
Wormwood, and give it to the woman for to drink before that she goes to meat
four hours, and let her not drink a good while afterward: proved.

A most excellent medicine for the mother, the chollick and stone.
Take Fenell seed, Coriander seed, Carroways seed, Parsley seed, Galingall seed,
Gromwell seed, an ounce of each of these: also an ounce of leaves and cods of
Scene, a quarter of an ounce of Spignall, a quarter of an ounce of Time: take al
these and make them into powder, and searce them through a searcer, and drink
them in white Wine or good Ale first and last, and in all manner of sauces that
you eat with your meat: and this medicine shall cure the mother, the stone, and
the chollick: proved.

Another for the mother.
Take Mugwoort, and herb Sunonde, Saudry, and red Mints, and siraine all these
iuyees with red Wine, and give it to the woman that is pained with the mother
to drink.

A good medicine for the mother coming of what cause so ever.
Take the rasing of Iuery, and the rasing of an Hearts horn, with the hair of
a Hare dried, and made in powder, and as much of Geats claws burnt, and
poudered if they may be gotten, or in steed thereof, Sheep claws: take all
these and use to eat of them in your pottage, or otherwise in your drinks.

For the genitories.
For the pain and swelling of the genitories, see the well the root of Bruise,
and make a plaster thereof, and put swet to it and bind it fast thereto with a
band, and it will cease the pain, and swelling of the cods.

For the swelling of the cods.
For them that have swollen cods with fleame, so that they shine, stamp
Doues-foote with small green Lettice, and lay it plaister-wise thereto.

Another for the same.
Take Barley meal, and Honey, and fry them together, and make a plaster
thereof, and let the party so grieved lay it warm to the grief of the cods.

For swelling of a man's cods.
Take Rue, and Wormwood, and srampe them together, and put thereto honey, and
make thereof a cold plaster, and lay all about the cod, and when you will take
the plaster away, then wash the cod with Vinegar, and he shall be whole.

For a man that is bruised, or that his cods be sore.
Take the wool of a black Rams cod, and put that wool into oil, and powder
of Comin, and heat it hot, and thereof make a plaster, and as hot as the
party can suffer it, lay it to his cods, and it will do away the aching, and
make it whole within three or four times dressing therewith.

For swelling of the cods.
Take Rose leaves, Rose Water, red Wine, Camomell, or Camomell flowers, and
Bean flower, let them boil together, and make a plaster of it, and lay it to
the cods as hot as he may suffer it.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of Walwoort, Vinegar, and Honey, put thereto Barley flower, and
sees them till they be thick, and bind it to the sore all hot,

For a man's yard that is scalded.
Take Bruise, Woort, Veruaine, herb Robert, Pimpernell, of each of all these a
good quantity, and most of all of Pimpernell, stamp them all together as small
as you may, then fry them with Butter, and strain it through a cloth, and put
it in a bore, and therewith annoint your yard cold, and of these herbs make a
plaster, then lay it all about the yard cold, dressing it every day two or
three times a day.

For a man's yard that is burnt.
Take a linen cloth and burn it to powder, and take oil of Eggs, and annoint
the sore, and fill the grief with the said powder. Also for a man's yard that
is sore, and full of holes: take a good company of Dasies, and stamp them, and
change them often. Also take Linseed and burn it, and make powder thereof, and
do it in a cloth, and lay it to the sore.

For a sore in a man's yard.
Take Swinismore, Hocke leaves, Ambrose leaves, Veruaine, Peritory, Cherfaile,
Mastick, bruise these herbs together in a mortar, and mingle them together with
Mastick, and Swines grease, and oil Olive, and boil them, and strain it
through a cloth, and with this Unguent annoint the sore yard so grieved.

For the swelling of a man's yard.
Take Leekes and bray them in a mortar, and fry them in fresh grease of a Bore,
and make a plaster, then lay it all about the yard, and it shall assuage and
heal it: proved.

Another for the same.
Take Clay and beat it to powder, and sifte it, and take wine Vinegar, and
seethe them together, and make a plaster thereof, and it will take away the
swelling thereof.

For pain in the bladder.
Take fcure drams of Betony, and four roots of Smallage sodden in water, but
first seethe the roots till the water be half wasted, then sees the Betony
therein, and drink thereof.

A decoction for to drink with Wine, for them that make bloody water by
fracture of any vain within the body, as in the liver, raines, and bladder.
Take of Knotgrasse, Bursa pastoris of each a handful, the cups of Acornes, of
Camphire one lease, of Cinnamon a dram weight, of Licoris clean scraped and
sliced, one dram weight, of water a quart, of Sugar two ounces, all this must
boil to the consumption of the third part, and then let it run through a fair
cloth into a clean vessel, and when it is cold put it into a glass, and in
your drink use thereof, either in Ale or Beer, and it shall ease the bladder of
pain.

For him that pisseth blood.
Take Ambrose, Bursa pastoris, Parsley seed, stamp them, and temper them with
Goats milk, and give the party to drink, and it will quickly help him.

For a man that pisseth blood.
Take of the earth that is on the Swallows nest, and put it into hot water,
and give the sick for to drink, and the bleeding shall staunch within a while.

For a man that may not hold his water.
Take the claws of a Goat, and burn them in the fire, and make thereof
powder, and let the sick use of this powder in pottage a spoonful at once,
and he shall be whole.

For a man that may not piss.
Take Mallows, a good quantity of Gromell, and seethe them in Vinegar a good
while, and then let the sick drink thereof warm: and he shall piss soon after.

Another for the same.
Take Lanberd, and make powder thereof, and then let the ficke drink thereof with
white Wine, and he shall quickly piss, for this medicine has been proved.

For a hard womb, and for to piss.
Take Parfly seed, Ache, and Spurge, of every of them four ounces: stamp them
to powder, and put it either into wine or water, and drink it morning and
evening.

For to make a man to piss well.
Take Peritory, stamp it, and fry it, and lay it all hot to a man's yard. Also
make a plaster of the flower of Cockle, and water, and so lay it to the sicks
yard. Also Linseede being sodden well in honey, and applied to the place,
causes the man to piss well. Proved.

For a woman that may not hold her water.
For a woman that may not keep her water, take Egrimony, and Salt, and stamp
them together very small, then sees it in old Wine, until the third part
thereof be consumed, and then give her thereof to drink.

For a man or woman that may not well piss.
Take Galbanum, and lay it to the end of a man's yard, and for a woman lay it to
her navel, and being thus applied, it will help either man or woman.

Another for the same.
Take a few of the crops of red Nettles, Sheeps tallow, Senson of a house top,
and fry it well together, and as hot as the man may suffer it, lay it to his
yard, and for the woman lay it on her navel all hot: proved.

For one that may not well piss.
Take a quart of white Wine, and a good piece of stone Pitch, Aniseeds, Parsley
seeds, and a piece of Sugar, let it sees from a quart to a pint, and drink it
warm evening and morning: and it shall help the party so grieved.

For straightnes of pissing.
Take and seethe Camomell in wine or water, and oftentimes drink thereof, it
eases and profits greatly for the stopping of the milt, and of the liver.
Proved.

Another for the same.
Take the leaves of Stamarch, or Alisander, and put them on a Tyle-stone being
warm, and lay it all hot to the privy members, and it will raise the
straightnes of the pissing, and abate the pain ther-withall: proved.

For Gomora passio.
Gomora passio is flowing of a man's seed against his will, and comes of
diverse causes, either for feeblenes of the rains, or of plenty of blood, or of
a palsy in man: this passion is perrilous, for it makes a man or woman
unlusty, and their joints as sore as a man that is weary with travailing, and
has no will unto a woman.

Take the seed of Lettice, and make it in powder, and drink it with water, for
it stops the flux of kind, that passes forth in the Patients water against
his will.

Also the powder of Mintes dried in an Oven, best restores kind, and
restrayneth the errors of the flux.

Also Castorium boiled in the juice of Agnus castus that is called Tutson, and
being drunk is good for the passion.

Also Amber oriental is a precious thing, and Caldo plaistered and laid on the
raines of the back.

Also temper the powder of Camphire with Mustilage or Veriuice, or the juice of
Morell, and therewith annoint clothes, and lay to the yard.

For all evils in the bladder.
Take Ach, Parsley, Fenell, and Pimpernell, and by even portions, bray them
together, and temper it with warm water, and drink it, for it will make the
evils to pass, and for to cast out the stone that is in the bladder: proved.

Another for the same.
Take Porrets that never was set, root and all, bray them, and temper them with
Wine, or with stale Ale, and seethe it from a pottell to a quart, and take of
the powder of Philopendula an ounce, and use this nine days till thou feel thy
self eased, and this God willing will help you.

For a privy malady that a man takes of a woman.
Take a dead man's bones, and burn them, and make powder of them, and lay the
powder on the hair, and thou shall he whole by Gods grace.

Also if a man's flesh rise too much let him drink often Veruain, and his flesh
shall not rise, nor he shall have any liking unto a woman. Proved.

A water for a canker in the nature of a woman, or in the yard of a man.
Take an ounce of roch Allom, and half an ounce of Verdigreace, and put therein
Smithes water into a glass, and let them boil for the space of two hours,
and wash the sore place therewith.

To provoke flowers in women.
To provoke the flowers in women, make a Fomentation of the decoction of the
herb called Tutson, and of the herb called Gentrum Galli.

Also take a gum that is called Serapini, and mingle it with powder of Centory,
and lay it to the navel.

Also let the woman bath her self in the water that Camomel has been sodden
in, and it will help her.

Also take the juice of Marigolds drunken or eaten with a rere Egg, and Meal
made in Fritters does the like.

Also to cause the flowers to flow in women: take the juice of Nettles, and
her urine, and put it in the matrice.

Also make a fume or smoke of Storax calamitae upon coals, and let the woman
receive the smoke with a Fonnell.

Also Wine mingled with the powder of Mirrh and Sothernwood causes the flowers
to flow in women.

For the excessive flowing of women's flowers.
The woman that is troubled heerewith, must be bathed with the water that the
herb called Wooddip is sodden in, and it will help her.

Another for the same.
Take and make a Suppository of the powder of Bole armoniacke, and the powder
of Sumac, of Mastick, and the juice of Planten, and put it into the conduit.

Another for the same.
Oaken leaves eaten, stops the lungs, and excessive flux in women, and
chiefly the water drunk that the middle rind is sodden in, or the party
therewith bathed.

Also to stop the flowers that flow abundantly: take and sees five leaued
Grass with raiue water, and so let the party bathe her self therewith.

For a woman that is in travel with child.
Take Leeke blades and scald them in hot water, and bind them to her navel as
hot as she may suffer it, and it will do out the dead child, and when the
child is forth, say three times Quicunque vult over the woman, and she shall be
safe.

For sickness that causes a woman that she may not conceive with child.
Take a Hearts horn and burn it to powder, and then take Goats milk, and set
it over the fire, then cast of the powder before said, a quantity into the
milk, and drink it off as hot as she may suffer it, and this will ease her of
her pain.

To make a woman soon to conceive with child.
Take the wine that Nep has been sodden in, till the third part thereof be
consumed, and give it to the woman to drink fasting, for three days together,
and she shall soon conceive with child. Proved.

Also Ipocras says, that a woman being conceived with a man child is ruddy,
and her right side is corny about, but if she be conceived with a maid child,
she is black, and her left pap is corny about.

For a woman in travel of child.
For the after throws of a woman if it be the first child, take the house or
bed that the child was in when it came out of the Mothers womb, and wash that
bed fair and clean, and then cast away that water, and then take fair water,
and therewith seethe the house of the child, and let it seethe a great while,
then take it out of the water, and bury it where you will, and the woman a
quantity of that water to drink that it was sodden in, and she shall never have
the after throws again.

A powder for women laboring with child.
Take Betony and make it in fine powder, and give the party thereof for to
drink, and it will cause her to have good deliverance quickly.

For the whites in women.
Take Galbanum an ounce, Mastick two penny worth, Galingall one ounce, Cinnamon two
ounces, Calamus aromaticus three ounces, Cucubes two ounces, long Pepper two penny
worth, white Pepper two penny worth, beat all these together in a mortar, with a
quarter and a half of white Sugar, and let it be fine powdered, and let the
Patient take it in the morning in warm posset Ale clarisied, and one penny
worth of Maces boiled in the Ale, and at noone in her broth, and at night with
a little boiled milk, the weight of a dram at a time.

To bring down women's flowers.
Take a spoonful of the juice of Isop, and a spoonful of the juice of
Germaunder and Sothernwood, in like manner take the wild Tansy, and wild Time,
and boil them in white wine, and give the Patient for to drink till she be
whole.

For to make a woman to conceive a child speedily.
Take Time, and make oil of the crops and branches, and it is good to anoint
the woman about the navel, the womb and the raines, that is to comfort her,
and to make her cenceiue with child quickly. Also to restore nature, take
Permaceti and Burras, and grind them together, and give it her to drink in
Wine, or Ale.

For to make a woman's paps small, that be great.
Take the seeds of Hemlocks, and sees them in Vinegar, and annoint oftentimes
the breast and papps, and mingle the powder of Incence there-withall.

A medicine for paps that run, and be sore.
Take Sorrel debays, lap it in Woort leaves, and put it in the embers half an
hour, then stamp it as small as you may, and do thereto Honey, and Vinegar,
and mingle them together, and do it in a box, first lay a plaster of
Garlic upon the sore, so boil it in Vinegar three or four times, and it
shall cease the running thereof.

For a woman that is troubled after her travel with loosenes of her privy
parts.
Take a quantity of Venice Turpentine, and roll it in Sugar, and give it to
her, and cause her to swollow it down, not chewing it at all. After that,
cause an Alebery to be made for her, and put into it the powder of Camphire,
and give it to her to eat, and the Turpentine shall cleanse, and the Camphire
shall close: your Camphire must be dried in the shadow, so that the wind and
Sun do not come to it: proved.

For to deliver a dead child forth of the Mother.
To deliver a dead child, sees this root of Aristologia longa in Wine and
Oil, and make therewith a Fomentation. Also to deliver a dead child out of the
Mothers womb, and the web that is in the woman, make an Inection or Pessaire of
the juice of this herb Dittany, and mingle the powder of the root therewith.
Also make a plaster of Hollihocks, with a little Salt and Goose grease, and
lay it to the matrice.

For a man's fundament that goes out.
Take the red Nettle crops, and bray them small in a mortar, and do them in an
earthen pot, and do thereto a good portion of white Wine, and sees them well
together to the half, and give thereof to the sick to drink first and last
warm, and lay the substance of the herb to the fundament, as hot as he may
suffer it, till he be whole.

Another for the same.
Take March and drink the juice, and lay a plaster thereto for ihat disease.
Also against the pain of the fundament, or of the matrice, and of the bowels,
sees the leaves of Hollihock in water, and make a stew of that water, and wash
she oftentimes. Also make a plaster of Scabious, and lay thereon, but the
Patient must first receive the smoke thereof beneath.

For the fundament another.
For the small cliftes that bleedeth in the fundament, lay thereto the powder
of Anthera, and annoint them with water that Dragagant has been chafed in.

Another for the same.
Take black Beans, and grind them very small, and searce them well, and
powder it on the fundament, and then put it in again, then sees the said
meal in a pan, and mingle it with white Wine, and let it seethe till it be
thick, and then spread it on a cloth plaister-wise, and lay it as hot on the
fundament as may be suffered, and remove it twice or thrice a day: and renew it
always with fresh meal, and you shall be whole God willing.

For the Pills and the Emerods, and for the evils of the fundament.
Take Ekespire, Tapsebarbe, and bath the Patient in the same to the navel, or
bind the herb hot in a cloth, and let the Patient sit thereon.

Also take dry Bulbecks, and put into the fundament, and it shall be all whole.

Also heal the fundament close with a leaf of S. Mary Capper, and when one is
dry then take another, and it shall help you quickly by Gods grace.

For to help the piles.
Take English honey, and the juice of Wormwood, or the small leaves, or the
roots of Dasies pund very small, and put them in a linen cloth, and put to
the sore place, and so use it thus till thou be whole.

For the Pyles and Emerodes.
Take Muskle shelles and burn them in the fire, and then take the white of
them and make it in fine powder, and put in a little English Homy, and temper
them together, then lay it upon a little linen cloth, and so lay it upon the
sore Piles.

To stanch the bleeding of the Pyles.
Drink the juice of Milfoyle, and it will help you. Proned. Or the powder of
burn. Garlic, and the Piles shall die. Also take black Wool and black Sops,
and bind it to the piles, and it will help you.

To destroy the Pyles.
Take oil of Roses, Frankensence and Honny, and make an ointment of them, and
put it in with thy finger into the fundament, and put Mirrh unto the same, and
use often to annoint the fundament therewith, and let the fume thereof go up
into the fundament.

For pyles that do grieve a man or woman.
Take the reddest and the newest Tar that you can get, and make it in a
plaster upon a new Lockeram cloth, and make bolsters of some other thing, and
so put two tapes to every corner to tie about the patient, and once a day
dress the same with clean clothes.

Another for the Piles.
Take a great Onyon, and cut out the core thereof, and fill it full of Sugar,
and stop the hole again, and wrappe it in a brown paper, and bind it fast
with a pack-thred, and roste it as you would roast a Warden: and when it is
roasted, open it, and lay it to the sore place as hot as the party may suffer
it.

Another for the pyles.
Take the roots of Verueine, and the roots of the Bur, and stamp them and
sees them, and so lay the^ hot to the place, but first take a little fire,
and on the same put powder of Frankensence, and let the heat go up into the
sore.

For the Piles.
Take Mollet leaves, and sees them in fair water till they be soft, then take
May butter, and make an ointment of the same, then use thereof for the Piles,
for it is a Medicine very well and often proved.

For the Emerods.
Take Inde Soap, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the pyles or
emerods, or to the Fistula, till such time as they do fall away of themselves.

For the Emerods.
Take new Milk, and a little fine flower, and sees them together, and make a
plaster of the same, and burn an Oyster shell, and make it into powder, then
strewe it thick upon the plaster, and as hot as ye may lay it to the place.
Also let the party that has them, blow his nose upon a cloth, and strewe
Soote upon the same, and as hot as he may suffer it, lay it unto the place,
and it will help the same.

For the emerods.
The Emerods be five veins that come to the fundament, that voideth
mellanchollie blood, and may not be stopped too soon, it is good for this
disease to bleed in the liver vain on the arm, and under the ancle, and let
him drink morning and evening the juice of Milfoyle, mingled with warm Wine,
and plaster the herb to the fundament: if the matter be plentious, then he
must be purged before that ye close up all, for fear of a Dropsy or a
breaking out. Also take the root of Flonny, and make powder of it, and take
the yolke of an Egg, and wheat meal, and mingle the powder and them together,
then fry them well with grease or oil, and use the same nine or ten times,
and the party shall be whole.

For the Emerodes.
Take the crops of Elders and stamp them, and lay them to the place. Also
Leekes and salt is good, and if they rise again, lay them to again. Also take
the root of wild Pellitory, and grind it, and put thereto the powder of
Arsenick, and lay it to the place. proved. Also Vinegar, Allom, and Deeres
suet, of each a like much being boiled together, is very good.

For the pain of the emerods.
Take Housleeke and Sheep dunge, and stamp them both together in a mortar
very small, then take of sheep suet and chop it very small, and put it in a
pan, and let it sees upon the fire, then put in the Housleeke, and the
sheeps dunge, and boil all together, and when it is well boiled, take it off,
and strain it through a linen cloth into a deep dishe, and then annoint the
patient therewith, as hot as he may well endure, this has been proved.

For the Emerodes.
Take a stool with a seege, and let it be closed to the ground, and then take
a pan with Charcole, and set it under the stool, and as hot as may be
suffered sit thereon, then take Frankensence beaten into powder, and cast a
good quantity thereof into the fire, and sit on the stool as close as you
can, and when the smoke is gone, cast in more powder in the fire, and sit
thereon in this order as long as ye may.

Another for the same.
Take an Onyon, and cut away the top, of a reasonable breadth, then pull out
the heart thereof, and take powder of pepper and put therein a good quantity,
and set on the top again, and take a great linen cloth, and wet it in water,
and wringe it well with your hand, and wrap the Onyon therein, and lay it in
the fire till it be soft, and then take it out, and put it in another cloth,
and lay it as hot as may be suffered to your fundament, and when it is cold
lay another on the place, and so have always ready five or six to serve your
turn, or as many as you think needful.

Another for the same.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, and lay it to the fundament, and when it is
cold, take another, as you did by the Onyons: and if you put Verdegreace in
your Onyons, some think it better then Pepper, likewise, you may cut the Eggs
in the midst, and take out the yolks, and put in Verdegreace, and so lay them
to the sore.

Another for the same.
Take Neates-foote Oil, and a little Harts-suet, and annoint the sore well
therewith, and then take a Tyle-stone, and heat it in the fire as hot as ye
may well sit thereon, and if you have no Tile-stone, then take a stool and
heat it very hot, and so sit thereon: and if the place bleed, take a
quantity of Bole armoniack and as much of the Harts-suct, and so use them both
together.

Another for the same.
Take the gum that comes of the Iuie tree, and annoint the sore well
therewith, and take a Tile-stone or a stool as I said before, and sit upon the
same very hot: but if you bleed, take a good quantity of Mouseare, and a
little Betony, and stamp them together, and drink the juice thereof with a
little stale Ale, first, three or four mornings together, and last at night
when you go to bed.

Another for the emerods, proved.
First take a good quantity of Shoomakers pieces, and burn them on a
Tyle-stone very small, so that powder may be made thereof, then take a little
quantity of Allom, and burn it likewise, and make powder thereof, then mix
them together, and put thereunto the liquor of a Swines-gall, and if it happen
that the Swines-gall be dried up by reason of long keeping, then lay it in
fair water all night, and it will return again into a ruddy color: if you
can get no Swines-gall, then take a little of the Oil that Corriours use, to
dress their Leather, and mix it with your powder, so that it may be somewhat
thick like a plaster, and if you think it smart too much, take more liquor
and less Allom, and if you think it bite not sore enough, then put more Allom
thereto: and when this medicine is thus made, annoint the sore therewith: and
if there be any pappes coming out of the Tuell when the sore is anointed,
take a piece of the skin of the gall, and lay the inner side of the skin upon
the paps, and it shall ease them greatly: but if the sore be within the Tuell,
take and annoint it within with your finger as far as you can, and it will
help the same.

For to destroy the emerods.
Take old shoes and burn them to powder, then take a saucerfull of Honnie,
and then take as much oil Olive that is old, and temper them till they be
thick, and lay this medicine, to the sore place, either for the Piles or
Emerods.

For the emerodes.
Take read Worts, and sees them in a pot, then take the pot, and set the same
under a close Chair, and sit over it, and wrap your clothes so close that no
air come forth, and sit so still till it wax cold, then take of the same
liquor and therewith annoint the party. Also take a plate of Lead, and rub
thereon a quantity of Bores-greace for a man, and Swines-greace for a woman,
and wash it out with white Wine, and annoint the Emerods, and it will heal the
same.

For all evil in the flanks.
Take nine Bay leaves and dry them, and make them into powder, and mingle them
with what liquor you will, and drink thereof evening and morning.

Another remedy for to help the flanks.
Take Capons grease, and make an ointment thereof, and annoint the sore flanks
therewith.

Also the root of the Fower-deluce being dried, red Reses dried, Gallingall
and Mustick of each a like quantity, these being beaten to powder and made
into ointment with a little oil of Roses or oil of Linseeds, eases the pain.

Also the decoction of Plantaine, Buria pastoris, Horsetaile, and Knotgrasse,
all these are exceeding good to help the chafing of the skin and flanks.

For chasing of the flanks.
Take Bean flower, Barlie flower, and the flower of Fitches, tempered with a
little oil of Roses, it makes a precious ointment for the same.

Also if the chasing be very great, it is good to make a bath of Hollihocks,
Dill, Violets, and Linseedes, with a little Bran, and then to wash the place
often therewith.

For sore knees that do swell and ache.
Take Rue and Louage, and stamp them together, and put thereto Honnie, and
make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the sore knees, and it shall put away
the swelling and the ache within three or four times using thereof.

For the swelling of the knees.
Take the water of the party grieved, after that it has stood three or four
days made, then sees it and scum it very clean, and wash the place as hot
as may be suffered therewith. Also Milfoyle fried either with Deers suet or
Sheep suet, and laid hot to, is very good for the same.

For the ache or swelling in the knees.
Take two handfuls of Lauender leaves, or the flowers, or both together, stamp
them in a mortar very small, and steep the Lauender two hours in a pint of
Malinesie, then strain it through a cloth, and boil it well, and then with a
Sponge all to bathe the swelling of the knees, or the ache thereof, and within
six or eight days using, it will help you God willing.

For the ache or swelling in the knees.
Take Sorrel, Vinegar, Smallage, and Sheep suet, and melt the suet, and put
in these herbs, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore knee.

Also against the ache and swelling thereof, bruise the flowers of Plantaine
with salt, and lay it thereto. Also the leaves of Plantaine stamped and laid
thereto, helps.

Also the juice of an Onyon being mingled with the grease of a Hen, and made
in manner of an ointment, and so used, helps the same.

Also bathe your knees in the water that Elder leaves have been sodden in, and
it will help you.

For him or her that is diseased in their knees, or in their joints, that they
may not go.
Take a black Sheep head, and smite it all to pieces, wool and all, and put
it into a pot with water, and sees it till it be as soft as pappe, and then
pluck out all the bones, and set it on the fire again, and put unto the same
a good quantity of Oatenreale, and let them sees till they be thick, and
then lay it upon a piece of Leather, and while it is very hot, lay it to the
parties joints, and they shall find great ease of the swelling of their joints.
Proved.

For a sore knee.
Take and sees Beans and Honny, and raw Ege, and make a plaster, and lay it
upon the sore knee as hot as you may suffer the same.

For the swelling in a man's knee.
Take a blew woollen blanket of cloth, as much as will lap about the knee, then
take the white of two or three Hens. Eggs, and beat them well in a dish,
and spread it upon the cloth, this done, put the yolks of the Eggs into a
dish and beat them, and put thereto as much or more of black Soap, and beat
them well together, and when they be well beaten make thereof a fair salve, and
spread it thick upon the cloth, and the white of the Eggs thereon reasonable
thick: then lay this upon the sore knee, and role it fast thereon for three
days, and it will put away the swelling and the ach thereof. Proved.

For aches and swelling in the knees.
Take a quart of Malmesie and a handful of Time, boil them very well
together, and when it is half boiled, put therein a good piece of sweet Butter,
and let them boil together from a quart till it come to a pint, and when you
do go to bed, bathe your knees well therewith, and also wet a cloth three or
four times double therein, and lay it also upon them as hot as may be
suffered, letting it lie on all night, and use this six or seven times, and
it will help you by the grace of God.

For a great ache in the knees.
Take Ground-Iuie, which has leaves like Catmint, and has a red flower, and
the leaves of Peneriall, and the leaves of Elder, and let them be sodden in
Swines-greace, and the marrow of a Mare, and annoint the party so grieved
therewith.

For ache of the legs.
Take the leaves of the Elder tree, and Penneriall, and Cinckfoyle, and make
thereof a plaster with Barrowes grease, and lay it to the ache of the legs,
and it shall help them.

For ache of the legs.
Take and drink the juice of fiue-leaued Grass. Also you may use Sow-thistle,
Chickweed, Elder-leaues, Groundsell, and Cleauers, of each of these a handful,
dry all these between two Tiles, and lay them to the place that is pained, but
let the herbs be first washed ere they be dried, and it helps.

For ache or swelling of the legs.
Take Otemeale and Milk, and put thereto the juice of Housleeke, and
Sheepes-tallowe, and let them boil altogether till it be thick, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it about the sore, and that shall ease the aching, and
take away the swelling of the legs, proved.

For all manner of ache in the legs.
Take Sage, Rue, Wormwood, Sorrel leaves, Horehound, Redde-netles, and stamp
them all together, and mingle them with May-butter, and let it stand so ten
days, and fry them often, and strain them clean, and melt therewith
Incense, and this serves for all manner of aches in the legs, if you use
thereof when you stand in need.

For black horrible swollen legs.
Take Selondine, Hore-hound, Hearbe-bennet, and sees these together in water
till the half be wasted, and therewith wash the fore legs every day three
or four times, and make as much at a time as will serve six or seven times.

For a hot sore leg.
Take petty Morrell, Plantaine, Smalladge, Herb bennet, Sengreene, Violet
leaves, and the leaves of Tutseine, Marigolds, and grind all these together,
and wring out the juice, and put it in a little Wheat Flour and Honny, and the
white of an Egg, and meddle all these together, and lay it vpthe sore all cold.

For swelling in the legs.
Take three spoonefuls of Rose Water, and three spoonefuls of Fennel water,
and three spoonefulls of good Wine vinegar, and put them together cold, and
skimme off the foam of it, and then take a linen cloth and dip it in, and lay
it to the sore place.

For a leg be it never so sore.
Take the most part of a Cow-turd, and lay it upon a cloth plaister-wise, and
lay it to the sore place, and if there be a hole in the leg, make a tent of
the same, and put it into the hole, and lay the plaster thereto, and let it
lie till that it do come off it self, and you shall find great ease.

For a sore leg.
Take the flowers of Cammomell, a handful of Sothernwood, Mallows, Groundsel,
Sage, a handful of each of these, beat them small in a mortar, and boil them
in milk, and put in the seething thereof, the seed of Fenicreeke in powder
half an ounce, Anniseedes, Fennel seed in powder, of each an ounce, and a
little May butter, boil all these together, and when it is but warm, put into
it four or five yolks of Eggs, and mingle them all together, and lay it to the
sore leg, and in the boiling, put thereto a pint of good red Wine, and it
will be the better.

Another for a sore leg, proved.
Take Celondine, Sage, and Woodbind a handful, seethe them in a gallon of
running water, to a pottell, and then strain it, and seethe it again, and put
thereto a pint of boney, a handful of the powder of Allom, a pennyworth of
Grains beaten in fine powder, and skimme it till it be very clear, and then
keep it in a glass, till such time as you shall have need to use it, then
take a cloth and wet it therein, and wash the sore therewith oftentimes.

For pain in the feet.
Against the pain of the feet, if any has been bruised or erushed, take and
eat the root of the middle Mugwoort with honey, and it will ease the pain
thereof.

Also let the party annoint his feet with the juice of Clary very often, and
it will help him.

For the swelling of the feet.
Against swelling, and aches of the feet, bruise the flowers of Plantaine with
Salt, and lay thereto.

Also stamp the leaves of Plantaine, and lay thereon.

Also take the juice of an Onyon, being mingled with the grease of a Hen in
manner of an ointment, and annoint your feet often therewith.

Also bathe your feet in the water that Elder leaves was sodden in.

For corns in the toes.
Take of unslaked Lime a little, and quench it with strong Vinegar, and when
you will occupy it, pare the corn, and mingle it with Rose water, and lay it
too.

Also take the gall of a Swine being dried, but first wash it with hot water,
and strew the powder thereon.

Also take and cut away the corn, and drop into it a drop or two of a black
Snayle, and put thereto the powder of Sandfer, and it takes away the corn.

Also take Marigolds stamped, and lay upon the sore evening and morning, and it
profits, or else pare your corn, and lay thereto Turpentine, and red Wax
boiled together, and make a plaster thereof, and it helps the corn of the
toe.

Rules for blood letting.
GAlien, Ipocias, and Auicenna, and other Masters of Physic, accord and say,
that letting blood of the vein, and that is called Fleobatomatum, or it is
ventosing, caruing, or cutting, and letting blood of any of these wise, is good
for man's health of body, for blood immingled with other humors that is too
much, or else corrupted by the cause of much sickness: it is therefore good to
know which veins in a man should be let blood, and for what sickness.

The vein in the forehead is good for the frenzy, and aching of the head, and
for the Meigrim, and for the Morphew, and seab in the face, for the Postumes in
the eyes both hot and cold.

The vein in the heart is good for a man's mind, and for the Rume that is
within the forehead, and for the watring eyes.

The veins in the temple is good for the Meigrim, and for the head ache of the
eyes, and that has long lasted, for the sickness of the eyes, for ache in the
eyes, and for the great heat in the temples.

The veins behind the ears is good for the blaines and pimpels of the head,
for the Meigrim and ache of the head, it helps man's mind, it is good for
Toothache, and for the gums, and for all vices in the mouth, and it purges
the rume of the head.

The veins in the corner of the eyes next the nose, is good for the Meigrim,
and for all the sickness of the eyes, and for the sight Cephica tum prius apta.

The vein in the top of the nose, it purges the brain, it is good for
ache, and flux of the eyes, and for the ache of the nose.

The vein in the cheeks is good for the Meigrim, and for spots or scabs in
the head.

The vein in the mold is best for to bleed, and for to wash thy head with the
same blood.

The veins of the ouer-lippe, and the nether, be good for hot blaines in the
mouth, and for apostums, and for hot evils in the mouth or gums.

The vein under the tongue is good for postumes, and rumes of the head, and
gums, and all manner of vice of the eyes, mouth, tongue, tooth-aking, and
blaines of the nese, mouth, gums, and for the apostumes and swellings under the
throat.

The veins under the chinne is good for the Kings evil, and for Sauce-fleane,
for spots and blains in the face, and other ache of the eyes, the gums, and for
ache in the nose.

The veins of the neck before, is good for the Squinancie, and for all manner
of apostumes and swellings that come from the head to the ears, or to the
gums, that causes the toothach, when the breath begins to be short.

The vein of the liver that is called Basilica, it is good for the Iaundise,
and for chafing of the liver, and for all manner of dropsy, and it is good for
all evils in the breast, and aching of the back, shoulders, sides, and slomack,
and for the Postume that is called Pleusis.

The head vein that is called Cephanica, it is good for the Meigrim, and for
head ache, and for madness of the mind, for ache, and all other vices in the
eyes, teeth, tongue, the Squinancie, and other evils that come to the throat.

The heart vein that is called Cardieca vt medium. it is gentle Purgations, for
it draws blood and humors of all the body, but namely it is good for sickness,
and Purgations of the heart, breast, stomach, liver, and lungs.

The vein above the thumb is good against all Feauers, and most Fever
quartaine, and for all evils of the gall, and for straightnes of the breast.

The vein between the thumb and the forefinger, let blood for the hot head
ache, for freusie, and madness of wit, and for sickness of the head, Cephanica,
let the blood of the vein in the forehead if it be need.

The same vein of the left hand is good for Litargy, and afterward bleed in
the forehead.

The vein which is between the little finger and the next thereto, is called
Salua cella, you must let blood in the right hand for Postumes and sickness in
the stomach, and for all evil humors about the liver.

The same vein on the left hand is to let blood for Impostums and gathering of
evil humors about the milt and spleen: it is good for the black Iaunders.

The over vein in the yard is good for the Crampe, and for Sciarica passio,
for swelling of the womb, for the dropsy, and for the stone.

The nether vein of the yard is good for the sides, for ye rains, bladder, for
swelling of the stones, and for the emerods.

The vein beneath the knee helps the knees: and it is good for aching of the
thighs and the joints, that is called Sciatica passio.

The veins beneath the knees both within and without, is good for the liver,
sides, and thighs, and for the matter that is above, and for to draw
downward,

The vein in the hammes is best for withholding of Women's purgations, for it
is the next matter as says Au^cen, and also it cleanses man's body.

The vein that is under the knockle which is called Sophena, it is good for
postumes, swellings and akings, and other evils that come to man's body from the
head to the foot, it asswageth them, it is good for the stone and letting of
urine, it helps the matrice and women's purgations, it is good for the scab
that is called Malum mortum de basilica.

The vein that is under the knockell without, that is called Sianca, it is
good for aching that is in the thighs, and goes down to the legs and to the
feet, and for the Podagar, and for the scab, it helps most the aching of the
thighs and joints, that is called Scrattica passio.

The vein that comes to the great toe en either foot, it is good for the
gout in the eyes, for blaines and spots in the face, and for postumes and
evils of the stones, for the blood, for cankers, festers, and sores in the
thighs and legs, and for withholding of women's purgations.

As for the time of letting blood, to wit, that neither in hot weather, nor
yet in great cold, nor in rainie weather, nor in mistie weather, nor in the
weather of great tempest, nor in the old Moon, nor in the new: that is to say,
four days be fore the change, neither four days after, but the three first
quarters be good, see that the Moon be in a good sign, and from S. Bartholme
we tide to Saint Peter's tide: till February let the blood on the left arm, and
in January on the right, that is to say, Ver or Summer, from the xxv. day of
July to the fifth of September let no blood, for then the caniculer days be,
after the teaching of Galien and Auicenna.

Rules concerning blood-letting to be observed.
Also be ye always well advised, and wary, that ye let no blood, nor open
no vain, except the Moon be either in Aries, Cancer, the first half of
Libra, the last half of Scorpio, or in Sagitarius, Aquarius, or Pisces,
remembering also that you ought not to do it in the day of the changing, nor in
the day next before, nor next after the same, or when the sign is in the place
where the incision should be made: neither in the heat of Summer, as from
middle July unto the middle of September, nor in the cold time of Winter, when
there is much frost and snow, except urgent necessity sorceth you thereunto.
Also if you choose out these signs following, appointed unto each complexion,
doubtless you shall do the better, so that time and occasion will suffer it,
as thus.

Open a vein in the flegmatique person, when the Moon is in Aries, saving in
the head.

In a melanchollicke man, the Moon being in the first half or fifteen
degrees of Libra, except in the hips, or when ye Moon is in Aquary, saving in
the legs.

In a choleric body, it is best to let blood what time the Moon is in
Cancer, saving in the breast, the last half of Scorpio. saving in the privy
members, or in Pisces, saving in ye feet.

The sanguine man may bleed in any of the foresaid signs, so that he do it
not what time the sign is in the member, or the season inconvenient therefore.
Beware also ye Chirurgians, that you make no notable incision, as to cut
Ruptures, take out the Stone in the bladder, deuoyde from the body any natural
Excrescentes, Wennes, or Nodes, to dipart, deplorate or rotten members, to
root out the Canker in the breast, let out the water collected in the belly
through the disease Ascites: to be short, to make an incision or
cautherization in any member, or to remove the Catricle from the eye, or to
attempt any other like thing by manual working upon the body of man, when the
sign governing the same is in the member in the which such attempts are to be
made for the remedy of any of these diseases aboue-said: or when the Lord of
the ascendent or first house, is the same sign that governs part of the body
at that tune, or when there is any oppositions, conjunctions, or quartile
aspects of Saturn and Mars, or when any Plannet is cuill aspected unto
another, or when the Moene is in the sign of Leo, or in the day of the change,
or full, except great necessity require it.

Moreover, I would wish no incission to be made about the full of the Moon,
where-after any great flux of blood may be feared to ensue, though the sign
be never so meet, but rather let it be done in the wane of the Moon.

As touching the stone ruptures, Dropsies, to be helpen by way of incission, I
have rather mentioned them in this place, because that the rude and ignorant
Chirurgian may be brought to the true practice and knewledge hereof. I doubt
not but to make many partakers of the benefit thereof, whose good intent, I
would wish either to follow in those attempts, and so to use it in utter
refuge, when other means will take no place in that case, it being a most
assured remedy for the true and due observations of letting blood, right well
allowed, and practiced at all times.

Rules for purging.
ALso it is good to take purgations when the Moene is in Cancer, Scorpio, and
Pisces to give pills especially when the Moon is in Pisces. Purge by drinks,
electuaries, boles, when the Moon is in Cancer or Scorpio, remember that you
purge not in the change, nor in any unfortunate aspect of the Plannets unto any
other, neither in the extreme heat or cold of the year.

Now, if any man would know what commodity purging or bleeding brings,
being rightly used, and done in such sort as it ought to be done, or what
diet and exercise should be used after bleeding, and order obscrued in
purging with the inconvenience and harm, which may and does daily proceed of
the negligence and unskillfulness in the contempt of the same.

For all diseases through the body, and for all kind of Agues.
TAke Purslaine, Gentill, Bursa pastoris, and stamp them all together, and do
thereto Vinegar, and bind it to the pulses, and it will greatly help you.
Also take the powder of Cloves and Pepper, of each a like quantity, and eat
fasting at one time as much as will lie upon a sixe-pence, and drink not in on
hour after.

Also let the party so grieved with the Ague, take half a pint of his own
water, and a pennyworth of Pepper bruised, and put therein: and let the parfie
so grieved, drink thereof all, an hour before that the fit does come upon
him, and let him lie down and sweat as much as he may.

Another for the Ague.
Take a pottle of thin Ale, and put thereto a handful of Parsley, as much
read Fennel, as much Centorie, as much Pimpernell, and let the Ale be half
consumed away, and then take and drink thereof.

Another for the Ague.
Take three Burre-rootes, and wash them, and strain them, seethe them with
half a pint of Ale, and so drink thereof lukewarm before the fit does
come.

Another for the same.
Take Endive, Sowthistle, Dandelion, Lettice, Sorrel, of each a like much, and
still them altogether, and give it to the party so grieved, it is very good
against the Ague.

Another experiment for the Ague.
Take four handfuls of Groundswellie, and stamp it small in a Mortar, and put
thereto three spoonesuls of Vinegar, and three spoonefuls of Bay Salt, grind
them all together, then put them in a pewter dish, and set them on a Chafindish
of coals and stir them together till the liquor is almost dry: then lay it to
the wrists as hot as the party can suffer it, every tune an hour before the
fit does come.

For the ague another medicine.
Take a handful of read Sage, and a handful of Read Nettles, and a handful
of Hearbe-grace, and two spoonefuls of Bay Salt, and a spoonefull of strong
Vinegar, and a piece of leauened bread, and let all these be well beat
together: and bind it to the pulces of your wrists before that the fit does
come, and it shall help you by the power of God: proved.

For the hot ague a remedy.
Take the juice of Sengreene and the whites of 4. Eggs; and fair flower of
Wheat, and meddle it well together, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to
the patients sides, the^ take the water of Betony, the water of Pimpernell,
Scabious water, water of Turmentill, the water of Radish, of each of these a
like much, and meddle all these together, and give the patient to drink all
hot, before that his fit does come.

Another for the same, proved.
Take a pynt of the juice of Sorrel, and put it into a pot of Milk, when it
begins to sees upon the sire, then take it off the fire, and let it stand,
and it will have a curde upon the same, like unto a posset-curde: then take the
curde off, and let the patient drink thereof a good draught at a time, as hot
as he can possible endure to drink it, and by Gods grace it will help him
within two or three times severally drinking. This Medicine has been proved.

Another for the same.
Take a handful of Smallage, a handful of Bursa pastoris, and so much white
Frankensence, as will cover two shillings at thrice, and as much Bay salt, and
bray them in a Mortar, and so lay them upon a thin cloth to the wrist, and
about the arm at night when you go to bed, an hour or two before that your
fit does come upon you.

For the burning ague.
Take a handful of Smalladge, a handful of Fetherfew, a handful of Read
sage, stamp them all together, and take three or four spoonefuls of the
parties water, and as much Vinegar, and boil them altogether on the fire a
little while, and take a quantity of the same Herbs, and wringing the liquor
out of them, lay the^ upon a cloth, and bind it hot upon your temples, and
not upon your forehead, then take the rest, and bind it to the parties
wristes as hot as he may suffer it, before that the fit comes, and within
three or four times dressing, he shall find great ease, and be helped of his
Ague.

Another for the same.
Take a pottle of Water, with half a pint of Vinegar, take also Endive,
Suckorie, Violet-leaues, fine leaued grass, and Straw-berrie leaves, of each
of them a good quantity, and sees them to a quart, and put thereto half a
pound of Sugar, and drink thereof morning and evening.

For the quartaine ague.
Take Ribwoort, Beet roots, and the leaves, to the quantity of three or four
handfuls, wash the herbs clean, then stamp them in a wooden dish, with a
wooden pestle, and strain the juice from the herbs, and drink it Milk
warm, and this takes away the humors of the stomach, and from the heart,
within five or six times using: it cures and helps the sick party so
grieved with the ague: proved.

For the Ague coming with cold.
Take five crops of Rosemary, and five cropps of Sage, and five crops of
Marigolds, nine Bay leaves, and a quart of strong Ale, seethe all these
together well, and drink it with Pepper being warm, and use it.

For fever Agues in children.
Take the powder of Crystal, and lay it in soke in Wine, and give it to the
Child to drink, and the sucking Child shall be whole.

Also take Morsus diabolie the root and the herb, and hang it about the
neck of the Child.

For all manner of aches a Seare-cloth.
Take Wax, Turpentine, Rozin, hard Pitch, Bores grease, powder of Commin,
powder of Bays, Frankensence, oil de vte de popilion, and take all these
things save the peuder, and set it over the fire, and stir it fast till it be
molten, and set it down and skim it not nor strain it not at all, stir it
fast till it be nigh cold, and then strew in thy powder with thy hand, as thou
would strew flower into a Child's papp, and when it is all in and welnie
cold, spread it with a slice upon a piece of leather, and when it is spread
upon the leather, take a new linen cloth, and lay it upon, and couch it fast,
and at your need use it.

For a cold and ache of the lims.
Take a handful of Sugar, a handful of Endive, a handful of the red flowers
of Archangell, and a quantity of Dandelion, and seethe the same in Mutton, and
cate the Mutton, and drink the Broth, and you shall find ease.

Another for the same.
Take a handful of Balm, a handful of Rosemary, a handful of Mallows, a
handful of Smallage, a handful of Walflowers, and all manner of sweet herbs
that ye can find and sees them in a tankerd of water with half a pecke of
wheaten branne: and when it is sodden, strain the herbs through a cloth as
you would do a bucke, and set it on the fire and with other water strain it:
and so bath you and sweat and you shall be whole God willing.

For aching of the joints.
Take March Mallows, and sweet milk, Linseedes, powder of Comin, the whites
of Eggs, Saffron, and white grease, and fry all these together, and lay it to
the aching of the toynts: this has been proved.

For ache in any place, an ointment.
Take and chafe a Stere till he scummer: then take that dung and fry it with
Sheep sewet, or else with Sallet oil, and it will come to a fine ointment,
and then annoint the place therewith: proved.

Also take the oil of Mace and annoint the ache with-all, and it will help
you.

For ache in the bone or joint.
Take a pricked Hearts skin, sliuer or draw him, and cut it in small pieces,
bones, flesh and all: take that and wash it clcane that no blood be therein,
then take clean water, and set it over the fire, and as it seethes scum away
the fat and save it, and let it sees till that no fat will ceme of him, and
then cast away the flesh and put it in a box, and annoint the grease where the
ache is, and it shall be whole: and do this three or four times.

A medicine for all aches.
Take half a pint of Wool oil, a quarter of a pint of Neates-foote oil,
and half a pound of Barrowes grease, first set the Barrowes grease upon the
fire, and skum it clean, put in your Neates-foot oil, and beat them all
three together being on the fire, then scum it clean, and put in your Wool
oil, and beat them all together, then boil them together, and take them off
the fire, and use it at your need.

A medicine for all aches in the bones.
Take the gall of an Ore and set it on the fire, and sees it, and scumme it
till it be very clean, and put it into a glass, and stop it close, then
take Neates-foote oil, and gather it very fine, and put it into a glass also,
and stop it close: then take Aqua vitae in an other glass, and stop it close:
then take of the oil and waters aforesaid, of each even portioned, and two
times so much portion of the Aqua vitae, and put them together in one vessel,
so warm it and annoint your grief, and it shall help you God willing.

Another medicine for the ache.
Take Swans grease, Goose grease, Heus, or Capons grease, of each of these a
quantity, but the more of Swanns grease then of all the rest, and when they are
mingled together, then take a pint of Malmesie, and a handful of Lauender
spike, Rosemary as much, and let your Malmesie seethe till it be almost wasted,
and then put all together with a little Bores grease, and so boil them, and
use them for your ache, and it shall ease you.

For him that is fallen broken.
Take a Trusse and trusse the party so straight as he can, and it will very
much help him.

Also take the juice of Madder, the juice of read Nettles, the juice of Hemp,
the juice of Bugle, the juice of Camphire, the juice of Cawle, of each of these
two Sawcerfuls, of Wine four Sawcerfuls, of Honey three Sawcerfuls, boil them
all together, and skimme them well, and then take it down, and dunke thereof
daily, first, and last, six spoonefuls at once, the space of fourteen days.

A plaster for a man that is broken.
Take of Bugle, of Cawle, of each a like much, stamp them small with a little
of the hair of a Hares skin, then take an ounce of Wax, and melt it with a
spoonful of butter, and put to your Bugle, and Cawle, and the hair: and
stamp it with a little Bole armoniack, and fry them all together, and stir it,
and make thereof a plaster, and lay it on a piece of leather, and lay it
straight upon the place of your sore, and so serve it three or four days, and
so given the space of twelve days.

For a man or a child that is welnie broken, and to heal them.
First make six pellets in this manner, take the root of Polipodij, and the
root of Betony, the crop and root of Daisies, of every one an ounce, and make
powder thereof, then take Bole armoniacke an ounce and a half, of Honey
clarified an ounce, of these make a plaster, and if it be too thin put more
powder thereto, and if it be too thick put thereto more Honey, and take and
roll it and make pellets thereof as many as ye may make thereof: then take
more of the root of Polipodij, and the root of Betony, and the crops and
roots of Daisies, of each two ounces, and punne them as you do Greene-sawce,
and put that juice into a quart or more of Ale that is stale, and boil it to a
pint, and strain it through a cloth, then boil it again with Sugar three
penny-woorth, and when the Sugar is molt then put it in a glass, and every day
eat a pellet thereof morning and evening last, and drink every time the
quantity of three spoonrfull of your drink in the glass, then if your drink
be done, you must make more: but you must understand that the sick man must
lie upright six days, and that he be bound wisely and fair, and that he
eat laxatiue meats for strayning of the humors, and it shall heal him
mightily: and surely proved.

If a man child be new broken, this will cure him.
Take the root of Camphiere, and the leaf of Osmond, and the young root of
Elm leaves, Auence, and leaves of Madder, and the leaves of Castire, of each
of all these a like much, these must be sodde altogether in new Ale, with a
good quantity of clarified Honny, and skimme it, and put it into a pot, and
every day drink thereof fasting, and also at evening: and bind it up very
straight.

For broken bones, in what place soever they be.
Take a new tyle, and maile him in the fire, and make it all to powder, then
tie it in the fire again till it be read, let it keele, and take that powder,
the juice of Daisies, and the juice of Camphire by even portions: and melt al
together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the bone that is broken,
and every day renew it thereto. Item take Daifie and Camphier, and Egrimonie,
and temper them with Vinegar, and lay the^ thereto, and it shall help them so
grieved.

For the bone ache and to take it away.
Take Sperewort, Olives, Crofoote, herb Christopher, Walwoort, Henbane,
Hony-suckle-flowers, Culrage, Rosemarie, Mallows, read Woort-leaues, red
Onions, and Ribwoort, still all them by themselves, and after meddle
altogether, save only the Sperewoort, which must be meddled with half a part
of the other Waters, meddle them before the heat of the fire with your hand,
and annoint the place therewith oftentimes.

To knit a broken bone.
Take Auence, Camphire, Egrimonie, and temper them with Vinegar, and lay it to
the bone* Also take Daisies, the crops of Hemp and read Colewoorts, and read
Nettles, and Bramble-leaues, Sothern-wood, Tansie, Pimpernell, Betonie,
Buglosse, Madder, wash them and beat them small, and drink the juice thereof
both morning and evening.

For all manner of bones that aketh.
Take a pint of White Wind, and the gall of an Ore, boil them well, and
skimme them clear, then take crummes of white Bread, and put them thereto, and
make thereof a plaster, and lay the same to the grief four or five times:
and it shall help you.

For broken bones.
Take Crey-land that is burnt, and grind the same to powder, and put thereto
the juice of Daisies, and the juice of Camphier, and strew on the powder till
it be thick, and lay it to the place plaister-wise, and the broken bone shall
knit again very shortly, and become whole.

To make an ointment for burning of Gunpowder, or for scalding with water.
Take a quarte of Bores grease, and two handfulls of Groundswell, and two or
three heads of Housleeke, and stamp the herbs together, and then put to it
of new sheep dunge two handfuls, and as much of Goose dunge, and stamp
altogether, and fry them, and being hot, strain them through a cloth into an
earthen pot, and with the same liquor anoint the sore that is burnt with
Gunpowder.

To take away a heat or burning with Gunpowder.
Take a good quantity of House-leeke, stamp it, and wring out the juice: then
take the white of six Eggs, and beat them in a dish till they be thin, and
then take off the scum and put the rest together, and wash ye sores with a
linen cloth, and after, lay a wet cloth on the sore.

A remedy for burning or scalding, or any hurt with an hand-gunne.
Take the dunge of Geese of one nights making, and fresh Butter unsalted, or
else clarified Sheep suet, and fry the same in a frying pan a good while,
until your suet be almost consumed, then put them in a course liunen cloth,
and strain them into a small vessel, then take a feather, and dip it in the
liquor, and annoint the place where the patient is so burned or scalded, and
when you have so done, wette a fine linen cloth in the said liquour, and
cover the sore withal, and use to do this twice or thrice a day.

For burning or scalding.
Take half a pound of Sheep suet, and as much of the erindels of Sheep
dunge, and a quarter of a pound of the inner rindes of Elder-trees, and fry
them altogether, and draw it through a cloth into a pewter dish, and it will
be fast, chafe it against the sore.

For burning, a medicine proved.
Take the white of Hens dunge, and of sheep dunge, of ground Iuie, of
House-leeke, sheep suet, and boil them all together, and strain them, and
so annoint the burning sore, and take a Rose-campion leaf, and lay it aloft
upon the place, and a thin cloth upon that, and it shall help it.

For burning, a remedy.
Take a quantity of Bores grease, and put the same into a frying pan, and
wring out the grease reserving the suet, then take not fully half so much
Rape-oyle, and put it thereto, with two or three spoonefuls of clear Vinegar
and Water, laboring them all very well together: and so reserve it to your
use, but stop it very close till such time as you need, and this shall help
you.

For burning with sire.
Take black Varnish, and all to annoint the place with a feather, and it will
both stay the heat and heal it as fair as ever it was, this you may use till
you be whole.

For burning or scalding.
Take a good handful of auence, and as much of Sheep dunge, and frye them
well together in May butter, and strain it, and use to annoint the grieved
place with the same cold twice a day, and annoint it first with gray or black
Soap, and it will help thee: this ointment must be spread upon a flaren cloth
it you can get it.

Another for burning or scalding.
Take Oyle-oliue, and beat the same with water till it were very white, and
annoint the sore place therewith.

For burning or scalding.
Take Snowe-water, and that will assuage the heat, and then take the white of
an Egg, and clippe the hairs of a Cunnies skin, and dip them in the white
of the Egg, and lay it to the burnt place, and it will heal it, and it will
cause the skin to be more fair then all the other: proved.

For all bruzes a Medicine.
Take Planten, Drpin, Camphire, Holli-hocke, and flower, and make a plaster,
and lay it to the sore.

Also take the grounds of Ale or Beer, and Wheate-branne, and Chicke-weede,
and lay it to the grief three or four times a day, upon a red cloth, not
too thin.

For a bruze.
Take Pitch, Rozen, and wrought Wax, and Bores grease, or Swines grease, of
each a like much: boil all these together in a pan till it come to a salve,
and then strike it upon a linen cloth, and lay it to the bruise, and let it
lie four or five days thereto, and you shall find great ease.

Another medicine for a bruise.
Take half a pound of Sheeps sewet clean tried, and as much unwrought War,
two ounces of Rezen, and a spoonful of Frankensence in fine powder, and well
searced, then boil them all together, and skim it clean with a feather, and
when it is boiled take it from the fire, and when it is half cold then wet or
dip a linen cloth in the same, so that every part be through wet, and lay it
abreade till it be through cold, and role it up, and it may be kept all the
year, and use it as need shall require, for this is a precious Seare-cloth
for all manner of ache or bruses: Proved.

Another for the same.
Take Mallows, Smallage, bruise Wort, Planten, the more of Smallage, and temper
it with Sheeps sewet, and make this salve in May, and you may keep it all the
year after, and use it as your need does require.

For all manner of botches.
Against botches, mingle this herb Timbalaria with Sheeps dung, and lay it
thereto plaster wise, and it shall ripen the botch quickly.

Another for the same.
Also to ripe botches, confect five or six dramms of Electrium with Barley
meal, and the white of an Egg, and lay it to the botch, and it will ripen the
same.

For to break the botch.
Take Bramble leaves, Elder leaves, and Musterd seed, and stamp them all
together, and then take of it and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the
sore, and it will draw out all the venom.

Another for the same.
Take one spoonful of Honey, the juice of Spurge two spoonfuls and a half, of
Wheaten flower a good quantity, and one spoonful of Turpentine, temper all
these together, and lay it to the botch, and it helps.

For biting of a Serpent.
Against biting of a Serpent or venomous Beast, take two drams of the powder of
Egrimony, with two measures of Wine that is called Ciates, and it will cast out
the venom.

Another for the same.
Take Centory and stamp it with his own water, and give the sick to drink,
it is as good for Beast as men, for the biting of an Adder. Also bear Veruaine
about thee, and the Serpent as some report shall have no power to hurt thee.

Another for the biting of a Serpent.
Take and seethe two or three handful of Veruaine, and wash the place
therewith, and stamp the leaves, and lay thereto, and it will abate the swelling
thereof, and bray this hear be Veruaine with Honey, and lay it often thereto, and
it will resounder and heal it fair again.

Also the juice of Cinkfoyle being drunk, puts out all venom, so does the
juice of Plantaine.

For the biting of a mad dog.
Take of the seed of Box, and stamp it, and temper it with water, and give
it to the party so grieved, and it helps them God willing.

Also take Sauery and temper it with bread, and lay it thereunto, and it has
the same virtue.

Also stamp long Plantaine, and lay it to the grieved place, and will cure the
sore: Proved.

Another for the same.
Take Walnuts, and stamp them with salt, and an Onion, they be good for the
biting of a mad dogs being laid thereto.

Also Betony that is green being laid thereto, helps the biting of a mad
dog, in very short space.

For biting of venomous Beasts.
Take Garlic and bray it, and lay it to the place so bitten, and it will in
short time cure the same.

Also if Garlic be eaten, it puts forth the venom in the body, and
cleanses the same.

Also take the powder of Aristialogia ro^unda, with the juice of Mints.

Also if the root of Brusewoort be bruised and laid thereto, it heals the
biting of venomous Beasts.

For a man or woman that is in a consumption.
Take a brass pot, and fill it with water, and set it on the fire, and put a
great carthen pot within that pot, and then put in these parcels following.

Take a Cock and pull him alive, then slay off his skin, then beat him in
pieces: take Dates a pound, and slit out the stones, and lay a layer over them
in the bottoms of the pot, and then lay a piece of the Cock, and upon that
some more of the Dates, then take Succory, Endive, and Parsley roots, and so
every layer one upon an other, and put in fine gold, and some pearl, and cover
the pot as close as may be with corse dowe, and so let him distill a good
while, and so reserve it to your use, till such time as you have need thereof.

For a weak person in a consumption.
Take a quart of red Rose Water, and a pottell of the strapings of the milk of
a Cow, 2. d. of fine Manchets, the yolks of thirty Eggs, half a pound of
Raisons of the sun, Cinnamon one ounce, Nutmegs one ounce, Mace half an ounce,
Cloves a quarter of on ounce, of long Pepper half an ounce, your bread must be
fine grated, and your Raisons stoned, and your Dates scraped, and all your
other spices beaten all together, then put in your Eggs and milk so stirred
together, and then last of all your Rose Water, and so distill it in a Limbeck
of glass, and so reserve it to your use, and as need requires to use it.

For to restore health in a consumption.
Take a handful of Yarrow and slampe it, and strain it into a dish, and put
thereto the yolke of an Egg, and a little Sugar fine beaten, and with this
juice being heat luke warm, temper therewith as much of Wheat flower as will
make Past, then the Past being well wrought, make thereof little cakes, as
big and as thick as an old testorne, and bake them upon a a little shard, and
being baked, let the Patient eat one of the cakes every day three times, or as
much as he or she can cate, and by the providence of God it shall make them
strong and mighty, this has been proved.

For a consumption in the raines.
Take Clary leaves and prick them, and fry them with two or three yolks of
Eggs, and put thereto Saffron dried upon a stone, and grind it small, and put
all together, and fry them with fresh butter and eat it warm next your heart,
and it will help you God willing.

For one that is in a consumption.
Take a great number of young Nettles that springs at the root, and wash
them clean, and stamp them and strain them, till you have a pint of the
juice thereof, then put them in a fair skillet, and set it over the fire, and
let it seethe till it wax somewhat read: then take it from the fire, and put
thereto a quart of Malmesey, and brew them together a good space, then take the
yolks of six new laid Eggs, and beat them together, then brew it again,
and put thereto as much sugar as will make it sweet: then let the party so
groeued, take every night and morning a reasonable draught thereof blood-warme,
and by the grace of GOD, it shall ease the party so grieved in very short
space.

To help to restore him that is in a consumption.
Take a Cock which is neither fat nor lean, and wring his neck, and hang him
up by the legs, and let him beat him self to death with his wings, and when
he is cold flea him, and take out the bowels, then cut off his neeke and
legs, and see that his body within he well dry^d with a cloth, and quarter
him, and at four stills still the quarters being first well hacked and
chopped, and the water that shall come out of the Cock being stilled, you must
give the patient in his brothes or drinks being blood-warme, and within short
time by Gods grace, it will restore him or her. But remember that the party
grieved, do neither eat nor drink in all the time, any meats or brothes
dressed with hot spices, or sharp sauces.

A notable restoritie and electuarie for a man that is wasted or consumed,
called the electuary of life, practiced by M. Baltazar.
Take two pound of Dates, and wash them clean in Ale or Beer, then cut them
and take out the stones, and the white skins, and cut them small, and bray
them very small and fine till they be as tough as wax, then take a quart of
claristed Honny, and cast the Dates therein till they be dissolved, then take
half an ounce of long Pepper, as much of Mace and Cloves, and Nutmegs beaten
in five powder, then sees the Dates and Honny over a soft fire, then cast on
the powder by little and little, and stir it very fast, and let it sees
long, till it wexe thick, then set it to ecole, and put it in close Boxes, and
eat therefore first and last: and it shall restore a man be he never so
weak or low brought: use this sometimes upon a full stomach, and you shall
not surfeit, proved by M. Baltazer Chirurgian.

An Electuarie most sovereign for all manner of diseases in the body: proved by
G. K.
Take four pound of Sugar, and boil it in a pint and a half of Malmesey, and
put thereto a pint of Rose Water, and a pint and a half of White Wind, half a
pint of Aqua vitae, and of running water a pint: boil all these together, and
when it is well sodden, take of the powder of Enula campana an ounce and a
half, of Calamus aromaticus and Licoris, of each half an ounce, pepper three
penny weight, one half penny worth of Alisander seeds in powder, six pence
weight, of conserve of Roses and Violets, of each four ounces, boil all these
to a measurable thicknes, then put thereto of folliater gold, and all to cut
it with a knife, and mingle it with the aforesaid Electuarie, and use it as
your need requires, and by Gods grace it will help you.

A restoritie for the weak and feeble.
Take a pint of running Water, and heat it over the fire, and put in it a
handful of Rose-mary, let it boil to the half and then strain it: then take
a pint of White wine, or Claret wine, and a good piece of Sugar, and powder of
Ginger, and Sinamon, a little Mace and Cloves, and put them altogether, the^
lay sops in a dish, and pour thereon the broth, and give it to the ficke and
feeble persons fasting in the morning, proved.

For a consumption, proved.
Take half an ounce of Manus Christi, one ounce of white fugar Candy, and a
penny worth of Anniseedes, and half a pint of Redde-rose water, and a pint of
Muscadine, four new laid Eggs, a quarter of Nutmegges, half a quarter of
Cap Dates, and stone your Dates, and wash them before that you do put them in,
and boil them altogether, and so use them, for this has been proved.

A Ielly proved for a consumption.
Take a well fleshed Capon and scald him, and draw him, and put into his belly
a handful of Barley, and as much Reysons, Currons and Dates, and put him in an
earthen pot with a gallon of Claret wine, then put therein some Sinamon and
Ginger: let it sees till the flesh be fallen from the bones, then beat him in
a Mortar, and put him into an Ipocras bag, and let the Ielly run into a fair
Vessel, and give the patient of that ielly evening and morning: and within the
spending of three Capons, by the grace of God, the patient shall recover much
his health: and to comfort his stomach, give him Rorax aromaticum, made in
losings at the Apoticaries.

A present remedy for the Sciatica.
Take a handful of Violet leaves, and wash them in good Ale, then take an
other pint of good Ale, and set it on the fire in a skillet, and then beat the
Violet leaves very small, and so boil them in the Ale, and then when it is
half boiled, take out the leaves, and strain the juice into the aforesaid
Ale again, and boil it very well until that it be thick, and then take a
piece of sheep leather, as broad as the place which is grieved, and prick it
full of heles, and spread the same on the rough side of the leather, and lay it
to the place xxiiij. hours, and then change it, and lay to it new, and so use
it three days, and you shall be well: the oftener the better.

To make a water for the Sciatica.
Take a piece of Porke of a male Hog which is lean, and perboyle it in water
until the blood be clean out, the^ boil it in strong Ale a good while, and
after that take it and distill it with a soft fire, and then keep the water,
and wash the places so grieved two or three times against the fire.

For a Sciatica another medicine.
Take an Ox gall, and red Allam, Rosemarie-tops, bay Salt, Aqua vitae, and
Vinegar, bray them well together, and set them on the fire, and always stir
it, but let it not sees, and so use it as need requires.

Another for the same.
Take Auence, Comin, and as much white salt, a handful of Red nettles, and sees
them in piss, and when they be well boiled, put thereto Aqua vitae, and
annoint well the sore therewith three or four times.

A medicine for the Sciatica.
Take Time, Lauender Cotton, the runnings or out-laces of Straw-berries, of
each a like quantity, a nest or two of young Swallows alive, with the
feathers and the gutts, and stamp them very small, and so fry them in
May-butter that is sweet and new, boil them on the fire, then strain it
through a cloth, and put it into a pot, and so use it at your pleasure.

For the Crampe.
The Crampe comes commonly of contractions, of nerves, or else it comes of
too much fulness of the body, or too much leanness: and note well that in the
Palsy the members be more longer then they should be by relaxation, and in the
cramp the members are shorter then they should be by shrinking of the nerves,
but the Crampe that comes of wasting, is seldom cured, if the pain be
great, and withal, cease it with oil of roses, or of Camemile hot, and of
yolks of Eggs and Saffron together, and wet Bread in sweet hot Milk, for
this cease the aching of the Nerves. Also make a garter of an Hares skin, but
the liver is said to be full good for the Crampe, proved.

For the Crampe, a remedy.
Take oil of Camemile, and Fenegreeke, and annoint the place where the Crampe
is, and it helps.

Another for the same.
Sees these herbs, Betony, Worme-wood, Veruaine, and Time, these are
exceeding good for to wash the party so troubled with the Crampe, if he make it
in a bath.

Another for the same.
If you say these words three times when the Cramp comes upon you, Bero,
baro, battora, it may hap to help you.

To make one to have a good color.
Take and drink the juice of Isope fasting, warm it, and it will make you to
have a good color, it is good for the sight, it destroys worms, it is also
good for the Romake, the liver; and the lunges.

For the Canker a remedy.
Take lentils of the Water, which be called Frogs feet, or Emets meat: it is
of great virtue if it be stamped, and the juice meddled with Porkes grease, and
lay it plaister-wise on the Canker, it sleieth and heals mightily.

Another remedy for the Canker.
Take as much Allam as a Nut, half a glass full of Honey, and a pint of Red
wine, and sees them together till it come to the third part, then strain it
through a cloth, and wash the sores therewith.

Another for the same.
Take a handful of unset Leekes, with the roots, and a small quantity of
Yarrow, ten or twenty branches thereof, and boil them in white wind until
they be all very soft, and then strain them and clarify them: and let the
patient drink of it morning and evening, blood warm.

For to kill the Canker in a man's body.
Take the root of Dragons, and break it in small pieces, and dry it, and make
it in powder, and take nine penny weight of the powder and put it in Wine, and
sees it well, and then let the sick drink thereof warm a good draught
fasting in the morning for three days together.

Another for the same.
Take two handfulls of Sage, and as much Wood-binde leaves, with the roots of
a wild Vine, this being stamped and strained, take a little Honny with a
piece of Alam being warmed, and so wash the sore place where the Canker is.

For the Canker another remedy.
Take Crystal, and make it in fine powder, and the powder of Harts-horne
burnt, with as much of the rind of a Poungranet, and the juice of Nightshade,
and give all these to the party, either man, woman, or child.

For the Chollick and the stone.
Take a handful of Sapifrags, a handful of Pellitorie of the Wall, a handful
of unset Isope, a handful of unset Time, and sees all these herbs well
together with a quarte of good Malmesey to a pint, and the powder of whole
Egge-shels, and as much of the powder of Hasell-nut shells: when you have put
the liquor from the herbs, then put in the powder to the same, and let the
patient drink thereof warm in the morning fasting, and it will help him.

For the colic a remedy.
Take white Time, Parsley, bruise them, and strain them with stale Ale, and set
it to the fire, and make it warm, and put thereto a good quantity of Grains,
and so drink it. Also take Broom seed that is green: and give it to the
party to drink being dried and made in powder, and when the pain is upon him
use it.

A medicine for the colic.
Take a pint of Sallet oil, half a handful of white salt, and seethe them:
then dippe in two or three handfuls of black Sheeps wool, and bind the same
from the navel to the bottom of your belly as warm as you can suffer it.

For the collica passio.
Take the root of Quintfoyle and long Pepper, and grind them small in powder,
and drink it in good Ale. Also take Time and Saffron, stamp them together,
and put thereto a little good Ale, and strain it through a cloth, and then
give it to the Patient to drink, and it shall ease him forthwith. Also make a
plaster of the herb Philopendula being sodden with the aforesaid herbs.

For the collica passio.
Take the crumbs of clean wheaten bread, and white Vinegar, and the powder of
Comin, and boil all them together, and make a plaster thereof: and as hot as
the sick may suffer it lay it near to the belly, and he shall soon be eased
of his pain. Also take Turmentile and Treakle de bays, and eat it, and
drink of the water of Elderne flowers stilled.

Another for the same.
Take unset Leekes and cut away the faces and all, then take the white of the
Leeke and bray it small with May butter, and fry it, and lay it very hot to ye
navel being bound with a cloth.

For the colic and the stone.
Take the green pith of an Elder stalk that is between the bark and the
stalk, and stamp it small, and drink it with good stale Ale, and it shall
break wind.

For a man that is costife.
Take Mallows, Mercury, and seethe them with Pork, and make thereof pottage,
and let the party eat thereof, and drink Whay, and it shall make him sollible.
Also take the juice of Walwoort and mingle it with honey, and drink it.

For the dropsy, proved.
Take two pound of sage Ryall, and two pound of water Carsen, and two pound of
Isope, take these herbs, and bray them in a mortar, and wring out the juice
thereof, and then take Wheat flower, and blend it with the juice, and make a
loaf thereof, and bake it in an Oven, and all hot break him into two or three
gallons of good stale Ale, and let there be no dregs therein, and so let it
stand all night, and stop it close, and let the sick drink thereof at all
times, and he shall be whole. Also take Borage, and Langdebeefe, and Parsley,
and Scabi^us, and of water Cresses as much as of the other herbs, a handful
of Smerewoort, and use this pottage with that drink, and he shall be whole.

Another for the dropsy proved.
Take four penny weight of Scamony, and two penny weight of Rubarb, and six
penny weight of Scene, and a penny weight of Setwell, and a penny weight of
Spignard, and a penny weight of the powder of Camomell, and an ounce of Sugar,
and bray all these spices in a mortar of brass, and mingle therewith the Sugar,
and then let the sick use this medicine three days fasting, a good spoonful
at once, and it will make him for to have a good stomach, and do away all
evils.

For the Dropsy if it be curable or no.
Take Barley meal and the juice of Spinach and of Marigolds and make thereof a
plaster, and lay it three times, unto a man's liver, and if the plaster be dry
soon, he is curable, and if it dry not, he is incurable.

For the Dropsy, another, proved.
Take a handful of the tender crops of Broom, and stamp them and strain
them in a quart of stale Ale, and boil it till it be half wasted: then put
thereto some Sinamon, and Ginger, and set the patient upright in a chair, so
that his feet touch not the ground by two foot and a half, then put under
his feet a pan of coals, and lay overthwart the pan a pair of tongues, or
two, and lay thereon geene Broom, and let him set the soles of his feet
thereon, and give him of the drink blood warm, and so let him sweat well when
he goes to bed, and by Gods grace it will help him.

For a Dormitorie.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds blended, and a half pound of Hempseede,
three times washed in clean water, and six Dates, and stamp them altogether,
and put thereto good stale Ale, and take an ounce and a half of Poppy seed
bruised, and let it lie in Ale three or four hours, and then sees them
together and strain them, and give the sick to cate thereof warm: and it
shall quickly make him sleep by Gods grace.

To draw a Bile from one place to another.
Take Oculus Christi, and Veruaine, and make a plaster of them, and let the
same be laid from the Byle, two singers broad: and when it has line a good
while, renew it, and so remove it still from place to place, until it be
laid in the place where you would have it break.

To draw out arrows out of a man's body.
Take Polipodion and grind it with fresh grease that is old, and bind the
same upon the place, and it will soon draw^ it out, be it arrow, or thorn, or
any other evil thing.

To draw out an arrow head.
For to draw an arrow head out of a man's flesh, take red Spear root, temper
the same and sees it with Honny, and then lay it on a cloth, and lay it to the
wound, and it shall draw it out by the grace of God quickly.

For a Dart in a man's body.
Take a Worm that is called Pi^cher, that is as great as a Bean, and is
clean blew or sender, and it has many small feet, and is white under the
belly, and when a man touches it, it will be as round as a button: take this
Worm, and rub it well against the Dart, till it be all broken, and do this
every day three or four times, and at every time take three or four Worms.

For all manner of falling evils.
Take the blood of his little finger that is ficke, and write these three
verses following, and hang it about his neck, Jasper fert mirram, thus melchior
balthazar aurum, hec quicum secum porta tria nomina regum, soluiter a morbo
domini pictate caduca, and it shall help the party so grieved.

For the falling evil.
Take the powder of Osmond, and the root of pilny, and and take the powder of
Mortegan, and drink all these with stale Ale, and let them say their prayers:
and as soon as the party falls down, take the gall of a Dog, and give the
sick to drink with good Ale that is stale, and by Gods grace he shall never
have the falling evil any more: proved.

For to cure the falling evil in four days.
Take Swallows, and beat them feathers guts and all, Castorry, Vinegar, and
some Iermander, distilled first in water, and some Cardus benedictus water, and
then still all, and give the sick to drink thereof. Also take the root of
Piony, and make it in powder, and put it into pappe for a child, and let him or
them lick it with a little Sugar, and they that be of age may eat the more
quantity thereof. Also the black seed of Piony is good therefore.

For the falling evil.
The filling of gold being taken in meat and drink, is good against that
evil, and if the Patients back be anointed with the oil of Iiniper in the
very chine, and so is a dram of Castoreum very good therefore.

Also take the powder of Gentiana, with the juice of wild Sage, is good for
the falling evil.

The manner and use to be observed and kept in the time of curing of a fistula.
First you must search the ulcer with your tonte, to know the depth and the
length thereof, that you may know of what fise to make your tente, and annoint
the sore only with Populion, and your tent also, and dippe the end thereof in
the powder following for two days, once a day dress it with your powder, and
other two days with nothing but Populion to remove the aker, and thus enlarge
your tent till the work be known unto you, so long as it casts a blocky,
maulte gory, stinking, or bloody water, still use your powder until it come
gross, thick, and white, and then apply mundisters or clensers, and the ulcer
cleansed, then use incarnatiues, as the green balm before written, and other
that follow: always rather shortening your tent, and making of it less till
you be assured of the victory for sigilation, sealing or sinking of the water
that hereafter shall follow termed mother and the congelour.

The powder for the Fistusta.
Take two ounces of green Copperas, and burn it in a Goldsmithes pot,
called a crusible, Mercurij subblimati an ounce, grind them small on a Marble
stone, till that it be very fine powder, and use it when need requires.

A skinning water for the Fistula.
Take strong Vinegar that is white, for that is best, a quart of Litarge of
gold finely beaten, and finely searced a pound, mingle them together, and let
them infuse in a glass three or four days, stirring them together twice in a
day: then let it settle a day, and take the cleared thereof, and put it into a
vial or glass: and so you have the mother.

The congelour in a Fistula.
Take fair water a pint, salt genne two ounces, common salt a good
spoonefull, boil all till the salts be dissolved, then put the cleerest
thereof into a glass, and this is the congelour.

The use of the congelour.
Take of the mother three parts, of the congelour 2. parts and a little more,
put them together, and it will be an ointment or a thick cream, lay it on the
place that you would have skinned, or the creeping tetter, and it shall do
wonderfully for the long ulcers that lack nothing but skinning, and it will
skin in very short time.

For the Fistula.
In what place soever it be, take the inyce of Turmentil, and drop it into the
hole, and it helps, and so does a tent dipped in the said juice, and laid to
the Fistula. Also take green Betonie with salt, and make a tent, and put to it
a plaster of the same, and it will heal it.

Another for the same.
Take of the powder of Copperis with two parts of bean meal, and confect them
with french soap, and shape a tent thereof, and put it into the hole of the
Fistula, it will cleanse it in such manner, that if there be any bones corrupt
or broken, that they may be taken out, and it will consume the evil moistures.

To stop a very great flixe.
Take half a pound of Almonds and blanch them, and stamp them very small in a
Mortar, and then take twelve yolks of new laid Eggs roasted hard, and put
them into a Mortar, and bray altogether, and then take a pint of strong red
vinegar, for that is best, and put it into the same stuff, and mingle the^
well together, and then put all into a fair pot of earth, and stamp it well,
then take thereof five or six spoonefulls at once, but first warm it, and
then drink three or four times upon a day, if need be.

Another for the same.
Take the root of a great Docke that bears the Burre, and the leaves of
Oak, and ground-Iuie, and make a bath of them, and put thy feet therein up to
the ankles, but no higher, and let thy feet stand long therein, as hot as ye
may suffer it, and then keep them warm.

A medicine for to stope the flixe or laxe.
Take three Nutmegs and roast them, take of Sinamon three ounces, three new laid
Eggs, and roast them very hard till they be blew, then take the yolke from the
white, as much of Bole armoniack as a Doves Egg, then beat the spices very
fine, that done take altogether and beat them: then put them in a quart of
strong Ale, sturring all these together, then strain them, and sees the same
till it come to a pint, then give the party so grieved, to drink thereof
first and last.

Also take Alligant and thicken it with Rice flower, as you would make pappe,
then spread it upon a piece of read leather as broad as your hand: and for a
child lay it beneath the nauel somewhat warm, and it helps.

For the flixe or laxe.
Take Redde-rose buddes, and clippe off the whites from the leaves, and dry
them, and make powder of them, and give it to the party so grieved in a
cawdell, and at three times drinking it shall ease him. And if the party be
weak, to make him a Tansie of Camphier, Planten and Archangell, a little at a
time, as much as an Egg. You may gather these herbs in Summer to serve in
Winter.

To help the bloody flixe.
Take two handful of Plantaine leaves, and sees them in fair water, and let
it sees till it be sodden to the one half, then take the same water, and
strain it through a cloth with out any wringing thereof, then with the same
water make rice pottage, and let the patient eat thereof a good mess, and it
will stop the bloody fly.

Another for the same.
Take Hen crossen, and the crops of Wood-bine, and stamp them, and temper
them with warm Redde-wine, and give the sick thereof to drink, and let him
eat for three days together each day fine Leekes with bread that is hot, and
drink no drink but Red-wine warm, and he shall be whole, and let the sick
have a stool with a siedge, and make there-vnder a little Char-cole fire, and
let it be closed round about with a cloth that no air may enter: proved.

For to fret away dead flesh.
Take Hens bones and burn them, and the shelles of ten Eggs, stamp them
and make powder of them, and lay it to the dead flesh, and it will fret it away.

Another for the same.
Take green Copperis and burn it, and as much burnt Allam, and as much
Verdigreace, and grind them altogether, and use thereof as you need, and it
helps: proved.

To abate proud flesh.
Take Honny and clarify it, and skimme it with a seather, and take the white
of, and take a quantity of Verdigreace till it be green, and lay thereto.

To raise up flesh.
Take red nettles and bray them small, and put thereto three or four corns of
Salt, and mix it with Butter, and lay it to the sore, and it will make the
flesh to grow, and to be more fairer then ever it was before.

To take the fire out of any sore.
Take a quantity of Rose Water, Sallet-oyle, an Ore gall, Housleeke, the juice
of each a like quantity, and so beat the^ altogether till that they be all
one, and so anoint the place, and it will take away the fire.

For the Gout, a most precious medicine.
Take a good handful of Rewe, as much of Plantaine, and as much of Read Sage,
and stamp them as small as you can, then take half a pound of black Soap, and
a pennyworth of the Treacle of Jane, and meddle all these together: then put
them in a close vessel, and when the pain begins to come, make thereof a
plaster, and lay it thereto, and he or she shall be eased within an hour:
proved.

For the red Gout.
This experiment is proved best. Take Quicksiluer, Brimstone three parts, and
two of Quicksiluer quenched with fresh grease, and the juice of Earth-bind, and
a little of swines gall, and meddle altogether: and put it into boxes, and when
need requires, annoint the place, and you shall be whole.

For the Gout that is bolning.
Take Bean leaves sodden in water, then meddle it with Swines grease, and lay
it to the sore place, and it does away all the boluing.

Also for the same you may take a Fox and make oil thereof, and therewith
annoint the patient.

For the Gout that is in the bones.
Take three tostes of Rie-bread, and tossed them well, and then lay on a dishfull
of Garlic, and stamp them, and lay it on the Gout as hot as may be
suffered. Also Walwort sodden in Wine till it be well thicked, and the sore
anointed with the same, is very good. Also Nettles stamped and laid upon the
Gout, helps it.

An ointment for the Gout.
Take an old fat Cat and flea her, and draw forth her guts, and bray the
Cat, and put her altogether in a fat Ganders belly, and put thereto half a
pound of Pepper, Mustardseede, and Parsley seed, of each four ounces,
Worme-wood and Garlic a good quantity, Bole armoniack six penny weight, then
roast it, and the grease that droppeth from the same keep it, and annoint the
Patient withal, and by the grace of God the ache will go away, for being
thoroughly anointed therewith, it presently helps him.

For the Gout a remedy.
Take a handful of Rue, as much Canell, as much Turpentine, of red Sage, of
each of these a like much, stamp them all as small as you can, then take half
a pound of black Soap, and mingle all these together, and put them in a close
vessel, and when the pain begins for to come, make a plaster thereof, and
lay it thereto, and the party so grieved shall have ease within one hour.

For the Gout in the toes.
Take the root of Fragon, Matselon, and the root of Launceroy, stamp them
and drink them with White Wind every day a pottle fasting.

For the Greene-sicknes.
Take Betonie, Hart's-tongue, Liuerwoort, of each a good handful, a Fennel
root, wash them and bruise them, and put them in a skillet with a quart of
Ale, two spoonefuls of Alisander seeds, and four good sticks of Licoris, let
all be bruised, and boil all in the Ale till it be half wasted, then strain
it, and make it sweet with Sugar, and put into it a little Maces and Nutmegs,
and use to drink thereof warm, morning and evening, three or four
spoonefuls, and like-wise when your fit does come upon you.

Another for the same.
Take the keys of an Ashen tree being dried and made into powder, and take of
Red-Fennel, Red-sage, and Marierum, and Betony, and sees them in running water
from a pottle to a quart, then strain them, and drink thereof a good draught
with Sugar, morning and evening luke warm.

For gnawing and aching in joints.
Take herb Bennet, Sheep suet, and Oil Olive, fry them together, then
take it off the fire, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the sore, and
it will ease you.

For a hardness in the body.
Against the hardness of the body, take a good quantity of Lilly roots, with
an herb called Brancha vrsina, and the root of Mallows, and Holly-hock, and
temper them altogether in Wine, and Oil twelve days, and then strain it, and
in stratning put thereto wax and oil, and make an ointment thereof, and
therewith annoint the hard-bound body.

Against heat in the body.
Take and eat ripe Berries, and drink the juice thereof, it is very good for
them that have overmuch heat, for it cools them: and an electuary made of
these Berries, is very good for them that is grieved with overmuch heat in
the body.

Also take the distilled water of Ox dunge, it is very good and profitable for
the same.

A medicine for the Black Iaundies.
Take Gentiana, long Pepper, Calomus aromaticus, Anence, Reysons, Currons,
white Soap of Spain, of each of these one ounce, and two spoonefuls of
Musterd-seed, and boyls all them in a quart of Wine till the third part be
wasted.

Another for the same.
Take Angel towchis, and grind them small, but first wash them as clean as
ye may, then put thereto a quantity of Neates-foote oil, and a quantity of
Vinegar, drink this medicine cold three times, and it will cause you to cast
out all the sickness in your body presently.

Another for the same.
Take Fennel, Sage, Parsely, Gromwell, of each a like much, and make pottage
thereof with a piece of good Porke, and eat no other meat that day: proved.

For the yellow Iaundies and green sickness.
Take of Iuorie made into small powder, half an ounce, of Turmericke three
quarters of an ounce, as much of Saffron as the weight of a groate, compounde
all these well together, and use to drink of this potion first in the morning,
and last in the evening, with a draught of good stale Ale: but if you take it
for the black Iaundies, you must first purge melancholy, and for she green
Iaundies without purging: and this medicine will help both, as has been
proved.

For the yellow Iaundies.
Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the blads goes out, to the
bigness of a Chestnut, and then take Treacle of Jane, as much as will fill the
hole, then take half an ounce of English-Hony being beaten, and so compound
the Treacle and Saffron together, and put it into the Onion, and set them
against the fire, and roast it well that it do not burn, and when it is
roasted, strain it through a cloth, and give the juice thereof to the sick
three days together, and it shall help them.

Another for the same.
Take a red Docke root and scrape it, and lay it in a quart of strong Ale
all night.

Another for the same.
If the patient drink the Soap of Spain, and the shauings of Iuory, it is
very good for the yellow Iaundies, being either old, or young.

To expel the venim of the Iaundies.
Take of running water a pint, of Endive and Succory, of each half a handful,
let them boil till the half be wasted, then strain it: and put thereto of
Rubarbe one dram and a half, and of Spignard a halfe-penny weight fine
beaten, of Sugar three ounces, and let it boil a little and then take it off,
and let it stand close covered all night, and the next day early strains it,
and give the sick to driuke thereof fasting, and abstain from meat two
hours after.

For the Iaundies in young children.
Take of Rubarbe, of Turmericke the weight of ten pence, of white sugar Candy
as much, of Spignard the weight of three pence, make all these in fine powder,
and mix it together, and three days together take thereof in white Wine, or
Rennish Wine.

Another for the same.
Take Turmerick, Saffron a penny weight, the shauing of Iuory four pence
weight, the shauing of Harts-horne as much, a spoonefull of the juice of
Capilly veneris, made into powder, and drink it in Wine, and put thereto a
pretty quantity of Sugar, and it helps the same.

For an Impostume.
An Impostume is a swelling or aching out of kind, and it is either of a corrupt
humor that must be broken out, or else of superfluity of a humor that should
nourish that limme.

First there must be given a Purgation, after that repercussions a maturatiue.

The remedy.
Take Holly-hock, Licoris, Lintseede, dry Figs, Lillierootes, and Iiniper
berries, sees them long in water, after do away the licoris and the Iiniper
berries, and bray well the other, then put thereto Barley meal, Lintseed,
Fenegreek, and boil al these together well, and annoint it first with fresh
Butter, and this ripeth postumes within and without, and it is good in an hard
and dry impostume though it wax as hard as a stone: repercutions to smite
inward, the matter again should not be used in children nor in old men,
neither where matter is wooddish or seruent, nor where the water is much, now
and then in the burning of sickness, in the nigreforiis as greeueth, when the
postume or botch comes of nobler lim or member then it is on, then shall he be
riped there, and not driven away from destinary dread of the better member, the
which abreeding of the postume, and of the venomous matter thereof,
repercutions must be taken in time ere that the matter be full seged, and ere it
be corrupt and rotten, and that is good commonly with the juice of cold herbs
as petty morrell, purslaine of the wood, and vmbelicus veneris, with oil of
roses, and a little aysell, a little Bole armoniack, and cold ointments, as
Popilion or vnguentum album, or the cold ointment Iusquinianus, and Poppy and
lead, and sees green Plantaine, and Vinegar, and the white of an Egg.

To break an impostume.
Take a Lilly root, and an Onion, and boil them in clean water, till they be
soft, and then stamp them and fry them with Swines grease, and lay it to the
impostume as hot as the patient may suffer it.

To ripen an impostume.
Take Worme-wood, Mallows, Mugwoort, of each a good handful, stamp them, and
mingle them with a quarter of a pound of Swines grease, and fry them: and put
to it a handful of Wheaten branne, and a little White wine, of Honey four
ounces, boil them till they be thick, and lay it hot to the sore place.

For an Itch or breaking out.
Take an ounce of Quicksilver, two ounces of Baies, and mingle them well
together until that you can see no Quicksiluer, and put it into a box, and
annoint the patience once in 24 hours, and it shall kill the itch.

Another for the same.
Take Frankensence and bray it small in a Mortar, and meddle it with Oil de
Bay, and therewith annoint thee all over, and it will destroy the itch.

For all itches.
If the itch be in the heat of the wriste, then let the party drink every
day, or other day, of the juice of Femitory, used fasting, and in the Winter
let him drink the sirrop of Femitory with warm water, for it cleanses all
scabbes and other corrupt humors that ensues, as leprosy: and cleanses the
blood in the veins.

For the itch another remedy.
Take the juice of Peniriall, the juice of Sauen, and the juice of Scabions,
the juice of Sage, the juice of Pellitorie, and Barrous grease, and black Soap,
temper all these together, and make a salve for the itch.

Also, take Femitory or Earth-gall, and sees the same in Wine, and it is very
good for the itch.

Against grievous itches, either in men or women.
Take the juice of Calidon, Tapsi Barbasti, of Honey puristed, an ounce, beat
them altogether till they be wasted, and set them on the fire, and when they
have simpered take it from the fire, and reserve it to thy use, and when thou will use thereof against itching, take thereof as much as thou will, and put
thereto of burnt powder of Vitriall, of burnt Allam, of each a like much, and
use this till that thou be well.

For the Ring worm.
Take of the gum of a Cherry tree, a good quantity, of the gum of a
Plum-tree as much, and dissolve it in Vinegar that is very good, and
oftentimes annoint the sore place therewith, and it helps.

For kernells, or Kings evil.
Take two ounces of the water of Broome-flowers stilled, and give it to the
patient in the morning fasting, and it will purge the evil humor downe-ward,
and wastes and heals the kirnels without breaking them out-wardly.

Also if you sees the water of Broome-flowers, and put it in the patients
Wine, it will do him great ease.

Also if you stamp Cuccow pintle with Bores-greace, and lay the same to the
place, it helps.

Also if you make a plaster of read Docke, and stamp old grease therewith,
it helps.

For the Kings evil.
Take the root of Briony or of Aristologia longa, or Smerewort a like much,
and beat them with Honny, and old grease, and lay it there-unto.

Also take Beans, and mingle them after they be beaten, with the gleare of an
Egg, or old Oil, and it will dissolve the kernels or kings enill.

Also if Darnell be sodden in wine with the dunge of an Ass and Linseedes, and
being drunk it helps mightily.

Take of the decoction of the barks or pills of Copporis, and Sperage, and
annoint it with this ointment.

Take a gray Serpent and cut off his head and tail, about four inches
thereof, and afterward, with the grease of that Serpent annoint the said sore,

For a Laxe.
Take Scene an ounce, Rubarbe two penny-woorth, spignard a penny weight, infuse
the same with white Wine, or water of Englasse or Borage, of each half a pint,
and warm them scalding hot, or boil them a little, and so let it stand al
night, then warm it in the morning and strain them, put in a little Ginger,
and Sugar, and so drink it all warm, till that thou be well eased thereof.

A powder laxatiue.
Take half an ounce of Scene in powder, a quanty of Spignard bruised, and an
ounce of Ginger in powder, bruise all these very well, and put this into the
soft pappe of an Apple, and so use to take a pretty quantity of this to
bedward.

A powder for a laxatiue person.
Take in Summer the white flowers of Elders, as much as ye will occupy all the
year, and dry it two or three days in the Sun, and then put the same into a
bladder, and when you will occupy it, dry it as you do Saffron, and put a
little in an Ale berry, or in a mess of pottage, and incontiuent he shall have
three or sour stools.

For the Leaper, a medicine.
Take the juice of black Berries, and temper it with firrop made of wild Sage,
it is good for them that be leaprous, and they that fear the coming of it,
should use every morning to drink half an ounce thereof.

Another medicine for the Leaper.
Take and make a bath of strong Wine that the leaves and flowers of Elder is
sodden in, for it greatly profits them that be like to fall into lepry by
reason of fleame.

Also a bath made in water that Scabbious and Moleyne is sodden in, is good for
them that have the spice of the Leaprie, called Alopice, in the which the
hayres fall.

To make a man lean.
Take and fill a pan full of Filberds flowers, and sees them a night and a
day, and put thereto Wine that they dry not, then let the Wine be strained, and
let the patient drink it five days together in the month of February.

For the lunges.
Take Southernwood, and meddle it with Licoris and Isope, sees it in Wine or
water, make it sweet with Sugar, and so drunk, is very good for all diseases
of the lungs and breast, when the sickness comes of cold, the breast shall be
anointed with vnguentum dialthea, and it eases.

Also the broth of a Creues is good for the pain in the lungs consuming, as
when a man has a swelling about the lunges, then he comes to drynes and
consuming of the natural moisture till he dies. Also the root of wild Rapes
are good to cleanse the lunges, if it be sodden with Licoris, and drunk. Also,
if Figs be sodden with Isope, it cleanses the lunges and heals the old
cough.

For the Morphew.
Take water of Elder, and drink thereof three spoonefuls in the morning, and
when you have drunk thereof walk up and down till you catch you a good
heat, and then take a pint of white Vinegar, and nine Oak apples, and cut
them and lay them three days and three nights in the same Vinegar, and after
take a fair linen cloth, and put the Apples therein and then strain them,
and with the licour thereof annoint thy body three days.

Also take the juice of Selidon, and mingle it with the powder of Brimstone,
and do it to the Morphew all cold.

Also for the Morphew white or black, take Musterd-seede and salt, and stamp
them together: then temper them with Vinegar, and annoint the Morphew therewith.

For the Morphew, white or black.
Take an ounce of fine Verdigreace, and one ounce of Brimstone, and make them
both into small powder, then take two sheep heads that are fat, and flea
them, and cleave them and take out the brain and cast it away, then wash the^
clean, and sees them til they be tender, and then take them of the fire, and
let them stand till the next day, and then gather off all the grease thereof,
and mingle the foresaid powder therewith, and then put it in a box, and let it
come near no fire after thou have done them together, but work them all
cold: and it will heal the Morphew, be it white or black, if you annoint the
sick therewith against the fire every night when he goes to bed, and in the
morning wash it away with Vinegar.

Another for the Morphew.
Take black Soap, and put it in a clean Cloth, and put it in your own urine,
and therewith anoint the Morphew. Also let the party grieved, drink morning
and evening, water of Femitory, and water of Borage, mingled together, in like
portions, and within foure-teene days it will help him clean.

Also take green Copperas, and put it in clean water, and let it stand a day,
and then cleanse the water, and then annoint the Morphew with the water.

A mechcine for the Marmole.
Take Broom flowers and dry them and beat them to powder, and temper the
powder with oil made of Mints, and a little Vinegar therewith: and annoint
the sore therewith. Take great Wall nuts as they grow, husks and all, and
bray them in a Mortar, and temper it with oil Olive, and fry it in a pan, and
put thereto a quantity of pitch in the frying thereof, and strain it through
a linen cloth, and therewith annoint the sore, and lay Plantaine leaves about
the back toward the sore, and every morning wash the sore with Madder water.

For to heal a Marmole.
Take a pint of clarified Honny, and a quart of running water, and a great
quantity of Sage, and sees them together as well as thou can, and wash the
wound with the licour, and lay a Sage leaf on the wound.

Another for the same.
Take oil Olive, and annoint the sore therewith, and lay thereon a Plantine
leaf, and every morning wash the sore with Madder water.

For to cure a Marmole.
Take fresh Seame, and the kernels of ripe Nutts, and stamp them small as may
be, and blende them together with Aqua vitae, and Honny, and make them thick as
a plaster, and lay it on a linen cloth, and put to the Marmole, and as often
as ye shall change the plaster, ye shall find it full of red worms, and
therefore keep this medicine thereto fresh and fresh, til such time as the
worms be clean out, but look that you claw not your legs to make them
bleed.

A maturatiue to ripen a botch or a bile.
Take sower dow, and white of old Swines grease, and beat them together, and
put thereto salt, and the powder of Comin, and mingle them well together, and
make a plaster thereof, this ripeth and breaks impostumes, but my Master
did put thereto powder of Fenegreeke, and the yolke of an Eg at one time, if
there be much, for failing of the heart.

How to make Neruaile for all akings.
Take two pound of wild mersh, and a pound of Ambrosen, and a pound of
Camemile, a pound of Betony, and a pound of Sage, a pound of Mints, and a pound
of Hawhew, and a pound of Southernewood, a pound of Mugwort, and a pound of
wormwood, a pound of Mallows, and a pound of Holly-hock, a pound of
Hore-hound, and a pound of red Nettles, a pound of Lorrell leaves, and a pound
of Liuerwort, then take all these herbs and stamp the^ in a mortar small,
and do thereto three or four pound of May butter, and a quart of oil Olive,
and stamp the^ together, then do them in an earthen pot, and cover it well,
and set the pot in a moist place, and let it stand nine days, and the tenth
day take it out of the pot, and put it in a pan, and set it on the fire to
sees, and stir it that it do not clean to the pan, and when it has well
boiled, take it from the fire, and strain it through a cloth, a little and a
little into a fair vessel, the^ take that licour, and put it in a clean pan,
and set it over the fire, and do thereto a quarter of a pound of sheep
tallow, melted, and as much Frankensence well broken in powder, and stir them
well together, till it be molten, and then take if from the fire, and let it
stand and cool, and make thereon a hole, and let out the water thereof: and
turn it on the other side, and do away the foulenes thereof: then take it,
and do it in the pan again: and set it over the fire till that it be
molten, and then do thereto a pint of the grease of a Gray, if you may have it,
then with a feather scum it clean, and put it in boxes, and this is the kindly
making of Neruaile, and this ointment is hot.

To make Neruaile to help all sinnewes, and to put them in their strength.
Take Ambrosen, Camemile, herb John, herb Water, herb Robert, Eglantine,
the leaves of Cross wood, Fenegreke, Laurel leaves, as much thereof as of all
the other, break them and lay them in white Wine, and let them lie so
fourteen days, then take a pottle of grease and a quarte of May butter, and
of oil Olive, and boil them together, and strain them, and let them cool:
and so use it to the shrunck sinews.

Here follows the making of diverse kinds of oils, and it shows which be
hot, which be cold, according to the opinion of Ipocras and Gallen.

Oil of Roses.
Take and fill a glass full of Rose leaves, and put thereto one pound of oil
Olive, and stop it well, and set it in the sun, stirring it every day once
for the space of xv. days, then strain it through a cloth, and put it upon
cold water, and stir it with Hasell wood, but take the bark off, and this is
moist and cold.

Oil of yolks of Eggs.
Take yolks of Eggs, and put them in a pot over the fire, and let them so
stand over the heat of the fire till you perceive they are become black, then
put them in a press, and press out the oil, and this oil is good for all
manner of burnings or scaldings what soever.

Oil of Henbane.
Take the seed of Henbane and fry it in oil, and press it through a cloth,
and afterward put the same for your use into some glass, for this oil is good
for all manner of swellings, and burnings in the joints.

Oil of Mandrakes.
Take and cut them in diverse pieces, and sees them in a double vessel of
glass, and set them in the Sun, and let it standnine days, then set them on
a small fire till they be thiek, and keep that oil, for it is good for all
festures.

Oil of Lorrell.
Take Lorrell leaves and bray them in a Mortar, and let it stand two or three
days, and then sees them, and strain the^ through a cloth, and that which
heaueth above, is the oil.

Also take Lorrell Berries when they be green, and sees them in oil, and
strain them, and it is good oil.

Also take Lorrell berries when they be ripe, and sees them with Lorrell
leaves, and thereof thou shall have the best Oil, and this oil is good for
diverse cold causes.

Another sort of oil, very necessary for diverse purposes.
Take Almonds or Nuts blaunched into a pot full of holes in the bottom, and set
that pot upon a seething pot, that the breath of the seething pot may enter
into the other pot, and wring these kirnels and receive that oil, and keep
it in a glass, and this is good for diverse purposes.

To make oil of Mustard-seede.
Take four pound of Mustard-seede, and four pound of oil, grind them
together, and let them stand so nine days, then stir it and keep it in
boxes: this oil is good for the palsy, the gout, the stitch, and also for
the Podagra.

To make oil of Fennel.
Take a quantity of Fennel between two Tile stones, or plates of iron, make
them very hot, and press out the lycour, and this oil will keep a great
while, for it is good for Tissick, dry scab, and for burning or scalding.

To make Oil of Rue.
Take rue leaves and cut them small, then put them in a pot with common oil,
the space of nine or twelve days, then sees them till they be wasted to the
third part, then strain it, and this oil is very good for to restrain from
all manner of privy causes of pestilence, which are remaining within a man,
woman, or child.

To make oil of Iuie.
Take Iuie leaves and bruise them, and put them in wine and oil in the same
manner as you do Lorrell berries, and so make this oil of Iuie berries.

Another for the same.
Take Iuie berries with the leaves, and sees them after the same manner as you
do the Lorrell berries, even so do by the Iuie berries.

To make oil of Cammemile.
Take the flowers of Cammemile and stamp them in a Mortar, and put thereto
oil Olive, and let it lie in the juice twelve days, and let it sees over the
fire, then let it boil a little, and take it off and press out the juice, and
put it into small glasses, and put thereto the flowers of Camemile being
stamped small, and let it stand 16. days, and so this oil is made.

To make oil of Roses.
Take red Rose leaves a good quantity, and stamp them in a Mortar, and put
thereto oil Olive, and let it stand in the Sun twelve days, and then put
it in a glass, and bind fast the glass about with ropes of Hay, and set it
in a pan full of water, and let it boil softly two hours, and then let it
keele, then put it in small glasses, and put thereto the leaves of red Roses
all whole, and stop it fast, and set it in the sun for sixteen days, and so
use it at your need.

To make oil of Olibanum.
Take Bawme flowers a bushel, and pick away the buds, and beat them, and put
thereto fresh butter, and a quarte of swines grease, and a pottle of oil
Olive, and put it in an earthen pot or pan of three gallons, and stop the
mouth fast with dowe, and set it in the ground, and take a tile and do it
upon the mouth, that nothing do come thereto, and let it stand forty days
under the ground, and at the forty days end see that you be not fasting, then
take a pan with a ladell and put it therein, and set it over the fire, and give
it three waumes upon the fire till it be green, then take it from the fire,
and strain it into a pewter Basin, and do it in an carthen vessel where you
will keep it. This is the true making of oil of Olibanum, and it is moist in
working: it is good for all manner of sores, but especially for the morimall
and Canker, and for Noli me tangere, or for any other sore, proved by many
Masters of Surgery.

To make the oil of Exceter.
Take two pound of Cowslip flowers in May, and put them in oil Olive, and
then put them in an Earthen pot close, until the month of June, then take
these herbs following, Lorrell, Ambrose, calamint, pellitorie of Spain,
Sage, Peritory, Scabions, Lauender, herb John, Lilly roetes, Rosemarie, of
each a handful: bray all these in a Mortar, then take the Cowslips out of the
oil, and bray them as you do the other herbs, then put them in a pan and
boil them together softly, till all the water be clean sodden away, for if
the water be in the bottom, let it sees till it be wasted, and then strain
them through a cloth with clean hands, and when your oil is kindly wrought,
then put it in pots or glasses, and stop it from the air. This oil is good
for all aches, except the Gout.

To make an oil for many greefes.
Take Mirrhe, Aloes exaticum, Spignard, Sandragon, Incense, Sarazens flesh,
Bedilium, Balm seed, gum Aromatic, Siracell, Mastick, Saffron, gum Arabek,
Storax liquida, of each of these two ounces, Labdanum, Castor, of each 2.
ounces, Musk, and Turpentine, as much, make powder of all that will be
powdered, and meddle them with Turpentine, and still them in a glass as you
do Rosewater, and keep it in a very strong glass. This oil keeps the
substance of man's lims and the sinews, and keeps dead folks from rotting,
being meddled with the oil of Roses, and annoint all thy back from the heart of
the forehead to the raynes, and it makes a lean body fat: and if the back
be anointed before the axis, it helps the Feauers, and for him that may not
speak: it is good for the rising of the Mother, for the falling evil, for to
be put in his ears, and in his nose.

Also it is good for them that be sorry without a cause, and for them that be
drunk with Wine: and it is comfortable for all diseases be they hot or cold.
proved.

To make a green ointment.
Take a pound of Swines grease, an ounce of Verdigreace, half an ounce of
Salgeme, and make thereof an ointment, and it may be kept forty Winters: and
this ointment is good for the Canker and for running holes, and for to heal
all wounds old and new it fretteth away dead flesh, and brings new: and put
of this into a wound and it shall not fester, and this ointment is good for the
rising of the yard or morimal, and there is no ointment that works so
especially as this does.

To make a green ointment.
Take one pound of Sage, of Bays half a pound, of rue half a pound, of Worm
wood as much, and choppe them very small altogether: take three pound of
sheep sewet, beat the herbs and the sewet together till they be all one,
then take three pints of Sallet oil, the herbs and the sewet mingle them
together, and let it stand two days, and then set it on the fire and stir it
together till the herbs be somewhat hard, the^ strain them, and preserve them
to their use that have need thereof.

To make a precious ointment, called Deweto.
Take the rasing of Harts-horne 2. pound, of Fenegreke 1. pound, of oil Olive
4. pound, sheep tallow 1. pound, and 2. ounces of Galbanum. 2. ounces of the
gum of Iuie, and two ounces of Perrossen, and bray them together, and do
thereto a portion of white Wine, or of water: and so let it stand 3. days, and
on the 4. day let it sees over the fire till it wax thick, then take it off
and strain it through a cloth, and put thereto a little hot water for the
thicknes, and strain it as hard as you may between your hands, and take the
third deal of that licour and put thereto two pound of oil Olive, and let
them boil well, till they be somewhat wasted, and put thereto a portion of
wax and of Turmentill, and do it to the other licour, and let them sees well
till it wax thick, then do it off the fire, and let it keele, and then put it
in boxes. This ointment is good for great greeuaunce of the stone, and for the
aching of the ribs, and all hard greeuaunce: it makes them nesh, but the
party must be anointed against the fire, for this has been proved.

To make a good ointment.
Take of Smallage and Mallows, and put thereto two pound of Bores grease, one
pound of May butter, and oil of Neates feet a good quantity: stamp them well
together, then fry them, and strain them into an earthen vessel.

A medicine for the palsy.
Take oil Olive and the slowers of Cowslips, out them together, and still them
in a glass in the sun, and then take two spoonefuls of the oil that shall
come of it with a spoonefull of Aqua vitae, and warm it on the fire in a
saucer, and so annoint the place which is benumd or grieved, and the patient
shall find very great remedy: proved.

A medicine for the Palsy.
Take a handful of Marigolds, beat them and wring out the juice thereof with a
draught of Ale, and put to the same a spoonefull of as good Musterd that may be
gotten, warm this drink three times, and so give it to the party so grieved.

Another medicine for the palsy.
Take Cowslips, wild Sage, Lauender, and stamp them small, and work them with
sweet Ale, and make them up in balls, and make holes in them, and fill them
full of sweet oil, and let them stand infuse nine days, then take them and
temper them again with sweet oil, and then fry them, and strain them, and so
annoint the party so grieved with the palsy.

An electuary for the palsy.
Take Mints, Sinamon, Comin, Rose leaves dried, Mastick, Fenigreeke, Valerian,
Ameos dorinici, Zedoarye, Cloves, Saunders, and Lignum aloes, of every one a
dram, Musk half a dram, make an electuary with clarified honey, and let either
man or child that has the palsy, take half as much as a nut. Also a bath
made with these herbs, Sauery, Marierum, Time, Sage, Nep, Smallage, and Mints,
are very wholesome for the same.

A plaster for a man that is benumed in any member with cold or palsy.
Take Sauine, Ru^, Sage, Mustersteede, and temper it with white Wine, and make
it as thick as it were a plaster, and so let it stand in a vessel a day and a
night, and then lay it on a cloth thick, and lay it to the member benumed.

For the pricking of a thorn or needle in a joint, and the hole stopped.
Take fine bolted flower of Wheat, and temper it with white Wine, and boil it
together till it be thick with white Wine, and lay it to the sore as hot as
you may suffer it, and it shall open the hole and draw out the venim and cease
the aching, and heal it again, this medicine is good to heal a bile or any
Whitlow or Vncome.

For the pricking of a thorn.
Take Mather roots and grind them small, and boil it with oil Olive, and lay
it thereunto, or else with the aforesaid oil anoint the sore place, and it will
do thee good.

A preparatiue.
Take of Endive, Succory, Harts-tung, Borage, of each a handful, of Persly
roots, Fennel roots, Fumitory, and the tops of young Hops, of each a quarter
of a handful, of Time, Betony, Germaunder, of each four crops, great Raizons
a handful, of Licoris a little bruised, half an ounce of Fenell seed, sees all
these in a pot of fair water to the half, then put there to six spoonefuls of
vinegar, and after one boiling strain them without pressing, then take the
clearest thereof, and if you will make a sirrop thereof, put to a pint of the
broth, a pound of Sugar, and in the boiling thereof put thereto a little Cinnamon
bruised, the weight of eight pence, let him drink of this four good spoonfuls,
with six spoonfuls of Borage water warmed fasting in his bed, and sweat after
it.

To make an excellent Millilot plaster.
Take of green Millilot bruised ten handfuls, boil it in a pottell of white
Wine to the wasting of the half, and strain it, then put thereto of Rozen a
pound, Wax as much, Sheep tallow four ounces Turpentine three ounces, Mastick
one ounce, boil all save the Mastick, until the wasting of the juice more then
half, then bruise other six handfuls of Millilot, and put to it while it is a
boiling, and stir it well while it has a play or two, then take it from the
fire, and strain it while it is hete through a course canuas bag, and with
wringing and iumping between two round staves, till by little and little, the
stuff, gums, and juice be come all out as much as you can get, and when you
may handle it, put thereto your ounces of Mastick finely powdered, and make it
in rowles, mingle your Mastick in the handling thereof.

To make the powder of life.
Take Spinach, Columbine, Camomell, the seed of Femitory and Marigold, of every
of these iuyces and seeds one handful, and dry them out of the Sun, and
make thereof powder, and give it to drink either hot or cold: for this has
been proved a medicine full true.

The Philosophers stone so called for medicine to cure all diseases both within
and without, Fistules, Canker, Pox, Falling sickness, Woolfes, S. Antonies
fire, and all incurable diseases, proved.
Take Celondine leaves fast by the roots in May or June, and seethe them in
running water, until such time as they do come to pap, and as pap take them
forth, and grind them on a stone very fine as Greene-sauce, and let it be no
dryer, then put them in a glass with a Limbeck head and a receauer, but it
must be stilled in Balneo likewise, receive the first water by it self, and
when it begins to drop somewhat slowly or to change, then take that receauer
away, and put another to it, and then take that as long as it will still, then
take that glass away, and keep it closely and sure for that is the fiery
element, and the first is the water, then let your glass cool, and then set
it in ashes in a dry Furnace, and draw the last water by it self, for that is
the air, and that that remains in the bottom is the earth, which earth you
must take out and grind it on a stone fine, and let it stand upon the stone for
to dissolve into water, for so it will in time so that the stone stand in a
moist place, but you must remember to close your stone round about, that the
water pass not by when it is in moistnes, set your stone hanging a little
aside, and make a little gutter for the water to run into the glass in the
which glass it must be congealed until it come to earth, therefore to stop
your glass that nothing do go out but that all may come to earth again, and
thus with that earth grind it and dissolve it, and congele it two or three
times for it is better, and then this earth will do great wonders, all
diseases it will run through and all wounds, and cause the same for to heal
surely, and being drunk with your Aurum potabile, and as much of that earth as
a Hasell nut drunk, and this will expulse all wicked humors out of thee that no
ill can grow in the body, if you so use it but once a week with the portion.

Also your first water must be stilled often, and that remains still in the
glass must be put into the earth for that is earth, if the Physician do well
skill upon the triplicities, and who has the great governance in man of the
triplicities, as for the earth Taurus, Capricorn, and Virgo, and for the air
Aquarius, Libra, and Gemeni, and for the fire Leo, Sagitarius, Aries, and for
the water Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces: then who so can know the complexions in
them, and minister accordingly, he shall do great wonder with these medicines
and Quintisans, and as for the earth being so used as aforesaid, it will
dissolve silver of it self, and also gold: and also heal many incurable
diseases in man or woman that have long reigned, and been most incurable for
to be healed. Laus deo.

To make Aurum potabile et Quintescena.
Take Tartar the best you can get, and fine calcenate it very white, then take
a part about a pound, and let it drink four pound of Aqua vitae, rectified by
little and little, give the Tartar to drink of the Aqua vitae, this must be
done in a glass or Limbeck set upon ashes with a little fire, and ever keep
it close, and so being congeled in manner somewhat liquid, then dissolve it with
more Aqua vitae rectified, and by and by it will dissolve, and look as it were
Azure right in color, then take of this water ordained of God, for to comfort
his creatures, put it in a vessel of glass again, fair being dissolved
clean, then take fine Duckat gold, but beware of the same gold, take an ounce
first fined in a test, and then fine beaten in fine sheets, then take pure
fine life honey four spoonfuls, and take a quarter of Gentiana fine searced to
powder, the gold Gentiana and honey must be ground finely and put to the
Quintescens, half an ounce of fine mother pearl, grind all strongly together
upon a Marble stone, and put all into your water or Quintescens, put all into
your glass, and set it in stilling with a gentle fire, and let it still up and
down ten or twelve days, and then keep it close and safe, for it is good,
let it still in most balnes in any case, and then it is done. Some do use to
make oil of gold in this manner, they do take vinegar and put filing of gold
in it or leaf gold, so let it stand in the Sun when it is hot twelve days,
and there will arise upon the vinegar as a scum, the which you must gather with
a feather, and as you gather it you may put it into your Aurum potabile, or else
grind it with your honey pearl and Gentiana, for this gold is better, for this
is one of the Philosophers great secrets hidden, this is a virtuous Quintescens
or water of life to heal all infirmities, as leaprosies, and as many as be in
man that is hard for to heal, and if a man be a dying and have but one dram
nature within him, give him but one spoonful of it, and if his time be not
ordained of God it shall help him certainly, and will procure him for to live
longer, by Gods providence provided for man.

Note this noble divine plaster which has a number of virtues in him as
hereafter follows.
Take Galbanum an ounce, Aromatici three ounces, Appoponaci an ounce, new Wax
twenty ounces, oil Olive a pound, Litarge of gold thirteen ounces, Olibane two
ounces, myrrh an ounce, green Copperis as ounce, Aristologia longa an ounce,
Mastick an ounce, Bedely two ounces, Orimandi calamita four ounces, make all
these into powder every one severally by himself, take a pot of earth and your
Galbanum, Armoniaci, Appoponaci, and put it in white vinegar very strong, and
cover the pot till such time that all be molten in them, after strain it
through a strainer, then put it in a clean vessel, and set it on a gentle
fire and temperate, and let them simper together until all your vinegar be
consumed, then take your oil Olive, and put it in the same pot, and so stir
them together on a gentle fire continually, and when all is molten then put in
your lytarge of gold made in powder, and as you put it in you must be ever
stirring of it that it may consume in the substance: and thus you must use it
until it come to blacknes, then put in your Bedely, Olibanum, Aristologia
longa, Mirth, Mastick, your Verdigreace, Copperis, and your Calamita, let it be
all in very fine powder, and when it is sod and well boiled it will be black
and red, and put a little on a stone or cloth, and if it be hard then it is
sodden well, then let him sees until such time as he be hard, and so prescrue
it, then anoint your hand with oil Olive, and so take it forth, then make it
in roles as Past, and put it in a piece of Geates skin well and clean made,
then put it in a vessel of Lead to keep, made like a box close, for this is
the precious divine plaster of all the world none like it, it is a Kings
jewel of health, for it is good for all diseases both old and new, and shall
give new flesh; and good that he had no better before, if a man be broken let
him make a plaster, and lay it to nine days, it shall knit sure for ever
again by Gods grace.

The black plaster for all manner of griefs.
Take a pot of oil Olive, a part of red Lead, boil these together, and stir
them with a slice of wood continually until it be black and somewhat thick,
then take it off the fire, and put it in a penny worth of red Wax, and a pound
of Rozen, and set it to the fire again, but you may not blase it and stir it,
then take it off and let it stand until it be cold, and make it in a lump, it
is good for a new wound, or to staunch blood, pour a little of it in a dish,
and if it stick fast unto the dishes side, then it is enough, and preserve it
to your use as need requires.

The making of the flower of all plasters and salues called Flos vnguentorum
per G. K.
Take half a pound of Rozen, half a pound of Perossen, a quarter of a pound
of Frankensence, a quarter of a pound of virgin Wax, an ounce of Mastick, a
quarter of a pound of Dears sewet, a quarter of a pound of Sheep sewet, two
drams of Camphire, a quarter of a pound of Venice Turpentine, and melt that may
be molten, and make powder of that which may be beaten to powder, and searce
your powder through a fine searcer, and to compound this treat or plaster
with all: your Wax, Sheep sewet, and Deares sewet must be first molten on a
soft fire, then your Olibanum, Mastick, with your Rozen and Perossen, and your
Frankensence and Myrrh, and last of all your Turpentine of Venice, and as you
put these gums in, you must ever be stirring it with a little stick that it
do not grow to the kettle side with a soft fire: the gums being thoroughly
molten, take the kettle from the fire still stirring of it, let your Myrrh and
your Turpentine be put in the last, for that must not abide on the fire long
after it is put in, then take a pottle of good white Wine, and let your
strainer be of canuas, ready for to strain the said gums withal, and let
there be no holes in the canuas strayner, then take a fair Basin or Piece and
put it in a quart or three pints of your white Wine, and then let it run
through into the white Wine, and so let it cool for the space of two hours,
and then work it and make it up in roles, and let the roles lie continually
still in the white Wine, for it will be (...) as Allablaster, and ye may keep
it this seven years in full effect and goodness, and especially for all new
wounds and aches being spread upon new canuasse, and apply it to the grief,
and these be the virtues of this Flores vnguentorum.

Also this noble Salve or plaster amongst all other is most clensing, and well
sounding the flesh, that it heals more in one week then in any other, it will
suffer no corruption to be engendered in man or woman, nor no evil flesh to
grow, for all these diseases above named, it is the most strange medicine that
ever was sound: as in experience it has been full many times proved and tried.

The golden plaster that heals all bruses of veins or sinews, proved.
Take Colofony, Pitch, Rozen, and Oil, three ounces, of liquid Pitch an ounce,
of Olibanum an ounce, of Auri vnguenti a like of each, of Wine as much as
suffiseth, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it too, and keep it to your
use.

To make Gratia dei.
Take half a pound of Rozen, and boil it in a pan until the foam or scum be
come of it, then take a quarter of a pound of unwrought Wax, and put it into
the Rozen, and boil them together as is aforesaid: then take an ounce of
Sheep sewet, and as much of Turpentine, and oil Olive a spoonefull, and put
them all together into the same pan amongst the Rozen and Wax aforesaid, and
boil them all together until the foam begin above, and when the foam
begins to wax black, then take it off the fire and cleanse it through a
fair linen cloth into a pan of water, then work it with your hands, and put
it out as you do Birdlime for the space of a quarter of an hour, and now and
then wet your hands in the wa^ when it cleaves to the salve, and then make it
into roles.

To make Gratia dei minor.
Take Betony, Veruaine, Pimpernell that bears the white flower, of each three
handfuls, and bray them, sees them in white Wine till it be half sodden, then
pour out the Wine through a cloth, and set it over the fire: put thereto
Perrosin a pound, Mastick a pound, Virgin wax, and take woman's milk that
nourishes a man child a quantity, mingle them together boiling with a slice
till it be well melt: then take it off the fire, put in half a pound of
Turpentine, stir it well together till it be cold, then keep it till ye need:
it is good for all new wounds and old, for the Web in the eye, it suffers
no dead flesh to remain within the wound. Also for stinging of venomous
beasts, and also for all manner of impostumes, and for all sores.

To make a plaster that will heal a wound.
Take a pound of the juice of Betony, as much of Plantine, the juice of
Smallage as much, Bursa pastoris as much, and four pound of Wax and
Perrossen, a quarter of a pound of Incense: boil all these together with the
iuyces of these 4. herbs, till they be almost thick, and then put therein a
quarter of a pound of Turpentine, oil Olive three pound, and so use it as a
plaster at need.

A methridate against poisons and pestilence, which for a truth was proved
upon four Irish Gentlemen poisoned with Ratsbane, cast into a pan of Milk in
France, who were so swollen that they were ready to burst.
Take of the roots of Turmentile two drammes, of all the kind of Saunders, of
every of them a dram, white Dittanie, new gathered and dried, a dram of the
top of a Hearts horn, or a Spitrack of precious stones, the fragments of orient
pearl, Bole armoniack, Aristologia rotunda, of each a dram, Peniriall, Mirrh,
and sewet, of each two drams, Tarra limnia, of the purest, two drammes: the
seeds of Cytrons and Saffron of each a scruple, Unicorns horn, and iacints,
of each half a dram. The licour to make this Electuary is Rosewater, and the
water of Borage flowers distilled: boil your Sugar and waters to a perfection,
and in the cooling put in your powders searced, and so reserve it as a most
precious treasure, that is, also a present remedy to drive out the Measels,
shingles, small pox, the plague pushes, and has help them whose sores were
gone in, and brought them out again, and recovered the parties, and it
defends all venim.

To make pills against poison, of a marvelous virtue, as has been proved.
Take Imperatrice, Bistorta, Turmentilla, Valeriana, Dittamo, Bianco, Carlina,
Gentiana, Aristologia rotunda, Agarico, Electo, Salgem, of each a like
quantity, beat them in fine powder, then take the juice of Garlike, and of
Onions, as much as will make it into a paste. Also put into the juice one dram
of Saffron, then let the said paste be mixed dry in the shadow, and then beat
it into powder again, and mix it with the foresaid juice in good force, and
keep it in a vessel of lead until thou have need, and when thou will use
it, take thereof 4. drammes, and make thereof pills with Siropo aceteso, in
good form, the which thou shall give unto him that is poisoned, and in short
time thou shall see miracles of this medicine: for all the aforesaid simple is
in manner alone sufficient to deliver one that were poisoned: but being mixed
together, it works greater effect, these pills are of as good experiment
against poison as may be.

For a man that has drunk poison.
Take Betony and stamp it, and mingle it with water, and the poison that the
party has drunk, will presently come forth again.

Against the plague or pestilence.
Take Matselon, Sentuarie, Worme-wood, Horchound, of each a good handful, and
steep them all night in a pot of Bear, and in the morning drink a draught
thereof fasting. Also to perfume your Chamber with Rosemary dried, and Bay
leaves, or Ieneper or Rosewater, and Cloves and Olibanum, it is very good to
give children in time of infection, treakle with water of Dragons or Scabions,
or let them chew Zedwall in in their mouths.

To drive out the plague if you think one be infected.
Take the root of Dragons, and the roots of Polipodium of the Oak, of each
like quantity, and dry them in an Oven, and beat them to powder: and if you
think that you be infected, take as much of the powder as will lie on a groat,
and put it in a cup of Ale, and drink it next your heart, and it will drive out
the plague, and preserve the patient.

A powder to drink to preserve one from the plague.
Take Betony, Pimpernell, Sinckfoile, Scabions, of each of all these a like
quantity, and dry them all, and beat the^ into fine powder, and where any
infection of the plague is, drink some of ye powder in Ale warm next your
heart, two mornings in a week, and if the infection be great, drink it every
morning, and by Gods grace it shall help you.

For them that are infected with the plague
Take a spoonefull of running water, aspoonfull of Vinegar, a good quantity of
Treakle to the bigness of a Walnutte, temper all these together and heat it
lukewarm, and gine it him to drink 24. hours.

For the plague a remedy.
Take Scabions and stamp it with swines grease, and lay it to the sore, and
let it lie 24. hours vnremooued, and it will take it clean away, or else
break it, and if the patient drink the juice thereof, it is very good
therefore.

For the plague a medicine.
Take an Onion and cut out the core, and fill it full of Treakle of Jane, and
roast it in the fire: and then take three spoonefuls of red Vinegar, and six
spoonefulles of juice of Sorrel, and strain the Onion with the said juice, and
drink it warm, and it will help you.

Another for the same.
Take Treakle of Jane, and stir it together with Ginger and Cloves, and a
little Saffron, and take thereof in the morning, next to your heart.

For to kill Ring-wormes or Tetters.
Take vnslacked lime and Soap, and mix them tagether, and lay it upon a
parchment skin, no broader then the Kingworme, and lay it thereto half an
hour, until it take the bark or skin, and the^ take the juice of Orpine,
and annoint it till it be cold, and then heal it up with salve.

Also, if ye take glass, and make the same into fine powder, and afterward
meddle it with black Soap, and annoint the sore therewith, it will heal the
same.

A very good ointment for Ring-wormes or Tetters.
Take oil of Roses two ounces, new Wax 4. penny weight, mingle your oil and
Wax together, then take Litage of Gold, and Seruse, of each half an ounce,
make your Litage and Seruse into fine powder, and meddle them in a brazen
Mortar with your oil and Wax: then take half an ounce of Quicksiluer
mortified, and the white of an Egg new laid, meddle them together, and put in
your Quicksiluer last, and use it evening and morning, and thus you shall
mortify your Quicksiluer, put it into a violl of glass, and put fasting
spettle to it, beat it up and down till it change color like ashes, then put
in your stuff, and labor them well together, and afterward use thereof at
your need.

For a Ringworme or Tetter.
Take four ounces of Bores grease, and one ounce of Quicksiluer, and kill it
with fasting spettle, one ounce of Verdigreace, a dram of Camphire, a
quantity of black Soap, and of Mustard, the juice of Walnut leaves, and
grind them altogether upon a Painters stone, and put it into a box, and
therewith annoint all the places where the Ringworme or Tetter is, evening and
morning, till it be whole.

To kill a Ringworme or Tetter in what place soever it be.
Take black Soap and Pepper, and mingle themtogeather, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the grief.

Also take the juice of Honny-suckle leaves, and annoint the place with a
feather.

Also take the oil of Scorpian, and annoint the place where the grief is, and
it helps the same.

Also if you take the flower of Popell and Vinegar, and oil of Nuts, and
annoint the place with the same, it will perfectly cure the Tetter or
Ringworme.

A good restoritie to restore a man's nature, and to help them that are weak
and decayed.
Take and make Almond milk with the broth of Beef mary-bones, and of a Cock
that is well boiled, then temper therewith yolks of Eggs, and good Bastard,
then put them in the Almond milk, and make a Cawdell thereof with your
Bastard, and cast blaunch powder upon it, and you may put a little Rosewater
upon it, for it will be the better.

A restoratiue of Rosa solis.
Take Rosa solis, but touch not the leaves in gathering, nor wash it not, take
thereof four good handfuls, then take three pints of good Aqua vitae, and put
them both into a glass or pot of three or four pints, and then stop it hard
for three days and three nights, and the fourth day strain it through a
clean cloth into a glass or pewter pot, and put thereto half a pound of
fine Sugar beaten very fine, take four ounces of fine Licoris beaten in
powder, half a pound of sound Dates, the stones taken out, make them clean,
and mince them small, and put all these together in a glass or pewter pot, and
stop it close that no air go out, and drink thereof at night half a
spoonefull with Ale or Beer, but Ale is best, take as much in the morning
fasting, for there is not the weakest body in the world that wants nature or
strength, or that is in a consumption, but that will restore him again, and
make them to have a good appetite to their meat.

For to restore the strength of a man that is brought low.
Take two or three Fennel roots, and as many Parsely roots, Isope, Time,
Sauory, Violet leaves, of each half a handful, and a Licoris stick bruised
small, a spoonful of Annyseedes, half a handful of great Raisons, with a
handful of Barlie: make your broth of all these, sodden in a pottle of water
till it come to a quart, or less, and when your meat is very well sodden,
stamp it: your flesh must be either a Cock Chicken, or a knockell of Veale,
and being so stamped very well together: strain it and keep it, and give the
patient thereof morning and evening often, and it will restore him although he
be never so low brought.

A salve to heal all manner of sores, and especially for afresh wound.
Take of oil Olive and Turpentine a like much, a pretty quantity, of
Rosemary-leaues pricked, boil all these together, and in boiling put thereto a
spoonefull of fair water, and let the^ boil together until the water be
consumed as an ointment, and when it is boiled, strain it hot and warm, and
let it stand in a vessel of earth, and when ye shall occupy it, heat it over
the fire, and against the fire dress the sore, so that the fire may dry the
ointment, and if need be, that there be no dead flesh, lay lint in the salve,
and lay it hot against the sore, and if it need to be tented, then tent it
with a tent of the same ointment hot, and lay upon the tent a plaster of hot
cleaving salve, and it will cure any wound or sore.

To make a salve to bring sores that rankle and ache into their own kind, and
cease the burning and aching.
Take the juice of Smallage and of Plantine of each like much, of Honny and the
white of an Egg a like much, and put thereto flower of boulted Wheat, and
stir them well together until it be thick, and let it come near no fire
but all cold and raw lay it to the sore, and it shall cleanse the wound and
cease the aching, and bring it to his kind and heal it fair: for this is a
principal salve for sores.

A salve for a new cut that will not leave bleeding.
Take the blades of unset Leekes, stamp them, and put thereto Honny and Wheat
flower, and stir them well together until they be thick, and let it come
near no fire, but all cold lay it to the wound, and it will staunch the
bleeding, and it will drive out the bruised blood, and make it clean and heal
it.

A salve for all sores.
Take oil Olive a pint and a half, Turpentine as much, Rozen a quarter of a
pound, unwrought ware half a pound, of sheep tallow 4. pound, then take two
handfuls of Smallage, 2. handfuls of Bugle, 2. handfuls of Ragewoort, 2.
handfuls of Plantaine, 2. handfuls of Orpine, and cut all these herbs small, and
sees them in the foresaid gear above written, and let it boil softly over
the fire, always stirring it until it be well meddled trgether, and when you
think it well, take it from the fire, and strain it through a strainer of
Canuas, and so use it.

A salve for a new hurt.
Take Wax and sheep sewet, but not so much of the sewet as wax, and a
little Rozen, and if you will heal it shortly, but in but a very little
Rozen, and set it over the fire together, and as it rises stir it, and then
put therein a dish of water, and when it is cold make it in roules.

Another for the same.
Take the whitest Virgin wax that ye can get, and melt it in a pan, then put
in a quantity of Butter and Honny, and sees them together, and take a dish
with fair water and strain it into the water, and work it with your hands,
and then make it in a round ball, and so you may keep it: and when you lay it
to any sore, you must first work it in your hand, and then strike it on a
cloth and lay it to: and this medicine will both heal and draw the same.

A salve for wounds, and all old sores.
Take half a pound of Saruese and somewhat more, of oil Olive, which is
Sallet oil, two ounces, of Vinegar a pretty quantity, and boil it till it be
black, and make it up in roules, and so at your need you may use it.

A very good salve called Incarnatiue, to bring flesh.
Take of the best Turpentine, and wash it in very fair water until it be very
white, and then put out the water from it, and compound it with the yolke of an
Egg or two, and put in the dust of Frankensence and Saffron very fine beaten,
and so work them all together: and keep it to your use when you shall need
it.

A notable healing salve.
Take pure Ware, Rozen, Bolae a^moniack, sheep sewet, Deeres sewet, of rach
one pound, beat the Rozen and Armoniack into fine powder, and searce it
through a fine searcer, then take Turpentine half a pound, boil all these
together upon a soft fire, and stir them well all the while that they sees,
but put not in the Turpentine until it be ready to take from the fire, for it
must have but one walme, and so employ this salve to any sore wound, and it
will heal it in short time.

To make a drawing salve.
Take Deares sewet and melt it, and put in as much oil Olive, as much Rozen
and Wax, boil them together, then let it stand and put in some Turpentine,
and so strain all through a linen cloth, and keep it to your use.

Another for the same.
Take an ounce of Wax, two ounces of Sheep sewet, half an ounce of Olibanum,
half an ounce of Rozen, two spoonefuls of Honey, two handfuls of young Docke
leaves, and take and put them into three or four old Dock leaves close wrapped
together, and so roast the young Docks therein, and when the Docks be roasted put
in your gums thereto.

A salve for an old sore.
Take as many Bramble leaves as when they are shired come to a quarter of a
pound, of Sage, and Valerian, of each of them a quarter of a pound, also as
much of Wax, as much fresh butter, half a pound of Rozen, then put them into
a skillet, and boil them altogether a good space, and then strain it through
a fair cloth, and so keep the salve till that you have need thereof, and
this helps.

The making of a salve to cure wounds that be rankled and bruised, and to cease
the swelling, and aching.
Take the juice of Smallage, and the juice of pety Morrell, and the juice of
Plantaine leaves, of each a like much, then take Honey and the white of an Egg
a like of each of the same as of the juice, and meddle them all on the fire,
and put thereto flower of bolted Wheat, and stir them well together till it be
some deal thick, and then let it come nigh no fire, but lay it to the wound
all cold, and it will cleanse the wound and cease the aching and brenning, and
bring them in his kind, and heal him fair for ever, and this is a principal
salve for sores or wounds: Proved.

To make a salve that is a precious ointment for wounds and for bruzings, but
it must be drunken in white Wine or stale Ale.
Take of the herb Walter, Robart, wild Thistles, Pursewort, Veruaine,
Daysie, the little Knapwoort, Egrimouy, Hearts tung, Horehound, Pimpernell,
herb Iuie, Sanigell, Plantaine, Medewoort, Sothernwood, little Burnet,
Mugwoort, Tansie, the holly Thistle, Betony, Turmentile, Mouse-eare, Peluet,
Milfoyle, Robwort, black Thistle, wild Sage, crops of Hemp, crops of the red
Bramble, crop of the red Woorts, Mors diaboli, Groundswelly, Scabions, Sage,
Violet of the garden, Osmond waches of the mede, Fumitory, Dawk, Spinach,
Strawberies, and the more Dayste, Mede March, Wastes crops, Peygell, Woodrone,
Crosset, Iermander, Tutsan, Woodbind, Pedelion, flowers of Broom, Cinkfoyle,
Wormwort, Scabwort, then take of Auence as much of him as of all the other
herbs, and then shred them, and do them in a mortar, and stamp them sinall,
and do therte three or four pound of May butter clean clarified and put
together, and so let them stand seven days, and then do it in a clean pan,
and set it over the fire, and let it sees soft, then strain it through a
canuas cloth, and do thereto the juice of Saffron, and stir them well together,
and let it stand forth till it be cold, then must the sick take thereof on this
manner: take of this salve six penny weight, and do it in warm Wine or stale
Ale, and let it melt on the fire, and let the sick drink it first and last, and
this heals wounds well.

For the salt humor.
Take half a pound of Lignum vitae, and barks thereof, and Anniseed, Licoras,
and boil all these together, and half a pint of clarified Honey, and all kind
of cold herbs, with Liuerwort, and Harts-tung, half a quartern of French
Barley, and half a pound of Rayzons of the sun, pull out the stones of the
Raizons, and boil all these together very well, and strain them, and it will
help that disease in the body.

For the salt humor another.
Take white Lead, Ceruse, Litarge of gold, and Litarge of silver, of each one
ounce, Sulphur one ounce, mix them together, and make them in powder very small,
then take oil Olive one ounce and a half, Vinegar, white Wine as much as
needs mix in due proportion.

For to heal any sore or cut.
Take a little fine Flax, and a little Hogs grease, and chop them together,
and make a plaster of the same, and it will heal it very well and fair.

An ointment for all manner of sores, and cuts, and swellings, and heat.
Take Melilot, Egrimony, of each a like much, Wood Betony, Wormwood, and
Smallage, a quantity of each of them, and gather them in May, and shred them,
and bray them with as much butter weight for weight as the herbs all together,
and then lay it in a corner six or seven days until it be hoary, and then
take it and fry it, then strain it into an earthen pot, and when it is cold
make an hole in the side or bottom of the pot that the dross may run out.

Another for the same.
Take a good quantity of Smallage, and Mallows, and put thereto two pound of
Bores grease, and a pound of butter, and oil of Neates-feete a quantity, and
stamp them well altogether, then fry them, and strain it in an earthen pot,
and keep it to your use.

A water for to heal an old sore.
Take a gallon of running water and set it on the fire, and let it seethe: then
take an ounce of green Copperas, two ounces of Bolae armoniake, white Copperas
the quantity of half a Nut, and grind or beat them all to powder together
into the said water, and let them sees together a little while, then take it
from the fire, and when it is cold put it in an earthen bottle, and stop it
fast, and then occupy it at your need.

A sovereign water for all manner of sores.
Take red Sage, Isop, Rosemary, red Fenell, Daisies, English Saffron, Nep,
Allom, of each a quantity, but most of Daisies, seethe them in running water,
and wring it through a cloth, and so make a water: and this is good for all
sores.

An ointment to cleanse old stinking sores.
Take the juice of Selidon, the juice of Plantaine, Honey, the yolke of an
Egg, of each a like much, Barley flower, meddle them together, and put as much
Barley flower as shall make it thick like a plaster, and let it come near no
fire, and so lay it upon the sore.

A good ointment to cleanse a sore both old or new.
Take half a pound of Turpentine, and wash it well in Barley water, the yoks of
six Eggs new laid, honey of Roses four ounces, and for lack of honey of Rofes
take other honey, Barley flower as much as shall be sufficient to make it thick
like a plaster, and meddle them together, and let them not come near any fire.

To skin the flesh that is raw.
Take a quart of good Ale, and Allom, Honey, and Woodbind leaves, and stamp the
leaves, and put the juice to them, and sees them till they come to a pint, and
when it is cold wet a gray paper in it, and lay it to the sore.

For all manner of scabs.
Take Enula campana, red Docke roots, Nightshade, Woodbind leaves, and then
cast in a piece of Allom, and put in Vitrioll romana rubrified when it is cold,
and wash the scabbe therewith.

Another for the same.
Take white ointment, Brimstone, Quicksiluer, Verdigreace, and meddle them
together, and therewith annoint the sore scab.

For to do away scabs.
Take red Dock roots, Pimpernell, Scabions, Sorrel de bays. Celondine, stamp
them with May butter, and fry them well together, and strain them through a
cloth into a clean vessel, and cast thereto a good quantity of Brimstone in
powder, and stir it well together till it be cold, and therewith annoint the
sick till that he be all whole.

Another for the same.
Take the root of Horsehelme and seethe it in water till it be nesh, and take
old Sheep tallow and meddle them well together in a mortar, and do it in a
linen cloth, and annoint the sore by the fire.

Another for to do away scabs.
Take Celondine, and powder of Brimstone, and meddle them well together, and it
will do away the scabs.

Another for the same.
Take Oniens and mince them, and sees them in water or in vinegar, and wash
therewith the scabs or isching, and it shall do it away, and heal it fair
and smooth.

Another for to do away seabs or itching.
Take the roots of Enula campana, and wash them clean in fair water, and
sees them as you sees Persneps, and then make them clean, and cut them in
pieces, and stamp them small with Colts grease, and anoint the sore therewith.

A good ointment for the scabbes and for itching of the body.
Take four ounces of oil de bay, and an ounce of Frankensence, and two ounces of
white Wax, and three ounces of Swines grease, and an ounce of Quicksiluer that
must be slacked with fasting spittle, an ounce of great Salt, as much of the one
as of the other, and of all these make an ointment, and if the scabs or itch be
upon all the whole body as well above the girdle as beneath, then when thou
go to bed wash both thy hands and thy feet with warm water, and supple them
well therein by the fire, and after dry them with a cloth of linen, then take
up with thy fingers of that ointment, and do it in the palms of thy hands,
and on the soles of thy feet, and rub it well together that it may drink in
well and if it do soke in well, thou must put gloves on thy hands, and socks
on thy feet, and thus do every night when thou do go to bed, and if the
scab or itch be above the girdle and not beneath, the^ anoint but thy hands,
and if the scab be beneath the girdle, then look that you anoint the soles of
your feet, and the scab or itch be in all thy body as well above the girdle as
beneath, then thou must anoint both thy hands and thy feet as thou sit by
the fire, and thou shall be whole: this has been proved.

Another ointment for a man that is scabbed.
Take five or six handfuls of Horehound, and sees it in running water till it
be half sodden away, and then wash the sick therewith as hot as he may
suffer it, and then look that you have ready this ointment made of these
herbs: take the root of the red Dockes, and the root of Selidon, and then
take Wormwood and Alleluia, of each a like much, and bray them well together,
and do thereto a good portion of May butter, and stamp them well together, and
so let them stand seven days, and then fry it, and strain it as thou do
another ointment, and therewith annoint the sick when he is washed, and he
shall be whole.

For the shingles a remedy.
Take Doves dirt that is musty, and of Barley meal heaped half a pound, and
stamp them well together, and do thereto half a pint of vinegar and mingle
them together, and so lay it to the sore cold, lay Cawle leaves ther-vpon, and
so let it lie three days unremoved, and on the third day if need require lay
thereto a new plaster of the same, and at the most he shall be whole within
three plasters.

Another for the shingles.
Take the blood of a Cats ear or of the tail, and therewith anoint the
shingles, and do nothing else thereto. Also take Doves dung, and Barley meal,
and stamp them together with Aysell, and lay it to the shingles all cold.

For all manner of sinews that are shrunken.
Take the head of a black Sheep, Camomell, Lorrell leaves, Sage, of each a
handful, and bray these herbs in a mortar, then boil them altogether in
water till they be well sodden, and let them stand till they be cold, then draw
it through a strayner and so use it.

An ointment for shrunken sinews and aches sovereign.
Take eight Swallows ready to fly out of the nest, drive away the breeders
when you take them out, and let them not touch the earth, stamp them until
the feathers can not be perceived, put to it Lauender cotton, of the strings of
Strawberies, the tops of mother Time, the tops of Rosemary, of each a handful,
take all their weight of May butter, and a quart more, stamp all the feathers
that nothing can be perceived in a stone mortar, then make it up in balls, and
put it into an earthen pot for eight days close stopped that no air take
them, take it out, and on a soft fire as may be seethe it so that it do but
simper, then strain it, and so reserve it to your use.

For sinews that be broken in two.
Take Worms while they be knit, and look that they depart not, and stamp them
and lay them to the sore, and it will knit the sinews that be broken in two.

For to knit sinews that be broken.
Take Archangell and cut it small in gobbets, and lay it to the sore, and take
Milfoile and stamp it, and lay it above it hard bound, and let it lie so three
days, and at the three days end take it away, and wash it with Wine, and then
make a new plaster of the same, and at three days end put thereto another, and
do nothing else thereto.

Another for the same.
Take Peniriall and bray it, and put salt enough to them, and temper it with
Honey, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it upon the sinews that be stiff,
and it will make them to stretch: Proved.

An oil to stretch sinews that be shrunk.
Take a quart of Neates-foote oil, a pint of Neates gall, half a pint of
Rose Water, as much Aqua vitae, then put all these together into a Brass
pan, then take a handful of Lauender cotton, as much of Bay-leaues, a good
quantity of Rosemary, a good quantity of Lauender Spike, of Strawberryleaues,
the strings and all, then take thread and bind them all in several brauches,
and put them into the pan or pot, and set them over the fire upon clear
coals, with the oils altogether, and so let the^ boil a good while, and when
it is boiled enough, it will boil but softly: then take it off the fire, and
let it stand till it be almost cold, then strain it out into a wide mouthed
glass, bottle or pewter pot, and stop it close, it will not continue in a
wooden thing: and where the sinews be shrunk, take of this being warmed,
and annoint the place therewith and chafe it well against the fire, and use
this morning and evening, and keep the place warm, and by the grace of God,
you shall find great ease.

For to staunch b^^od.
Take Bole armoniacke, and Turpentine, and make a plaster and lay it to, and
it will help the same. Also if you take the moss of the Hasell tree, and cast
it into the wound, and it will stanche the blood foorth-with: and the longer
that it is gathered, the better it is. Also take a good piece of Martilmas
beef, out of the root, and heat it on the coals, and as hot as may be
suffered, lay it to the place.

Another for the same.
Take a piece of lean salt beef, and let it be of that bigness that it may
fill the wound, and lay it in the fire in the hot ashes, till it be hot
through, and being hot, thrust it into the wound, and bind it fast, and it
shall quickly stanch the bleeding.

Another to staunch blood.
Take Bursa pastoris, stamp it, and lay it to the vain, and it will quickly
stanche bleeding.

Another for the same.
Take the moss that grows about the root of the Ash tree, and hold it to
thy nose and smell it, and it will stanche the bleeding thereof.

To staunch blood when a Master vain is cut.
Take raw Beef that never had any salt cast thereon, and lay it on a gredion
over fresh coals well kindled, and lay the Beef thereon, still turning the
same till it be well broiled, and then lay it to the sore, and it will stanch
the blood: and for the nose, if it be put into a cloth and smelt to, it helps.

To staunch blood.
Take an herb that is called Lunaha, and stamp it, and lay it to the wound,
or take the green leaves thereof, and lay them on the wound, and it shall
staunch: and if a man may not have this herb, let him burn the feathers of a
Cocks neck, and take the ashes of them and lay on the wound, and the blood
shall soon be staunehed.

For swelling that comes suddenly in a man's limbs.
Take Hart's-tongue, Cherfoyle, and cut them small, and then take dregs of Ale,
and wheat branne, and sheep tallow molte, and do all in a pot, and sees
them till that they be thick, and then make a plaster and lay it to the
swelling.

Another for the same.
Take fair Water and salt, and stir them well together, and therein wet a
cloth, and lay it to the swelling.

For to make one slender.
Take Fennel and sees it in water a very good quantity, and wring out the
juice thereof when it is sod, and drink it first and last, and it shall help
the patient.

For to break the stone, a medicine.
Take half a handful of Pellitory of the wall, half a dozen Parfly roots,
half a handful of vnsette Time, a quantity of Pennyriall, and sees all
these in a pottle of Rennishe Wine or white wine, and let it sees to a quart
or a pint, which you will: then take a Nutmegge roasted and dry it by the fire,
and divide it in four parts, and drink the same warm after it is strained,
as much at a time as you think good.

Another for the same.
Take the roots of Parsley, Pellitory, and red Nettles, of each a like
quantity, wash them clean and mince the^ small, and lay them in White wine
twenty four hours, and still them together, and drink it with two pound of
roots put to a quart of White wine.

For the stone a remedy.
Take Reysons, unset Leekes, Sappifrage, Samphire, Auence, Beane-cods, still
each one by it self, and fine them in the Sun, and take of each a like much,
and put thereto as much Malmesie as of the waters, and still them altogether
again, and fine it in the Sun, and when the patient is grieved and at no
time else let ^un drink thereof three spoonefuls at a time, and that will be
sufficient enough at once, and heat it luke warm, and put in a little powder
of Gives, and drink it, and lay him down to sweat. Also tak^ Sapifrage, and
still the same with water, and make thereof a firrop, as though it were with
Roses, and put thereto a quantity of Sugar, and eat it, and it will break
the stone meruailously.

Another medicine for the stone.
Take a cake of Rye and bake it, then take Onions, and roste them very soft,
then take your cake out of the oven, and slit it a sunder in the midst, the
upper side from the nether, then take your Ouions, and pill them, and shread
them upon the cake, and lay the one piece to the bottom of your belly, and the
other part to the raines of your back, and it will help you.

A very good powder for the stone.
Take Smallage seed, Louach seed, Fennel seed, Sapifrage seed, Caraway
seed, Gremell seed, Broom seed, parslie feed, Philopendula, the root
thereof dried, Veruaine, and the kernels of Cherristones, of every of these a
like much by weight, then beat them in a brassen Mortar all to powder, and
then let the sick use of this in White wine at evening and morning, and also
let him use of this powder in his pottage, for it is very good for the stone.

An excellent good Medicine for the stone, and to break it.
Take Allisander, Louach, Smallage, Water cresses, and Gromet, of each a like
much, and boil them in a Gallon of fair water, till the half thereof be
wasted, and do thereto a good deal of Sugar, or of Licoris, and then strain
it through a cloth, and do it in a clean vessel well stopped, and let the
sick drink thereof morning and evening, and this will break the stone in the
raines or bladder, and make him for to come forth without fail.

A good medicine for the stone.
Take March seed, Anniseede, and Commin seed, Parsley seed, and Fennel seed,
and Water Cresses seed, or else the powder made of the herb, then take all
these seeds and do them in good Vinegar, and so let them stand two days and
a night, then dry these seeds in an Oven, and then make them to powder in a
brassen Mortar, and let the sick use of this powder in his pottage, and in his
drink as is aforesaid, and this will make a man to make water well.

A good plaster proved for the strangury.
Take Holly-hocks, Violets, and Mercury, the leaves of these herbs or the
seeds of them, also the rind of the Elder tree, and leydwort, of each of these
a handful, and beat them small, and sees them in water till half be
consumed, then do thereto a little oil Olive, and all hot make thereof a
plaster, and lay it to the sore and raines. And also in Summer you must make
him a drink in this manner: take Sapifrage and the leaves of Elders, five
leaued grass, and sees them in a pottle of stale Ale till the one half
thereof be consumed, then strain it and keep it clean, and let the sick
drink thereof first in the morning, and last at night, and if you lack these
herbs because of Winter, then take the roots of five leaued grass, and dry
them: and make thereof powder, and then take Dister shells and burn them, and
make powder of them, and mingle them together, and so let the sick use thereof
in his pottage and drink, and it shall help him.

A very good medicine, showing how to make a powder for the stone and
strangulion.
Take black Bramble berries while they be red, Iuieberries, the inner pith of
the Ash keys, the stones of Eglantine berries cloven, rubbed from the hair,
Nutte keys, the roots of Philopendula, of all these a like quantity, Acorne
kirnels, the stones of Sloes, of each a like quantity, dry all these in
platters in an Oven, till they may be well beaten to powder, then take Gromell
seed, Sapisrage seed, Alisander seed, Coliander seed, Persly seed, Commin
seed, Fennel seed, Anniseede, of each of these a like quantity, as much as
is before written, and dried in like sort, then beat all these to fine powder,
and take Licoris of the best that you can get fair scraped, as much in
quantity as of all the other, and beat it fine, and mingle it with the same
powder, and so keep it close that no wind come at it, using it first and last
with posset drink made with White wine or strong Ale, and when you cate your
pottage or other broth, put some in it if you be sore pained, and if you have
any stone it will come away by shiuers, and if it do so, when you think that
your water begins to clear again, take this drink following and it will
cleanse your bladder, and it will leave no corruption therein.

The drink.
Take Rose-mary and wild Time, and sees them in running water, with as much
Sugar as will make it sweet, from a quart to a pint, use the quantity of your
herbs according to your discretion, so that it may savor well of them, and
so use it nine mornings, six or seven spoonefuls at a time.

For the Tissicke, well proved.
Take a handful of Fennel roots, as much Parsley roots, as many Alisander
roots, half a handful of Borrage roots, and pull out the pith of all the
said roots, then take half a handful of Penny-riall, as much of Violet
leaves, and as much of Cinckfoyle, as much Succory, Endive, Hollihockleaues,
Mallow leaves, and read garden Mints, of all these a like quantity as of
those next before, half a handful of Licoris sticks scraped, bruised and
beaten to fine powder, a gallon of fair running water, boil therein all these
simples, and boil these seeds following with them, that is, three spoonesuls
of Annyseedes, as much Fennel seed, as much Coliander seed and Comin seed,
a good handful of Dandelion roots, and so boil altogether from a gallon to a
pottle, and let the patient drink thereof first and last, and it will quickly
help him.

Another for the Tissicke.
Take a quart of running water, with a handful of Isope, two ounces of
Annyseedes, as much Licoris beaten both together, half an ounce of Fennel
seed, beat all these together very sine with a quarterne of white Sugar, and
so boil them altogether unto a pint, and then strain them, and so let the
party drink thereof first and last, and it will do him good.

For a Tissicke or cold, another.
Take two ounces of Licoris scraped and bruised, of Figs three ounces, of
Egrimony, Hore-hounde, Enula campana, of each a handful, and boil them
altogether in a gallon of Water until the half be wasted, then strain the
herbs from the juice, and use it early and late: for this has been proved.

Also for the dry Tissick, take and stamp Fennel roots, and drink the juice
thereof with white Wine.

For the Tissicke another experiment.
Take Radish roots, make them clean, and cut them thin, and cast them into
an Oven and bake them, then beat them into powder so small as you can, then
drink thereof every morning fasting, and at night when you go to bed, and
wet your meat in the same powder as you weuld do in salt, and it will do
you very great ease shortly.

To make the mother of Treakle.
Take a pint of Honny, put thereto the juice of red Fennel, sees it on the
fire until it come to a pint, then take it of, and put thereto a penny-woorth
of Sinamon in powder, two raises of Ginger, a Nutmeg and a little Mace, and
stir them well together, and when it is cold put it into a box, and gather
your Fennel in May.

Also to make Treakle for all manner of poison, take one ounce, of Betony in
powder, 4. ounces of Centory in powder, and 2. ounces of the powder of Rue,
meddle these together, and temper them with clarified Honny, and keep it in a
glass.

The golden treat that heals all bruses.
Take Colosony, pitch and Rozen, and two ounces of oil, three ounces of liquid
Pitch, 1. ounce of Olibanu^, Auti vnguenti Allam, of each two ounces, of Wine
as much as suffiseth, and boil all these together and so receive them to your
use as you need, and it helps.

For to make a white treat, called Apostolicen.
Take oil Olive, litarge of Lead, Gold and Silver, stamp it, and put it in
the oil through a cloth, and stir it till it be hard, and this is a good
treat for to heal all manner of wounds, be they new or old: this kind of
treat has often been proved good.

To make a treat called Emanuell.
Take Veruaine, Bittany, Pimpernell, Centorie the more, Gratia dei, of each one
handful, herb John, Auence, Celondine, Acus muscata alaluia, Plantaine,
Spurge, Egrimonie, of each one handful, grind all in a mortar, and put the^
in a gallon of Wine, and boil them in a pan till the third part be wasted,
then strain it through a Canuas cloth, and set it oner the fire, and put
thereto Wax four ounces, Pitch as much, Rozen as much, Olibanum two ounces,
Mastick two ounces, Mirrhe two ounces, Aloes two ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
Sheep sewet half a pound, boat them all in powder, and boil them all
together save the Turpentine, the which must be put in last of all, then
strain the same through a cloth, and keep it till you have need thereof: and
this is a special healer of all wounds and sores, bruses and broken bones, and
Apostumes that be broken, also it has a special virtue to draw, cleanse, and
reengender good flesh, it heals and does away all kind of aches whatsoever,
all Cankers and Festers, it heals Morimals, it passes all other ointments:
and if you will have it soft, put thereto a quantity of oil of Roses, so much
as you think good. Proved.

A good entreat called the green treat of Jane.
Take a pint of the juice of Smallage, a pint of the juice of Waybright, as
much of Plantaine, put them together in a vessel, and put to it a quarter of a
pound of Wax, and as much of Frankensence or Rozen made into powder, make your
Wax into small pieces, and boil them altogether, and ever stir them, and to
know when it is boiled inongh, drop a drop upon a Basin, and if there be any
moisture in it when it is cold, then put to it a pound of Turpentine, and stir
them till they be well meddled together, then strain it, and put into it a quart
of white Wine, and let it stand while it be cold, and so use it.

Another entreat called Gratia dei.
Take Wax, May butter, or other butter, without salt, of each one ounce, then
take of Frankensence two ounces, melt them together, and strain them, and this
is the making of this entreat which is called Gratia dei.

A good entreat for wounds.
Take Betony, Pimpernell, and Veruaine, of each a handful, boil them in a
pottell of very good white Wine until it be half consumed, then strain it
through a course canuas, then put the liquor over the fire again, and in the
boiling put to it half a pound of Rozen, a pound of Frankensence in powder,
and always stir it that the powder go not to the bottom, and when it is
taken from the fire, put to it half a pound of Turpentine, and a dram of oil
of Spike, and stir it till be cold. Proved.

A green treat for a green wound which is especial good,
Take Rozen made in fine powder four ounces, of Sheeps sewet one ounce, half a
pound of Turpentine, Wax, and Frankensence, of each one ounce, Ve rdigreace ten
pence weight, Oil six ounces, beat your Frankensence and Vel digreace, and
put to all your stuff over the fire in a vessel, but your Turpentine and
Verdigreace let them botle ever stirring them till they be all relented, then
take it from the fire and stir it well, and then put in your Turpentine ever
stirring it till it be relented, then put in your Verdigreace, and mix it well
with the other and strain it, and keep it to your use and it will help you.

The making of this treat which will endure an hundred year, and it is good
for all ache in the bones, and for the sinews.
Take a pottell of neat oil, and fry it with Madocks as many as he may, for
they be dry and hard, then wring out the oil and do them away, then do
thereon two pound of sheeps tallow that is new and melt it, and half a pound of
Wax, as much Rozen and Frankensence and break them small, and do them into
the oil for to be melted, then take six handfuls of Hocks, and of Celondine
four handfuls, and four handfuls of Enula campana, and of Plantain eight
handfuls, and of the root of Enula campana clean picked two pound, and so bray
them small as mortar, then too to these herbs and roots a pottell of good
white Wine, and so let it stand a day and a night, then strain out the liquor,
and do it into the oil before that they sees them and set it over the fire,
and let it sees the space of four hours, then take it off the fire, and do
it in a clean bowl, and so let it stand till it be all cold, and then take it
up and do away the water and the slime and if it be too hard do in more oil,
and if it be to nesh, do thereto more Wax and Rezen, and of Frankensence and
seethe it again, then do it in boxes and keep it well, for this is a
precious treat or ointment for all manner of ache in the bones.

The making of a treat the which is called Oxicrochsie.
Take a quarter of a pound of mede Wax, as much of pure Rozen, as much of
black Pitch, as much of Saffron, an ounce and a half of Mastick, and half a
quarter of a pound of Frankensence, as much Myrrh, and a quarter of a pound of
Arpinake, half a quarter of a pound of Galbanum, as much of Turmentile, then
take all the gums and make them to small powder, and break thy Wax and
Galbanum to small pieces, then set them in good vinegar all a night, and on the
morrow set it over the fire, and let it seethe till that the vinegar be wasted
somewhat: also strain it well through a clean cloth into a vessel with white
Wine or with water, and when it is cold take it up, and then hold it against
the fire, but look that thou have thy Saffron ground, then hold it as thou
would hold Wax, and a little and little temper the Saffron thereon, and
meddle them well against the fire til the Saffron be melted in the gums, but
thou must annoint thy hands with oil of Laurel that it cleave not to thy
hands, and do it where thou will: and this treat is good for all sores and
bruses in any limb of a man, it destroys hard apostumes, and it is good for
broken bones and for the surgery of salerne, who used this medicine for small
wounds that were evil healed, and this will open a sore, and will heal him
well and fair again: proved.

For to make Vnguentum albanum.
Take a pint of oil Olive, and put thereto half a quarterne of Wax, and set
it over the fire till the Wax be molten, but make it into small pieces: then
take half a pound of Ceruse, and an ounce of Mastick, and one ounce of Olibanum,
and a little Camphire: take and grind all these small, and cast it into the
oil, and stir it well together till it be nigh cold, then take the white of
four Eggs made into gleare, and put thereto a saucer full of vinegar, and stir
all this well together and too it in boxes, and this ointment is good for to
anoint all sores without the wound, but do it not in the wound, for this is a
good cold ointment.

To make vnguentum album another way.
Take a pint of oil Olive, and half a pound of Diaclome, Anniseede a pretty
quantity, and put them together, and put thereto a pound of Seruse small
grounded, and then boil them altogether a little, and stir them always till
it be cold: et fac vnguentum.

For to make vnguentum popilcon.
Take three or four pound of Poppy seed, and two or three pound of herb
Walter, one pound of Henbane, and one pound of pety Morrell, and one pound of
Orpine, and one pound of Singrene, and one pound of Endive, one pound of
Plantain, and one pound of Violets, and one pound of water Cresses, one pound
of Mandrake, and one pound of Peniwort: take all these and stamp them in a
mortar, and do thereto three or four pound of Barrowes grease molten, and bind
them well together, and then set them in an earthen pot well closed in a moist
place, and so let it stand nine days, and on the tenth day set them on the
fire, and do thereto a quart of white Wine, and let them seethe well together,
and then wring them through a strainer a little and a little till it be cold,
and when it is cold do it in boxes, and this ointment is good for many sores.

For to make vnguentum geptiacum.
Take a farthing worth of Honey, a spoonful and a half of Vinegar, of green
Copperas a small quantity, a piece of Allom, and if you will make it easily,
put thereunto Ale, or else woman's milk, and this ointment is good for all sores
and wounds both new and old.

For to make vnguentum ruptorum a corsie.
Take Cantarides and make it into powder, and as much of unslaked lime, and of
black Soap as of all the other, and make all these in manner of a plaster, and
lay it to the sore as broad as thou will have it broken, and no brother.

For to make vnguentum versilinum.
Take an ounce of Litarge, half a pound of Masticke, half a pound of Ceruse,
an ounce of Camphire, half an ounce of the stone called Calamint, and make these
to small powder, and do thereto half a pound of mede Wax small broken, and
then do thereto a pint of the juice of Emerose, and put all this in a pan, and
set it over the fire, and let them sees till they be molten, and always stir
it, and then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, this
ointment is good for a man that is scalled on his yard with fire, or on his
body or visage, or on any limb of a man, and for all scalding, and this is good
for wounds and for many other privy maladies: and this is a precious ointment.

For to make vnguentum dolerosica.
Take a pound and a half of purified Honey, and a quarter of a pound of
Verdigreace small made to powder, and a good saucerfull of Vinegar, cast all
this together into a pan, and boil them well together till it become red,
and always stir it well, and then beware for it will have many colors, for it
will be red, then do it in boxes and it will be hard, and after it will relent
again, and then do therefore into the rotted wound, and anoint the sore
therewith, and it will do away dead flesh and other corruption, and this is a
good ointment for to cleanse, and for to make the flesh for to grow.

For to make vnguentum Geneste.
Take two pound of the flowers of Broom, a pound of the flowers of Woodwexe,
and a pound of Oreflips, and bray them in a mortar, and do thereto three pound
of May butter, and mingle them well together, and so let them stand for three
days and for three nights, and then do it in a pan, and fry it well on the
fire, and then wring it through a cloth, and do it in a box, this ointment is
good for all cold gowtes, and for other cold evils.

For to make vnguentum Penetium.
Take a gallon pot full of black Snailes gathered in the dew, in the month of
May, and do them in a linen bag, and when ye have the Snailes look that ye
have ready then a pound of the pounder of Comin, and an other pound of Dill, and
meddle these pouders amongst the Snailes and hang them up and set under a clean
vessel, and keep well the oil that comes of them, and then take the oil
and seethe it on a soft fire, and do thereon a quarter of a pound of the marrow
of a Horse leg, and sees it with the oil, and then do it in a glass with
that ointment, and anoint any man or woman that is so troubled with the Gowt,
and he shall be whole by Gods grace.

A good ointment for to heal wounds.
Take Auence, Bugle, Pigle, and Sauigle, Smallage, and herb Robert, Veruein,
and herb Water, Weybred, and Ribwort, Daisies, and Holyhock, Ligni serpemini.
red Cawle and the crops of Brier, of every one of these a pound, or at the
least half a pound, then take these herbs and stamp them small in a mortar,
then take May butter two pound, and two pound of Barrowes grease, and stamp
them well together, and then do these in an earthen pot, and let them so stand
for nine days, and on the tenth day do them in a pan and sees them on the
fire and let it sees easily a good while, and then wring them a little and a
little through a strainer, and then take them, and put it into the pan again
with a quart of white Wine, and half a pound of mede Wax, and a pound of sheeps
tallow, and a quarter of a pound of Frankensence, and a quarter of a pound of
purified honey, cast all these together into the pan, and then set them over
the fire, and sees them well together a good while, and then set it down and
let it keele, and then do it in boxes, and this is a speedy ointment to heal
all manner of sores and wounds be they never so great: this has been proved.

If thou will heal wounds well and clean with the drink of balls, then take
of these herbs to make thy balls.
Take a pound of Pigell, and a quarter of a pound of Sauigell, and half a
pound of Bugle, a quarter of a pound of Turmentile, half a pound of Auence, a
quarter of a pound of Mouse are, a quarter of a pound of Centory, a quarter of
a pound of Rue, a quarter of a pound of Iuy, a quarter of a pound of wild Sage,
and half a pound of Daisie, a pound of herb Robert, a pound of herb Water,
and a quarter of a pound of herb John, a quarter of a pound of Egrimony, as
much of Violets, as much of Strawberries, and half a pound of Ribwort, and
half a pound of Weybrev, and a quarter of a pound of great Daysie, and half a
pound of Spignell, and half a pound of Betony, a quarter of a pound of Hemp,
and as much of red brier trop, and as much of the black brier crop, half a
quarter of the red Nettle, and half a quarter of the red Cawle, and a
quarterue of Verueine, as much of Burnet, and as much of Scabions, take all
these herbs and shred them small, and then do them in a mortar, and grind
them all to flower as thou would do Veruine, then mingle of Madder the
weight of al these other herbs and grind it with these herbs, and then let
them rot together for five days and flue nights, and then make thereof small
balls as big as a Walnut, and dry them in thin platters covered one over the
other, and set them in the Sun so that there come no air thereto by no way,
and who so has a great wound, then take one of these balls, and crum it into a
quart of white Wine or of stale Ale, and let him drink thereof each day first
a little quantity, and to wash his wound three times on the day with white
Wine, and if that you have no white Wine: then take the juice of Auence and let
come none other ointment at the wound but the juice of Auence, and therewith
wet well the wound all about, and thus thou may heal and save every old
wound be it never so horrible and festered: and if there be in the wound any
dead flesh, thou must do thereon the powder of Sandefer or else of burnt
Allam, for that will fret away dead flesh, and these balls will heal the
wounds.

For to open a wound that is closed too soon.
Take the leaves of the white Plum-tree, and the milk of a Goat, and stamp
them together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will
open it well, and it will do away the rankling.

Also take Centory, stamp it, and lay it thereto, and it will open any wound
fair and well.

Also Galbanum is good for to cleanse a wound, and for to keep it open.

To heal a wound.
Take Turpentine, as much as you think to serve your turn, and put it into a
dish with clear water, then take a stick and make it fit at one end, and with
that beat, and turn your Turpentine in the water till it be very white, then
put the water clean from it, and put to it half as much yolks of Eggs as is
of the Turpentine, and mingle them well together, and minister it when ye
need, put not this in your treane bore, for it will soke through: you may
keep it in a bladder.

For a wound in the head a good Mundicatiffe.
Take honey of Roses two ounces, oil of Roses an ounce, meddle them together, and
put it warm into the wound with Lint, and a plaster upon it: it is a good
Mundicatiffe.

For the ache in a wound.
Take the roots of Briauy, and pare the utter side, and beat them in a mortar
and in fair running water, and strain it, and warm it, and lay it hot to the
wound or ache as the party may suffer it: first wash the wound fair, and then
lay it to the wound.

To make a water for a cut or wound.
Take a pottle of fair running water, and sees it on the fire, and let it
sees a while, then take two penny worth of white Copperis, as much of Bole
armoniack, and four penny worth of Camphire, and beat them altogether in
powder, and put them all together into the water, and let them seethe a little
while, and then take it off the fire, and when it is cold put it into a
Glass, dross and all: and when it is occupied pour out a little into a
sawcer of the cleerest water, and none of the bottom or dross: and set it
upon the coals, and wash the wound as hot as he may suffer it, and then take a
little linen cloth, and double it three or four times double: and wet it in
the water, and lay it to the wound as hot as the patient may suffer the same,
and bind it fast.

For a cut or wound.
Take a gallon of running water, and put thereto a pint of Honny, and a
quarter of a pound of Roch-allom beaten in very fine powder, and let them sees
together and scum the^ clean, and put thereto a handful of Wood-bine leaves,
and a handful of Sage leaves, a handful of Selondine, and sees them
altogether till the half be consumed, then take it from the fire, and strain
it through a Canuas cloth into another clean vessel, and then put thereto a
pennyworth of grains, and let them sees a while together: and then put it in
a fair glass when it is cold: this is a principal medicine.

For to heal wounds, and to knit and heal broken bones.
Take Betony, Bugle, Sauigle, Pimpernell, Milfoile, Strawberry leaves, Orpin,
Sage, Mouseare, Emerose, Tansie, Sothernwood, herb Robert, herb Water,
Egrimony, Plantaine, Solcirkle, Auence, Madder, Daisies, Camphire, Osmond, the
crop of the red Colewort, the crop of the red bryer, the red Nettle crop, of
the crops of Hemp, take of each a like much save of the Madder by weight, then
take these herbs and stamp them small, and take May butter made of raw
Cream, Ewe milk, with dew water of May, and if that you can get no Ewe milk,
take the Butter of Cow milk of the yellowest color that can be found, for it
is far better then the white, and take a quart of Butter, half a quarterne of
Mede wax, and melt the Butter and the Wax together: and when they be molten,
let the Butter and wax run through a cloth, for then is the Butter clarified
from the Wax, and shread the Butter and the Curds a sunder, or else it will
never do so well, and then let thy Butter keele, and when it is cold then take
and put thereto three pound of thy herbs, and half a pound of Butter, and
cast them in a Mortar, and stamp them small, till you can see nothing of the
Eutter, and then do it in a new earthen pot, and close it fast that no air
come forth, and when all is in the pot, make it sure that no worms may get
in, nor that no air (as I said before) get out: then set it in a moist
place, and so let it stand for nine days at the least, and then it will be
hoare above: then take it out of the pot, and do it in a fair pan, and set
it on the fire and fry them well together, and stir it well, and when it is
hot enough, take it from the fire and wring it through a cloth, and let it
stand till it be cold, and then kerne it and let out the water, and then do it
into the pan and melt it again: then do it up in boxes, and keep the same to
your use.

Also to make an ointment sanatiffe for wounds.
Take of the same herbs before expressed, and work them as thou did the
salve: but whereas thou tookest Butter to thy salve, take fair Barrowes grease
and melt it: and when it is cold, put it to thy ointment, and whereas thou
tookest to thy salve Madder, put thereto Cammemile, and put thy herbs thereto:
take to that ointment of Auence as much weight as of all the other herbs
before named, and then shall this ointment be according to the salve, the one
to work within, and the other to work without, for this salve and ointment is
cheifest accounted of among Physicians for all wounds, both to cleanse and to
heal very fair and perfectly, and to knit broken bones surely.

To heal all old wounds.
Take Plantaine water distilled, and put half a pint thereof to an ounce of
Mercury sublimatum, and so stir them very well together, until it be
dissolved in the Plantaine water, and then wash the sore or wound well
therewith, and after wet a cloth in the same water, and cover it clean over
the sore or wound, and use this once every day until it be whole, and do so
from day to day.

A red water for sores and wounds, either old or new.
Take a pottle of running water, a pecke of ashes of Ash wood that is old, and
a pottle of Tan-iuyce that leather never came into, and a pound of Mother, a
pound of Allam, and beat them all in fine powder, and put it into your
Tan-iuyce nine days, and then when you have so done, take a pottle of the one
and a pottle of the other, and put thereto ten ounces of green Copperis, and
one ounce of Ginger beaten all into fine powder, and put them all together, and
so sees them to a quarte, then take them off and strain them, and put them in
a fair vessel, and pour out the thin from the thick, and lay a wet cloth
thereon, and lay it to the wound or sore either old or new, and wash them
well therewith.

A water imperial for all wounds and Cankers.
Take a handful of red Sage leaves, and a handful of Selondine, as much of
Woodbine leaves, take a gallon of conduit water, and put the herbs in it: and
let them boil to a pottle, and then strain the herbs through a strainer, and
take the licour and set it over the fire again, and take a pint of English
honny, a good handful of Roch-allam, as much of white Copper is fine beaten, a
pennyworth of grains bruised, and then let them boil altogether three or
four walmes over the fire, and let the skimme as it rises be well taken off
with a feather, and when it is cold, put the same into an earthen pot or
bottle so that it may be kept close from air: and for a green wound, take of
the thinnest, and for an old wound of the thickest, cover the sore rather
with Veale or Mutton: skimme them with Docke leaves: when that you have dressed
them with this aforesaid water.

To make water imperial another way.
Take a handful of Dragon, of Scabions, of Endive, a handful of Pimpernell, a
handful of Worme-wood, of Rue a handful: a handful of Tansie: as much
Fetherfoy: as much of Daisie leaves, as much of Cowslyps: as much of
Maydenhayre: as much Sinckfoyle: as much Dandelyon: as much Time: as much
Bawme: of each of these herbs a handful, as I said before: then take of
Treakle a pound: of Bole Armoniack four ounces: and when you have all these
herbs together, you must take and shread them a little, but not too small,
then take the Treakle and the Bole armoniack, and mingle them and the herbs
together: then put them in a stillitory and still them, and it is made.

A very good remedy to take away Warts.
For to take away Warts, take the seed of Briony with the leaves, burn them
and make Ashes of them: and meddle the ashes with the juice of the same herb
like an ointment, and annoint your Warts often, and they will fall away. The
dunge of an Eagle if it be often rubbed upon the Warts, does likewise do away
the same very quickly.

Another remedy for Warts.
Take the juice of herb Wart-wort, and annoint any Wart or Ring-worme
therewith, and it helps.

For to do away Warts.
Take Elder berries and stamp them, then wringe out the juice, and with the
same use once or twice a day to anoint thy Warts, and it will quickly do them
clean away. This experiment has been proved.

For to do away a Wenne.
Take and bind fast the Wenne, then take Verdigreace, Sulphur, Soap, oil of
Eggs, Allam and Honny, and temper them together, and lay thereto, and it shall
do away the Wem, and also for to heal it well and clean within three or
four times dressing.

For to do away a Wenne.
Take a quantity of vnslackt Lime, and mix the same very well with as much
black Soap, and annoint any Wen therewith, and the Wenne will fall away: and
when the root is come out, annoint the place with oil of Balm, and it will
perfectly heal the same.

How to help one that is blasted.
Take the white of a Hens Egg, and put it in a brazen Mortar, then put
thereto a quarter of an ounce of Copperis, and grind them well together till
it be as small as an ointment: with which annoint the sore face, and it will
case the pain and take away the swelling: and when it is welnye whole, annoint
the place with a little Popilium, and that will make the skin fair and well
again.

An excellent remedy to help the rewme.
Rub the leaf of a Marygold between your fingers, and put the same into your
nose, and let it stay there a little while, and it will bring forth abundance
of humors out of the head, it will help the Rewme within a little while, if
you use it. This has been proved.

Another special remedy for the Rewme.
Take a little stick, and tie about the end thereof old Oaken leaves, then
cut them something round, and hold the same leaves in your mouth as deep and
as far as you can suffer the same, holding the stick between your teeth, in
this manner hold your mouth over a dish or poringer, and there will great
abundance of humors avoid out of your mouth. But within a while wash in
fair water the leaves on the stick, and then hold them in your mouth again.
Do thus for the space of an hour, and use it three or four times a day, for
three or four days together, or until you have avoided so much watery humors
as you think good. This is the best and presentest remedy for the rewme that
ever was heard of. And he that proves it shall find it and excellent help.

A sovereign water against melancholy, and drink to comfort the stomach.
Take a pound of Aqua vitae. and put thereto a quart of Redrose water, put
into it as much Licoris sliced and scraped as you may hold in both your hands,
but if it be English Licoris you may take less, put thereto as much Anniseede
as you think will be sufficient to make it taste well thereof: stew all these
with a soft fire well covered with an earthen pot that the air do not go out
to your judgment, till that a pint thereof be consumed: let it not boil in
any case but stewe softly, this done, take it from the sire, and let it scand
and cool: and when it is cold draw it from the seed and Licoris, and put it
into the wicker glass or bottle, but bruise it that your water may be as clear
as you can, and when need requires occupy it.

To make artificial oil of balm for wounds.
Take Balm, Rewe, Fetherfoy, Sowthistle, Nettles, Briany leaves, Bramble
leaves, Sage leaves, Cinckfoyle, of each of all these a handful: take all
these simples and lay them in oil Olive one whole night, and take the water
that comes of a Vine stalk, and black Suailes, gum Arabeck, gum Edere, of
each of these one ounce: you must take the seed of the Ash tree, and beat the
seeds and the gummes very fine together. Afterward, you must put the oil and
the herbs into the Still, and throw thereupon a quarter of a pound of the
oil of Roses, and two ounces of Aqua vitae, and so distill it with a soft
fire: but you must still it at the least twice or thrice: This oil will heal
all wounds very soon.

A green balm to incarnate wounds, and to dry up filthy ulcers.
Take of fine Aqua vitae, Venice turpentine, oil of Roses, of every of them a
pint, boil them with a soft fire of coals, and after a waume or two, put in of
Verdigreace made in fine powder an ounce and a half, and boil it to a good
perfect substance, and so use it to your sore wounds and filthy ulcers, and it
shall help them very shortly.

To make artificial Balm.
Take of gum Elempine six ounces, Aloes, Mirrhe, Castore, Apponace of each two
ounces, Storax calamite. Olibanum Mastick Cacabre, of each four ounces, Munge
Bedelii, gum of the Fig tree, of each two ounces and a half, make every one of
them in powder by themselves that will be powdered. The spices take of Lignum
aloes, three ounces, Zilobalsami, Carpobalsami, Spignard, Cloves, Sinamon,
Calamus aromatici, nut aromatici, Nutmegs, Galingall, Setwell, grains,
Cardomomus, both of the great and small, Cucubes, roots of Cipres,
Mustacastaline, which is the coddes of the Musk, of each two ounces,
Rewpenticon 2. drams, flowers of rosemary 2. ounces, Juniper berries, Enula
campana, of each dried an ounce, Bayberries half an ounce, beat all together
in gross powders, then take of the seed of fennel, perfly, tansie, Carret,
Coriander, and Caroway seed, of each one ounce: wormwood, sage dried, basil,
Rosemary: Margerum: Penniriall: Mints: Secades: Egrimonie: a like quantity of
each: then take Figs of Algarie, Dates the stones taken away: Reysons of the
sun: Almonds, of each four ounces: then take oil of Turpentine 2. pynts:
oil of Mastick, oil Bennet, oil of Castore, oil of Tartor, oil of Dyll,
oil of Exceter, of each half a pint, oil of Spike, oil of Nard, of each
four ounces: pure Aqua composita the weight of all the former stuff: and
first boil them in the bodies of two Limbecks of glass fast luted, with the
crowns of their couers downward in Balnaeo mariae, that is, a Cawdron of
water a day and a night: then take off their caps and set them aright, and
distill it with an easy fire in these two Limbecks, all your stuff being
divided into even portions, as before: lute them strongly, and distill them
with a sofe fire, six hours: then in the rest increase your fire by little
and little til the water be passed, then shall you see white oil, and last of
all yellow oil: keep every of them by themselves: the fourth is in the
bottom, keep ye as an excellent remedy for all wounds, it helps suddenly,
without suffering the wound to putrify or cast matter, but confounds it and
helps it straight.

The virtue of this Balm.
It is most excellent for Gowtes, Palsies, Cramps, wounds, akings, sinews cut,
hurt or shrunk, the falling sickness, Apoplexia, the turning of the brain,
the biting of dogs, or any other venomous things, for the Timpany to annoint
the belly, and the first water is good for all wounds, and all retten and
filthy ulcers, as has been proved.

The receipt of the water of health, by G. K.
Take red Rose flowers, Cammomile flowers, Lauender flowers, Buglosse flowers,
Isope flowers, Rosemary flowers, sage flowers, secados flowers, balm flowers,
time and wild time, peniriall, Margeru^, winter sauery, pimpernell, S. John
woort, Philopendula, eyebright, horehound, dittany, bittany, scabies,
turmentill, planten, auence, maidenhaire, mints, rue, sapifrage, Harts-tung,
Ensras, Brasill, Canepithy, Piony, Juniper berries, Bay leaves or berries: take
of all these flowers a maine handful if they be gotten, if not, then take
three gallons of mighty strong Ale, or three gallens of Gascoigne wine: then
take these spices, Anniseede two pound, Licoris two pound, Fenell seed two
ounces, Cinnamon two ounces, Caraway seed two ounces, Galingall two ounces, Setwell
two ounces, Angelica two ounces, Ciperus two ounces, Ginger, Nutmegs, of each one
ounce, Enula campana one ounce, Calamus aromaticus one ounce, Ireus one ounce,
Lignum aloes two ounces, Cloves one ounce, Cucubes one ounce, Grains one ounce,
long Pepper one ounce, Spignard one ounce, Mace one ounce, Amiss amonium one ounce,
Sugar half a pound, Alkenet two ounces, Olibanum, Mastick, Basil seed,
Marierum seed: of all these half an ounce, and do by the drawing of this water
of health in all respects as by your Aqua composita, your flowers and herbs
must be dried, and shred on a chopping board a good handful of each at the
least, and your Aniseede must be well beated and dusted, and your Licoris must
be scraped and sliced clean, and then all the rest of your other spices and
seeds must be beaten fine in a brazen mortar each to his quantity. Also you may
put thereto three grains of ciuell Musk, for it will make it to drink the more
plesanter, and for diverse infirmities this water is good, as to break wind in
the belly, for them that cannot relish or digest their meats, and for diverse
other cold causes, this water will make a man to live long, and to keep and
preserve a man long in health, and to make a man to look young again.

For to make pety Balm.
Take fine meat oil a pint, and put it in a clean pan, and sees it well over
the fire, then do thy hands in cold water and let it drop thereon and it will
cream, and when it leaves creaming do it to the fire again, and let it
seethe well, and do so three or four times with your hands, then take half
an ounce of Masticke, as much of Frankensence, as much of Rozen, a quarter of an
ounce of Verdigreace: make all these into powder by themselves, then do them
into the oil, and let them seethe well together, and stir it well and skim it
clean, then let it cool, then do it in a pewter vessel, and this is a good
balm.

For to make aqua vitae perfectissima, per G. K.
Take the root of Sapifrage, Persly, Alisander, Fenell, Time, Isope,
Peniriall, Rosemary, Lauender, Primrose, Mints, Rue, Betony, Sauein, Sage,
Auence, Calamint, of each of these herbs half a quarterne: then take
Galingall, Pepper, long Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each of these one ounce, of
Canell, Mace, Cucubes, of each of these two ounces, Setwell, Pellitory of
Spain, Lignum aloes, of each half an ounce, stamp thy herbs, and powder thy
spices, and do them in a gallon of good red Wine, and mingle thy herbs and
spices together in the Wine, and let them stand all a night in steep, and on
the morrow distill them into a Limbeck: this water has many fair virtues, and
it comfort man or woman, and keeps them from all maladies that be cold.

Also it is hot at the first distilling, and at the third distilling it helps
man or woman in their kindly heates.

Also it comfort a cold stomach, and destroys both scabbe and scall.

Also it heals all old sores if it be kindly used, it is good for the
deafnes of the ears by putting a little thereof into thy ear: it drives away
the stinking of the breath.

Also it is good for the falling evil, and for the palsy in the tung, for
that palsy makes a man suddenly dombe.

Also it heals the palsy of other members that trembles.

Also for biting or stinging of Scorpions or Adders, or other venomous beasts,
for no venim can come near unto it.

Also it is good for the toothache of cold rewme, and for a cold fever being
drunk before the axis: it is good for to wash the emerods and old sores called
Noli me tangere, and for the Collica passio, and who so drinks it for the
vanity of the head: it also heals the saucefleume in the face.

Also it purges the stomach of all corruptions and for stone, and for all
gowtes, it destroys the gnawing within the belly, and suffers no wind to
breed in man's body.

To make Aqua vitae for cold causes.
Take good Gascoigne wine, and distill it in a glass, or Serpentine, and that
water that burns do it by it self, and if it be moist it will be of more
virtue.

Also take of Ginger, Canell, Mace, Cucubes, Nutmegs, Grains, long Pepper, of
each of these three ounces, and bray them in a mortar, and searce them: and put
these powders into the water that burns and still it often, and so reserve it
to your use morning and evening first and last, and this is called the most
sovereign water, and mighty against all manner of cold causes that ingendereth
within man or woman, and this will help you for diverse infirmities that is
within man: this has been proved often.

A sovereign water used by Doctor Steaphens Physician, with the which he did
many great cures, and a little before his death he declared the same to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and now to the benefit and commodity of all people
that be well disposed.
Take two gallons of good Gascoigne wine or Clarret wine that is good, or else
two gallons of mighty strong Ale, and of every of these spices a dram: take of
Ginger, Galingall, Cinnamon, or Canell, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds,
Fennel seed, Caraway seeds, Calamus aromaticus, Cucubes, Ireos, Maces,
Spignard, Enula campana, Canepithis, of each of these a good handful, Juniper
berries one ounce, and of every one of these herbs following a handful, Sage,
red Roses, red Mints, garden Time, wild Time, Pellitory, Camomell, Lauender,
Wormwood, Betony, Plantaine, Ribwoort, Bays, red Iilliflowers, wild Marierum,
Rosemary, Organum, Rue, the flowers of Secados, Peniriall, Hilwoort, Auence,
Cowslip leaves, Primrose leaves, and flowers of screbby grass, Strawbery
leaves, Tutson, beat all these spices, and stamp all these herbs, and put
them in the liquor aforesaid, and put a little Musk therein, and let it stand
twelve hours infused, and stir it oftentimes, then still this water in a
Limbeck close stopped that no air come out of the pot, and with a small sire
keep about it that it come not too fast forth, and keep the first water by it
self for that is best. Also the second pint by it self for that is also good
but not as the first is. Also you shall receive a third pint of that water of
these three gallens, but your ounce of Alkenet must be for the two last waters
to color it red withal, which must be in the receauer with some Sugar, and
some Cinnamon, and you may keep this water these seven years, and it will be
in his full strength and operation.

The receite of the water called Aqua mirabilis et pretiosa, made by Doctor
VVillowby Physician.
Take of Galingall, Cloves, Maces, Cucubes, Ginger, Cardomomum, Nutmegs,
Millilot, Saffron, Egrimony water four ounces, and beat all these into powder
the quantity of a dram and somewhat more: then take of the juice of Selondine,
and a pint of M. George Kebels water of the best and the first: put of the same
water being well mingled in a stillatory of glass, and let it be stopped well
and close, and so let it stand for the space of four and twenty hours, and
then distill them with a soft fire for the space of a natural day.

The virtue of this water aforesaid.
This water is of secret nature, it is exceeding good for the stomach, it
dissolueth the lungs without any greeuance, and the same lungs being wounded
and putrified it mightily helps them, and comfort them, and it suffers
not the body to putrify.

Also he shall never need to be let blood, and this water suffers not the
body to be brent with choler, nor yet with melancholy nor slemot to be lift
up and have dominion above water, and this water mightily expels the rume,
and profits much the stomach, it ingendreth good color, and keeps and
conserueth the visage and memory.

Also it is good for the palsy, if the said water be given to man or woman
laboring toward death one spoonful, it relenteth them: of all waters
artificial there is no better.

Also use in Summer once a week a spoonful of this water fasting, and in
Winter time two spoonefuls: it is good for women that have the green
sickness, and for diverse other causes: per Doctorem Willowbie.

The receite of Cinnamon.
Take rennish wine a quart, or spanish wine a pint, Rosewater a pint and a
half, Cinnamon bruised a pound and a half, let these stand infused the space of
four and twenty hours, then distill it, and being close stopped and luted,
then with a soft fire distill the same softly in a Limbecke of glass, and
receive the first water by it self.

Also if ye be so disposed to make the same water weaker, take three pints of
Rosewater, and a pint and a half of rennish wine, and so distill the same, and
you shall have to the quallity of the stuff the quantity of the water, which
is three pintes: but the first is the best, and so reserve it to your use both
morning and evening.

To make Cinnamon water another way.
Take three quarts of Muskadine, and a pound of Cinnamon, and half a pint of
good Rose Water, and so let them lie infused the space of four and twenty
hours, and distill it as aforesaid, and you shall receive to the quantity as
to the quality, but the first pint is the best and the cheifest of all the
other as is manifest practice.

Aqua composito for a surfeit.
Take Rosemary, Fenell, Isope, Time, Sage, Horehound, of each of these a
handful, Peniriall, Mints, Marierum, of each six crops, a root of Enula
campana, of Licoris, Aniseed bruised, of each two ounces, put all these to three
gallons of mighty strong Ale, and put it into a brass pot over an easse fire:
and set the Limbeck upon it, and stop it close with dow or Past that no air
do go out, and so keep it stilling with a soft fire, and so preserve it to
your use as need requires.

To make water of life.
Take Balm leaves and stalks, Burnet leaves, and flowers a handful, of
Rosemary, Turmentile leaves and roots, Rosa solis a handful, red Roses a
handful, Carnations a handful, Isope a handful, a handful of Time, red
strings that grow upon Sauery a handful, red Fenell leaves and roots a
handful, red Mints a handful: put all these herbs into a pot of earth
glased, and put thereto as much white Wine as will cover the herbs, and let
them soke therein eight or nine days: then take an ounce of Cinnamon, as much of
Ginger, as much of Nutmegs, Cloves, and Saffron a like quantity, of Aniseeds a
pound, great Raisons a pound, Sugar a pound, half a pound of Dates, the hinder
part of an old Coney, a good fleshy running Capon, the flesh and sinews of a
leg of Mutton, four young Pigeons, a dozen of Larks, the yel^s of twelve
Eggs, a loaf of white bread cut in sippets, Muskadell or Bastard three
gallons^ or as much in quantity as suffiseth to distill all these things at
once in a Limbeck, and thereto put of Methridatum two or three ounces, or else
with as much perfect Treakle, and distill it with a moderate fire, and keep
the first water by it self, and the second water alone also, and when there
comes no more water with strings, take away the Limbecke, and put into the
pot more Wine upon the same stuff, and still it again and you shall have an
other good water, and shall so remain good. In the first ingredience of this
water you must keep a double glass warily, for it is a restoratiue of all
principal members, and defends against all pestilentiall diseases, as
against the Palsy, Dropsy, Spleen, yellow or black Iaundise, for worms in
the belly, and for all agues be they hot or cold, and all manner of swellings
and pestilentiall sorrows in man or melancholy and flegmaticke, and it
strengthens and comfort all the sprites and strings of the brain, as the
heart, the milt, the liver, and the stomach, by taking thereof two or three
spoonefuls at one time by it self, or with Ale, Wine, or Beer, and by putting
a pretty quantity of Sugar therein: also it helps disgestion, and does
break wind, and stops laske, and binds not, and it mightily helps and
eases man or woman of the pain of the heart burning, and for to quicken the
memory of man: take of this water three spoonfuls a day in the morning, and an
other after he goes to dinner, and the third last at night.

The electuary of life.
And if a man be sick at the stomach or in the belly, or at the heart, or in
the head, or were bitten with any venomous evil beast, or poisoned, and a man
were by the way travailing, or in the house, and he had all these sicknesses,
so that he had with him this Lectuary that is made of five things to eat there
of or drink thereof in water three or four spoonefuls, he should by Gods help
(...) quickly whole, so that he use it for fifteen days fasting: and when he
goes to bed least he should not be whole of all his sicknesses in the body,
and if he (...) drink the of^ (...) a day the better: and there be the five
thinge^ to make the electuary with: Sco^loglo, Mo^re, G^ntia^ Grandorer, and
I^laout, as much of the one as of the other and stamp them, and strain them,
and mingle them with honey that has been well boiled on the fire and scummed
clean: and the (...) making of this Lectuary, and when as need requires you
may use it (...).

A good powder called the powder of life.
Take the seed of Smallage, and the bones of a Mouse, and the root of
Turmentile, the root of Quintfoile, and the root of Philopendula, the seed
of Gromwell, and the seed of Sapifrage, the seed of Alisanders, and the seed
of Sowthistle, of each of these seeds a like much, and then take Licoris and
Galingall, Cannell, and Ginger, of each a like much: then bray them in a
mortar, and mingle them together and use thereof, then do thereto a quantity of
Auence, of Saffron, and a quantity of Maces, and this is the making of this
powder for all manner of sickness in man's body or in the womb, or if a man be
overcome by the way, it will destroy all manner of poison and venom, and the
dropsy, and palsy, and also the wallowing about a man's heart.

FINIS.
A Table of all such matters as are contained in this Book.
FOr all parts of the head, and the diseases thereof. Fol. 1 Very good remedies
for them that cannot sleep. 9 For all manner of pain in the ears. 10 For all
manner of disseases in the eyes. 11. For the diseases in the nostrils and the
nose. 15 For the diseases coming by toothache 16 How to keep the teeth
clean. 18. How to help the pain in the gums and the bleeding thereof. 18 For
blysters in the mouth, and swelling of the lips. eodem How to help a stinking
breath. 20. For the tongue, and the palsy thereof. 20 For to do away
sunne-burning. 21 How to help all manner of red pimpled faces. 22 How to help
any one that is iawfalne 23 For choler and shortness of breath. eodem For a
hoarce voice and to open the pipes eodem For a sore throat, and for the Quinsie
in the throat 24. How to help all manner of cold Coughes 25. How to stay a
vomit, and how to make one cast. 27 How to provoke a good appetite 28 A remedy
against the shortness of breath. eodem For griefs in the arms and hands 29
For all kind of diseases in the stomach eodem For the pain of the Bulk 32
For spetting of blood eodem For all manner of pain or incombrances in the
breast. 33 A remedy against hart-burning 35 Remedies against swounding. 37
Remedies against the pains of the liver, the lunges, and the diseases of the
milt. 38 Against all pains in the gutts and belly. eodem Against the diseases
coming of the Spleen 39 For pain in the sides, and for the plurasie 45
Against all aches in the back, and pain in the raines. 46 For all manner of
impostumes in the body 48 Against the disease called the Mother. eodem For all
manner of pain in the privy members 49 How to help the fundament and the
piles. 54 For to help the pills and Emerods. eodem For evils in the flanks
57 Against all manner of pain in the knees eodem Against all aches in the
legs. 58 Against the pain in the feet, and for corns on the toes. 59
Certain necessary rules for purging and letting blood. 62 Against all diseases
through the body, beginning of agues 63 Against all manner of hot or cold
Agues. 64 Against all manner of aches in the body 65 For a man that is broken.
eodem For all manner of broken bones. 66 Against burning with Gunpowder, or
scalding 67 Against all manner of bruses 68 A present remedy for to break a
botch. eodem For the biting of a mad dog, or the biting of any venomous
beast, or Serpent. 69 To help one that is in a consumption eodem How to help
the Sciatica passio. 71 To help the Crampe, and to have a good colloure 72
Against the Canker, a special remedy. eodem Against the Colic and the stone
diverse remedies 73 Against the Collica passio, and for costiffenes. eodem How
to help the Dropsy in a man or woman 74 For a Dormitorie eodem How to draw
a bile from one place to another eodem To draw a Dart out of a man's body 75
How to help the falling sickness eodem To cure a Fistula eodem How to stop
a flixe or laxe. 76 To draw fire out of any sore, and to fret away dead flesh.
77 Against all manner of Goutes. eodem Against the green Sickness, and gnawing
or aching of joints, diverse remedies. 78 Against heat in the body. 79 Remedies
against the black or yellow Iaundies eodem. Against all impostumes in the body
80. To destroy all itches or breakings out eodem To destroy a Tetter or
Kingworme 81. For the kernels, or Kings evil. eodem For the laske. eodem
Diverse remedies for the Leprosy 82 How to make a man lean eodem Remedies
against the pain in the lunges eodem Remedies for the Morphew, either white or
black. eodem. To cure a Marmole 83 A maturatiue to ripen a botch or bile.
eodem To make Neruaile for all akings eodem To make of diverse sorts of oils,
and to know which be hot and which be cold. 84 To make an oil for diverse
purposes. eodem To make ointments that be green 86 To make diverse precious
ointments eodem To make a medicine against the palsy. eodem To help the
pricking of a thorn or needle in any joint, and the hole be stopped. 87 To
make a preparatiue eodem To make a Mellilot plaster eodem To make the powder
of life two ways 88 To make the Philosophers stone, so called, by reason of
the sundry virtues thereof. eodem How to make Aurum potabile. eodem To make
the black plaster two manner of ways 89 To make the plaster called Flos
vnguentorum. eodem How to make the golden plaster, which heals all bruses
ofvaines or sinews 90 To make a plaster called Gratia dei mayor et minor.
eodem To make Methridate against poison or pestilence. 91 To make pills for
poison. eodem Against the plague or pestilence a remedy eodem A remedy for a
man that has drunk poison eodem To cure a King-worme or Tetter 92 A good
restoratiue to restore a man's nature, and to help them that are weak and
decayed. 93 A restoratiue of Rosa solis. eodem To restore a man that is brought
low 93 A sovereign salve to heal all sores and wounds. eodem A salve for to
bring sores that rank and ache into their own kind, and to cease the burning
or aching 94 A salve for a new cut that will not leave bleeding eodem A salve
for all sores. eodem A very good salve to heal a new hurt eodem A very good
salve called Incarnatiue, to bring flesh. 94 To make a salve to draw and heal
95 To make a salve for any old sore eodem To make a salve that is a precious
ointment for all kinds of wounds and bruses. eodem For the salt humor. 96
How to heal any sore or cut. eodem An ointment for all manner of sores, cuts,
and swellings, and for any great heat. 96 How to skin the flesh that is raw.
97 Sundry medicines to heal scabbes eodem A very good ointment to do away
scabs and itching. 97 Remedies to cure the shingles 98 To help the shrinking
of the sinnewes eodem An oil for sinnewes that be shrunk 98 How to knit
sinnewes that be broken eodem Diverse remedies to staunch blood 99 Against any
kind of swelling that comes suddenly into a man's limbs. eodem To staunch
blood when a Master vain is cut. eodem For to make one slender 99 A very good
remedy to break the stone 100 Against the Strangurie and Dissury 101 Remedies
against the Stone and Strangulion eodem Remedies against the Tissicke, well
proved eodem To make Treakle 102 How to make the golden treat that heals all
bruses eodem An excellent way teaching how to make the white treat, called
Apostolicon. eodem How to make the treat called Emanuell eodem To make a good
treat, called the green treat of Jane 103 Another treat called Gratia Dei.
eodem To make a very good treat for wounds 103 To make a green treat for a
green wound, which is a special good remedy eodem How to make a treat which
will endure a hundred years, being very good for all aches in the bones, and
excellent for to help the sinews. 103 To make a treat called Oxicroxie. eodem
How to make Vnguentum album, two ways 104 To make Vnguentum popilium eodem To
make Vnguentum geptiacum eodem To make Vnguentum ruptorum 104 To make Vnguentum
versilium. eodem To make Vnguentum delerosica. 105 To make Vnguentum genuest.
105 To make Vnguentum penatum eodem A very good ointment to heal wounds eodem
A drink made of balls to heal wounds 105 Very good remedies for all manner of
wounds. 106 Remedies how to heal wounds and broken bones. 108 To make an
ointment sanatiffe for wounds 108 How to heal all old wounds 109 A red water
for sore wounds, either old or new eodem A Water imperial for all wounds and
Cankers 109 Another way how to make water imperial. eodem Very good remedies
to do away Warts. 110 Remedies to do away a Wenne eodem How to help one
that is blasted 110 Very good remedies to help the Rewme eodem A sovereign
water against mellancholie. eodem To make artificial oil of Balm for wounds
eodem A green Balm to incarnate wounds, and to dry up filthy vicers. 112 To
make an artificial Balm. eodem The receipt of the water of health eodem To
make petty Balm 113 To make Aqua vitae perfectissima. eodem To make Aqua vitae
for cold causes 114 To make Doctor Stephens water eodem To make Doctor
Willowbies water, called Aqua mirabilis, very necessary for diverse purposes.
115 To make Cinnamon water two ways eodem To make Aqua composita for a surfeit.
115 To make the Water of life eodem To make the electuary of life. 116 To make
the powder of life. eodem
The end of the Table.
AT LONDON Printed by I. R. for Edward White, dwelling at the little North
door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gunne. 1597.


