THE DAMPE OF DEATH: BEATEN back with the glorious light and life of Jesus
Christ.

In a Sermon Preached at Lancaster Assizes in Lent last, to the condemned
Prisoners there, and before the Honorable Judges, and Worshipful of that
County.

By William Leigh Bachelor in Divinity, and Pastor at Standish.

1. Cor. 15. v. 57. Thanks be to God, which has given us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

LONDON Printed by Tho: Creed, for Arthur Johnson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the white Horse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THOmas Tildesley Esquire, his Majesty's Attorney
general, within the County Palantine of Lancaster, and Vice Chancellor, of
his Highness Court of Chancerie there: Grace be multiplied in this world, and
blessedness in the world to come.
Worshipful Sir.
YOur love has ouerawed me much in this business wherein it has pleased God
and you to put me, and for because your place, and praise, is in the Gospel, I
durst not consult with flesh and blood, but have as you may see, most willingly
obeyed the heavenly call.

The Sermon being ended at Lancaster in Lent Assizes last, where I was enjoined
by authority to preach to the prisoners then condemned to die, it was your
desire to have a copy in private of that which was then delivered in public,
at what time I truly told you, my Notes were scattered and vndisgested,
rather carried in my heart, then in my hand, yet (would God assisting me) in
convenient time bind them together ere they were too far fallen out of my
mind and memory, which I have here done accordingly, and sent them to your
worship, as a constat of my unfeigned love, yet with this Caution, you never
think what was then delivered by voice, can be carried so powerfully in
papers, as it was in speech.

The words contained in the two tables which God gave to Moses, from the holy
Mount, were first spoken by the mouth of God, ere they were written by the
finger of God, and then carried into the valley to be heard and kept of all the
people. So may I likewise say of the Gospel, Voices and Prophesies went of the
blood of Christ, ere ever it dropped out of his veins. But if gracious words had
not fallen from the mouth of Christ, Christians had never conceived either the
power or virtue of his death. For as there is a blood of redemption, so there
is a word of reconsiliation, and surely where the word teaches not, there the
blood droppeth not: you are religiously wise to conceive whereat I aim. To
wit, that reading, preaching, and practizing of piety, may all go together,
like Saul and Jonathan, of whom it is said, that they were lovely in their
lives, and at their deaths were not divided.

Learned you are in your own laws, and therefore know better then I can
tell, that though the body of your laws lie in your books, yet the soul
thereof is in your mootes and pleadings, as also that the bar and bench do
more powerfully end, and profitably determine our causes, then the books in
your chambers can do: I speak in no desperagement, either of your books, or
our Bibles, which in themselves are learned, sacred and holy, but to intimate
to all the world, that if you plead not, and we preach not, neither states can
long stand, nor souls can be ordinarily saved. For though holy books be holy
Oracles, and registers of Gods truth, Malachi. 2. v. 7.
Yet must the Priests lips preserve knowledge, and the people must seek the
law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

Good Sir, take what I have written, in lieu of my love, may it pleasure you
and benefit Souls, either living in this world, or dying to a better, it is
all I wish in my heart, it is all I beg in my prayer, and what is in my power
or Element to do, it shall be always yours, my pen is yours, my pains are
yours, my self am yours, to be commanded in him, who commands all, with my
daily prayer to God, for you and yours, ever to be kept under his holy and
helping hand of providence and protection. And so I cease your further trouble,
but never leave to love and honor you, as I am much bounden,

Standish this seventeenth day of April. 1613. Your worships ever, and so
assured in his love, William Leigh.

THE DAMPE OF DEATH, BEATEN BACK WITH THE glorious light and life of Jesus
Christ.
Colloss. 3. verse. 3.4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in good.

When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory.


WHen I last supplied this place in your honorable presence as now I do, and
preached unto those poor delinquents then ready to die by the doom of
justice; I was sharply censured of some, that I preached too much mercy, and
too little Judgment, and that like an unskillful Samaritan, I powered into the
sores of those wounded souls and broken hearts over much oil, and too little
vinegar.

Which and if I did, I might well say with the Prophet Jeremiah, in a cause not
much different; Ierem. 20.7.
O my God, if I be deceived, thou have deceived me, thou have deceived me with
the extent of thy mercy, which reaches far, even from the nethermost hell,
to the highest heavens: Thou have deceived me with the height of thy mercy,
which is above all thy works, for thy mercy O Lord stretches it self unto
the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds: thou have deceived me with the
depth of thy mercy, for one depth calls upon an other, but that of mercy
swalloweth up all: Nay thou have deceived me with thine holy offerings of
mercy upon thine holy Altar, who have said, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; But oh my God, thou art not deceived, neither can thy mercies be
limited in thy bounty, and why shall they be straightened in my bowels?

It may be Nature has made me ouermilde, and the sins of the world require I
should be severe, yet this must I say withal, that neither my ouermilde
disposition, nor yet the worlds transgression, shall ever make me cruel
against the penitent.

And such you are, whose salt tears this day, do well express your
sorrowful hearts, who having been humbled, at the bar of Gods Justice, why
should you not appeal to the bar of his mercy, to seek and sue for grace
to help in time of need.

For when is need if not now? when the fear of death is before your face, when
the horror of your sins cries vengeance against your souls, when your best
friends fail you, and this whole world forsakes you, when Satan winnoweth
you like wheat, because he knows he has but a short time, when is need, if
not now? to pray that your faith fail you not, that the Lord would be
propitious, and that no temptation fall upon you greater then you are able to
bear, but that even in the midst of the temptation, the Lord would give you
a gracious issue, and that so upon your dissolution which is at hand, you might
be translated out of this miserable world, to live with God in the mercies of a
better.

Pardon me then again to pass by these turbulent waters of Jorden, I mean of
Judgment that run roughly upon the Rocks of your sin, and give me leave
yet still to bathe in the sweet running waters of Shilo, I mean mercy, that
go softly by Syon, and when Jordan is driven back with the Ocean of Gods
mercies, you may more speedily make your passage into Canaan the land of your
inheritance.

Now therefore to you, be it spoken poor suppliants, over whom we pray with
tears, and preach with passion, lift up your hearts above the height of all
Sublimitie: Settle your affections on things that are above, and not on things
that are below. For thoe ye be dead, what of that? yet your life is hid with
Christ in God, and when Christ which is your life shall appear, then shall ye
appear with him in glory.

The Text is like the fiery Chariot that carried up Eliah into heaven, 2.
Kings. 2. v. 11.
which thoe happily it might turn his body into Synders, yet it never left
him, till it had brought his soul into solace.

And it runs as you may hear see upon three wheels, the first is of death,
the second of life, and the third, of glory.

Death goes before, Life follows after, and glory perfecteth all: and so as
I may say, there is blessedness in death, there is blessedness in life, and there
is blessedness in glory, and with this three fold gable ye are halled up to
heaven.

Ye are dead, that is your blessed mortification;

Your life is hid with Christ in God, that is your blessed regeneration:

And when Christ which is your life shall appear, then shall ye appear with
him in blessedness, that is your glory: Or thus, ye are dead, that is your
blessed cross, but your life is hid in Christ, that is your blessed shade or
cover, and when Christ shall appear, then shall ye appear with him in
glory, that is your blessed crown and diadem of all heavenly delights.

Genesis 27. v. 26.27.
It is said of aged Isaacke, that when his son Jacob had prepared for him such
sauourie meat as his soul loved, cooked and seasoned with the cunning hand of
Rebeckah his mother, Isaac called unto him, and said, Come hither my son,
and let me kiss thee before I die, for me thinks the smell of thy garments is
like unto the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.

Though most of you be young, yet are ye now aged and dead to this world, as
Isaacke was, and I hope the meat prepared for you, is such sauorie meat as
your soul loves, Cooked with a more curious and cunning hand, then that of
Rebeckah, for the spirit of God has spoken it, by the mouth of Paul, and
therefore come and kiss your Christ before ye die, since the sweet smell and
odor thereof, is like unto the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed;
For now are ye blessed in death, blessed in life, and blessed in glory.

First then my dear brethren, beloved and longed for, I say beloved in the
best love which is of Jesus Christ, and longed for, with a longing desire of
your speedy salvation, even at the instant of your desolution; let it not
seem strange unto you, that there should be a blessedness in death. The truth
has spoken it, you may believe it. Revel. 14. v. 13.
The dead that die in the Lord are fully blessed, Amodo, even now they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them. This voice says John fell
down from heaven, that in the sweet air thereof, breathing life into our
souls, our dead and dull, hearts might be comforted, and even here in the midst
of death, never to despair of life.

You have heard below in this valley of tears many fearful voices, when
sin and shame run after you as it were with Hue and Cry, and when ye
wear taken in your transgressions against God and the King, it was a fearful
voice, when putting your selves upon God and your country, ye were found
guilty by the verdict of twelve just men, yet more were ye daunted, when ye
were sentensed to die with this irreuocable doom, from the mouth of Gods
minister: ye shall go to the prison, from whence ye came, thence to the
place of execution, there shall you hang, until you be dead, and Christ have
mercy upon your souls: your hearts were shaken to hear that voice, and the
merciful Judge tendering dropped down tears to pronounce the Judgment, the
standers by were compassionate, and the whole Bench was moved with your
misery, yet what of all this? Since all these voices are beaten back, with a
voice of greater Majesty: Even thus, The dead that die in the Lord are fully
blessed. Or as it is in my Text, Ye are dead, but your life is hid with
Christ, in God, etc.

But happily it may seem a Paradox to your passionate hearts, that a man
should wither, and yet flourish: that a man should be breathles, and yet
breath: that a man should be senseless, and yet feel: that a man should be
dead, and yet alive: Ye are dead, yet is your life hid in Christ, etc.

Surely, Nature can never sound it, yet grace may apprehend it thus: It is
possible to die to sin, and yet live to righteousness. It is possible to die
to this world, and yet live to a better. It is possible (like a Dead man) to
walk upon this Earth, and yet to have his conversation in Heaven. Nay, it is
possible that heaven and earth should so blend in one, as that one, and the
self same man, should be dead in himself, and yet live to his God.

It was so with Saint Paul, when he said, Whether in the body, or out of the
body, I cannot tell, God he knows, but me thinks I see things that are
invtterable: It was so with John, Revel. 1. V. 10. and V. 17.
when Ravished in spirit, he fell down dead upon the sight, and at the feet of
that heavenly vision. It was so with Daniel, when groueling upon the ground,
Daniell. 8. V. 16.17.18.
he lay as dead: yet heard a voice between the Banks of Hula (which said)
Gabriell, make this dead man to understand the Vision; It was so with Ezekiel,
at the River Kebar, when he was carried between heaven and earth by the hairs
of his head: And so both heard and saw the divine vision. Ezekiel. 8. V. 3.
All these were alive, and yet dead, they were ravished in spirit, and
therefore lavish of their bodies: their thoughts were not mortal, whether in
their bodies, or out of their bodies, they could not tell: Nor did they care,
either for the crosses or comfortes of this transitory world, so they might
solace their souls in the Joys of a better.

The use is good, to make the burden of your death more tolerable, in the
comforts of a better life. Oh bear it with patience: and let your Earthly
passions be molded with heavenly patience: Patientia vera, ipsum amat, quem
portat: True patience loves it burden, and let the visions of God, and
thoughts of immortality, Mortify your members, with your minds, let them
kill your Earthly affections: So shall you pass without grieuances, and say,
Multi vident Punctiones, sed non vident Vnctiones: Many see our Afflictions,
what they are outward, but they do not feel our consolations, what they are
inward.

We are dead, and what of that, Since our life is hid with CHRIST in GOD? who
will Crown us even upon the Cross, with glory and Immortality: Never to
die any more, never to sin any more, never to sigh any more: For Tears shall
be taken from our Eyes, sorrow from our souls, and sin from our Hands, we
shall now walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Oh, but life is sweet, and death is fearful, how may I be prepared against
that hour, to undergo it in a Christian patience, without earthly passions? I
answer.

There be three things that make Death tolerable to each Christian, The first
is, the necessity of dying: The second is, the Fecilitie of dying: And the
third is, the falicitie of dying. For the first, that which cannot be avoided
by any power, it must be endured with all patience: The first Age had it, it
may plead Antiquity. The second Age felt it, it may plead continuance. And
this last Age has it, it will plead property in all flesh, till Sin and
Time shall be no more; Call it then no new thing, that is so ancient: Call it no
strange thing, that is so usual: and call it not an evil properly thine,
which is so common with all the world.

Will thou fear that done, which is always a doing? (I mean thy dying) and
fear thou to die in thy last day, when by little and little thou dyest every
day? Oh well said Saint Paul, by our rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus
our Lord, 1. Cor. 15. Verse. 31.
I die daily: Why then I may well say, Ye are always a dying, and death is
still a doing.

Death is the Lady and Empress of all the world, it ceazeth upon all Flesh,
without surrender of any, till the day of restoration: No place, no Time, no
presence, can back it. There is no privilege against the grave, there is no
pity in the grave, there is no pleading with the grave: And therefore
Antiquity, never made Altar to Death, or did devotion to it, because it was
implacable: Ever found to be cruel, and never felt to be kind.

But it may be you will say, I might yet live longer, for I am young, and in
my blood: I answer, there is no time now to consult with flesh and blood, but
readily to obey the Heavenly call: and for your few years, Seneca says well,
He that dies when he is young, is like one that has lost a Dye, wherewith
he might rather have lost then won: More years might have ensnared you with
more sins, and have hardened you in your impenitencie, to the hazard of your
lives in this world, and your souls in an other: And for the flower of your
youth, if you compare it with Aeternity, whither now you go, and long after,
Ephesians. 4. Verse. 15.
all are equally young, and equally old, for the most extended Age of a man in
this world is but as a point, or a Minute, and the most contracted can be no
less.

And here from the necessity of dying, come we to the facility of dying,
which makes it less fearful, and more tolerable: For that the Sense of
Death is of no continuance, It is buried in it birth, it vanishes in it
thought, and the pain is no sooner begun, but it is ended. Though the Flesh
be frail, yet the spirit is strong, to encounter the cruelty of death: and
to make it rather a kind kiss, then a cruel Cross.

Christ said at his death, Father, Now the hour is come, Io 17. V. 1.
glorify thy Son. Is there glory in Death? And is it but an hour? Non
manet diu, quod in horam tantum manet: It is of no long abode, that abides but
an hour.

And little do I doubt, but in that hour, the soul is more ravished with the
sight of GOD, then the body is tormented with the sense of death. Nay, I am
further persuaded, in the very soul of my soul, that in the hour of death,
the passion of mortality is so beaten back, with the Impression of
Aeternitie, as the flesh feels nothing, but what the soul offers, and that
is God from whom it came, and whither it would: as Saint Augustine says, Eadem
facilitate, qua foelicitate; with as great haste, as happiness: And so I pass
from the facility of dying, to the Felicity and blessedness, that comes
thereby.

Of which I may say, as Sampson did of his riddle, Out of the eater came meat,
and out of the strong came sweetness: Judge. 14. V. 14.
Now the meat that comes out of this eater, and sweetness that proceeds
forth of this strong one, is a Sessation of all evil, and an endowme^t of all
good: all evil both poenae and culpae, are swallowed up of death, and by that
door, we have ready passage to all blessedness, where all good and God is.

Man that is borne of a Woman, Job. 7. V. 6.7. and 14. V. 1.2.
has but a short time to live, and is full of misery:

Oh sweet Death that turns time into Aeternitie, and misery into mercy.
This made Saint Paul to say, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
This made David to dance, in the midst of his Affliction, when he said, I
should verily have fainted, but that I verily trust to see the goodness of God,
in the land of the living. This has supported the souls of Gods Saints, in
the Seas of their sorrows, when they thought upon the day of their
dissolution, wherein they should be made glorious by deliverance.

And therefore whether you please to define or divine of Death what it is, if
it be rightly broken into it parts, and passages, the Elect of God shall find
it, A going out of prison, a shaking off of Gyues, an end of banishment, a
burster of Bands, a destruction of toil, an Arriving at the Haven, a Journey
finished, the laying away of a heavy burden, the lighting from a mad and
furious horse, a deliverance from a ruinous house, and house of claye: The end
of all griefs, the escape of all dangers, the destroyer of all evils, Natures
due, Countries joy, Heavens bliss: And all this, for that by Death the door
is open, and passage made to Blessedness, Rest, and Immortality: Luke 24. V. 26.
According to that of him who died for all: Ought not Christ to have suffered,
and so to have entered into his rest? You may not leap out of your mothers
warm womb, into your fathers hot Joy, but you must a while endure death,
that ye may be dignified, I had almost said deified, Phil. 3. v 21. Revel.
14. v. 4.
and surely you shall be near it, for ye are borne of God, and ye shall be
fashioned like unto Christ, and follow the lamb whither ever he goes: And
now tell me in lieue of all I have said, if death do thus divide us from all
evil, and put us into all good, if death be like the gathering Ost Dan, that
comes last to gather up the lost and forlorn hope in this world, that they
may be found in a better, whether is it better to live in sorrow, or die with
solace?

Let Agamedes and Trophonius assoile the doubt, of whom it is written by Plato
in his Axioco, that after they had built the Temple of Apollo Delphicke, they
begged of God, he would grant them that which would be most beneficial for
them, whereupon they went to bed, and there took their last sleep, and the
day after, they were found both dead, in token, that the day of death is
better, then the day of life, this being the entrance, that the end of all
misery.

The use is good in preparing us to affliction, a continual current ever
running over our backs, even from our birth, unto our burial, with a
continual Archers shot, piercing our veins, and breaking our bones, and from
which we are never delivered, but in the day of our death, Genesis 35. v. 18.
when Bonony the son of my sorrow, is turned into Benjamin the son of my
right hand, and Rahels Cross, is crowned with Ia^^s strength.

And hear seasonably may I descend to the next part of my Text, and turn the
second wheel, carrying you from death to life, wherein you are hid, for your
life is hid in Christ, that is your comfort. Nay that is your Tower, and though
death like a dampe may seem to put out all the delights of pleasure, yet when
it has brought us to the door of life, it is beaten back with a more
glorious light, for then is your life hid with Christ in God: there to be
carefully kept in grace, that ye may be crowned with him in glory, Soul now,
and body then, in that blessed union of faith, and day of restoration, when
this mortality shall put one immortality.

I say carefully kept in the bosom of thy Christ, Psalm. 16.7. Isai. 32.2.
as in a retyring camp after the day of battle, kept as in an hiding place
from the wind, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, kept us
in a sanctuary to shrowde in, and as in one of the Cities of refuge to flee
unto, when sin, hell, and death follow after with hue and Cry: kept as
Joseph was in the dry pit at Dothan, from the rage of his brethren; 1. Sam.
22.1. 1. King. 19.8.9. 1. King. 18.13. 2. King. 11.2.
kept as David was in the Cave of Adullam, from the rage of Saul; kept as
Elijah was at Hebro^ from the ire of Iesabell; kept as the hundredth Prophets
were by Obedea from the fury of Ahab; Nay kept as Ioas was in the loving lap
of Ioram, from the bloody designs of Athalia.

And thus is your life hid in Christ, and so kept as no violence can reach it,
no treason can entrap it, no tyranny can betray it. No policy or puisance
can fetch it out: My sheep says Christ, Ioh. 10. v. 28.
hear my voice and I know them, they follow me, and I give them eternal
life, they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands;
where he does not say any man, but any; That is to say, any sin, any death,
or any devil.

And therefore I may safely secure my soul in the sweet repose of my God and
Christ, when all my friends flee from me, and all mine enemies fly upon me, as
they did upon my Christ, when hanging upon the tree in greatest torments, yet
found out an issue, and said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Luke.
23. v. 46.


Again, if all this be not sufficient to secure thee, yet know further, that
Christ is the storehouse and treasury of all mercy, in whom are hid with thee
as the Apostle says, all the riches of wisdom and knowledge, of grace,
mercy, and peace, of love, life, and salvation, never exhausted, but ever full
and flowing in all abundance, yea, and far above all earthly treasures, in
these several respects, Quia violentia non aufertur, Antiquitate non
Corrumpitur, Communitate multiplicatur, paupertate acquiritur, iucunditate
possidetur, ex spiritualibus Componitur.

For the first, the treasure in this storehouse is such, as no violence can
fetch it thence, no Moth can eat it, no Canker can corode it, no thieves can
break through or steal, no fury, no combustion, no wind from the wilderness,
no violence of the Sabeians, no Caldean bands can burst in where thy God and
Christ have treasured up thy life, and thy salvation.

Nor is it ever altered with time, decayed, or exhausted.

The Persian store is now emptied, and devouring time has eaten out their rich
treasure, the Assirian wealth is worn out, and Babels burse is broken down,
the great Maguzin of the Medes is molded to dust, and Romes revenues are
lestned since Cesars time, the mighty Monarchs of the world are either worn
out, or weakened, in their wealth; in their wit, in their power, and in their
puisance. The imperial city is shallow in store, because it is sunk in
sin, and become a cage for all filthy birds. Lastly, it pittieth me to think
upon Salomons store, when gold and silver wear as stones in the street, tract
of time has spent it, and now Ierusalems riches is in her ruins; All these
are gone, and their pomp was in the pride of a days continuance, but the
Author of days, our God and Christ, has a treasure more permanent, and which
abides ever.

Quia Communitate multiplicatur: all earthly treasures are spent in bestowing,
this heavenly wealth is multiplied in giving; Pro. 11. v. 24.
There is that scatters says Solomon and is more increased, there is that
spares and comes to poverty; And here is the difference betwixt God and us,
the more he gives, the more he has; the more we scatter, the less we have;
The Fountain of Gods grace is always open, and the more that flows from
him, the fuller he is, one Depth calls upon an other, but the Depth of his
mercy is bottomless.

Fourthly, this treasure excels others, Quod paupertate acquiritur, Christ
his coffers are filled with pain and poverty, according to that, Math. 19. v.
21.
If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give it to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me.

And again, whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, wife or children, or lands, for my name sake, he shall
receive an hundredth fold, and shall inherit everlasting life; Isay. 55.1.
it is the call of thy God and Christ, ye that have no money to buy, come
buy without penney or penneyworth. Behold I set a kingdom on sale, even that
of heaven, where riches are bought with poverty, peace with persecution,
glory with shame, mirth with moan, Sollace with sorrow, and life with death,
for ye must die once, that ye may live always, and always there, where true
Joys are to be found.

Fifthly, though this treasure be purchased with pain, yet it is kept with
comfort: Earthly riches we so greedily caught at, and gape after, they are
sharp as a thorn, and they prick to the bone, for they prick in getting,
they prick in keeping, and they prick in parting from them; Nay, Acquirendo,
Retinendo, Erogando, in getting, keeping, and bestowing, there is nothing but
much sin, with little solace, and great danger with small delight.

But the treasure wherein our life is hid, Ecclus. 15. v. 8.
has in it gladness of heart (as Siracides says) for men of truth haunt it,
and shall prosper even to the beholding of God. Wave therefore all wearines in
the wealth of this wicked world, and as the proverb is, Ito sicut canis per
Nilum, drink by catches for fear of Crocadils: taste of it pleasures, but
soake not into them, least in the sweetness thereof, thou be supped up, Amatores
suos nouit deuorare non portare, it knows better how to cross, then crown
it riuals.

Lastly, ex spiritualibus Componitur: This treasury stands upon spiriturall
store, no orient pearl of Peru or Mexico, no gold of Hauila, no Carbunkle,
Topas or Chrisolit, with are nothing else, but Terrae maculae and immunditiae;
Neither any of these, or all these, with an other world of greater wealth, can
store the treasury we aim at, it is filled, it is filled, with the substance
of a more heavenly being, spiritualibus, non mundanis gazis, not with
transitory, but with eternal store.

It is filled with righteousness, peace and joy of the holy Ghost, it is filled
with mercy, grace, and glory: It is filled with long life, length of days,
and all Aeternitie: It is filled with Imperial majesty, brightness, and
immortality: It is filled with the presence of God, with the sight of the
Lamb, and with the sweet breath, and perfume of the holy Ghost, proceeding
from both: It is filled with Songs of Sion, Melodious Music: and praises of
all Saints and Angels, sweeter then the harmony of the Heavens.

Finally, It is filled with greater joy the^ man can think, or Angel can
speak: and therefore I leave it with a Selah, to my soul, till I find in
glory, what I feel in grace. And the Lord increase your Faith, till you come
to this perfection.

Pardon me a while, to follow this current, till I hauee laid you a sleep,
in the sweet Repose and Bosom of your CHRIST; And therefore say yet further
to the solace of your saved souls, Christ, in whom your life is secured, is
that hidden Mannah, tendered to the Church at Pergamus, and in them to you, and
so to the conquering Saints all the World. To him that overcomes, Revel. 2.
V. 17.
I will give to eat of the Mannah, that is hid.

Prou. 25. V. 1.
It stands with the glory of God, to keep a thing secret. So says Solomon,
But the Kings honor will find it out: Christ is a secret, a mystery, and a
Mine, to be dug into, our heavenly food, our meat and hidden Mannah, which
we may not find in the bark and rind, which often times seems fair to the
silly Eye of flesh and blood, but we must search the Veins, and dig down
to the Root, where Christ his sap and sweetness is.

Reu. 10. V. 10.
The little book was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly: The lower
it went, the more passionate it was: It feeling was in it fall, and till it
came to the entrails, it entered not. So is this hidden Mannah, swimming in the
ear, and molded in the mouth, it relisheth not to thy salvation. But when it
searches the veins of thy heart and soul, then is thy life hid in Christ,
then is the very soul of thy Soul, incorporated into thy Savior, which made
the Prophet cry out in Rauishment of spirit, Rasili, Rasili, My secret to my
self, Isai. 24. V. 6.
My secret to my self.

As if he should say, If none will feel, yet am I filled with the abundance
of this Angels food: yea, and though all the world lie in darkness, yet Christ
my Love, my Life, my Light, and my Salvation, shines unto my self, and I
shall walk in the brightness thereof: even from grace to grace, till I come to
glory.

Yea, and in the mean time be fed and filled with that Heavenly Mannah,
which in these respects, I may parallel with my CHRIST, and apply as a
comfortiue to your pensive souls, who are to dye, and now hunger and thirst
after righteousness, grace, and glory.

1. First, as Mannah fell from Heaven, So did Christ, when he bowed the
Heavens, and came down and said, I am the bread of life that came down from
Heaven, whereof who Eats, shall never hunger any more!

Now your Eating of CHRIST, Io. 6. V. 35.
is but your (steadfast Faith) and believing in CHRIST: For so says Saint
Augustine, Edere, est Credere: And therefore says Christ, Io. 6. V. 40.
He that belieueth in me has everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. Whereupon I may conclude, Quid paras dentem, and ventrem, Creed and
manducasti: Why do thou bring me thy tooth and thy belly? believe in me,
and thou have eaten me.

Secondly, when the Mannah was fallen, some gathered more, and some gathered
less, and yet so, As he that gathered little, Exodus 16. V. 18.
had no lack, and he that gathered much, had nothing over: So is CHRIST the
food of our souls, he fills all that gather, though not in like measure:
And therefore let none judge of the quantity of Faith and Sanctity, how much
or how little will save a soul: Sithence we are here taught, that if it be
any, it is enough. For he that gathered little had no lack, and he that
gathered much had nothing over. None may presume, have he never so much, None
may despair, have he never so little: But he that has none at all, is
remediles of all mercy. You are here dejected at Christ his feet, your tears,
prayers, and kisses, express your Faith and Feeling, both of Christ his
mercies, and your own miseries. It may be you think, you are feeble in Faith,
and wanting in works, and what of that? Tantum velis, and Deus praeoccurrit:
Only be thou willing, and God will supply thy wants: he will meet thee in
the way, Luke 15. Verse. 17.
as the loving Fatheer did his lost Child, and say, This my Son was dead,
and is alive again: and he was lost, but is found.

Thirdly, Mannah fell from Heaven, Exodus 15. Verse. 15.
when they thought not on it, nor knew it not: and therefore upon the sight,
they said, Manhu, quid hoc: what is this? Christ fell down from heaven, like a
shower of Rain, upon a fleece of wool: in softnes and in silence: his own
knew him not, but said: Is not this the Carpenters Son? Who is this, that
both wind and Seas obey? Suddenly has the Son of God rushed upon you, and
has violently taken you out of your sins, and it cannot be, but upon the
sight and relish of his sweet mercies: Ye say to the astonishment of your
saved souls, Manhu; who is this, that thus fills and feeds our souls, with
unspeakable joy and dulcet love.

Fourthly, Mannah fell from heaven, when Israel was furthest fallen from God,
murmuring in the wilderness against Moses their governor, Exit. 16. v. 2.3.
and Aaron their priest, and wishing they had died in Egypt, and had never
heard of Canaan: Christ came into this world a Savior from sin, when all the
world was dead in sin, when the Scepter was gone from Judah, and there was
never a Prophet left, when the sacrifices were ceased, and the holy lamps were
put out, when the house of God was made a den of thieves, and the world was
tired with traditions, I say he came when the Law was perished from the
Priests, and the kingdom was in an Ataxie. Then, eue^ then came Christ to
repair our ruins, to redeem us from sin, death, and damnation, feeding us
with heavenly food to life and immortality.

And now tell me you that are to die, were ye not violently taken to grace,
when ye were furthest fallen from God, when running on in sin, did he not
repair your ruins? and did he not think upon you ere ye thought upon him?
are not these his mercies pressing out your tears of repentance, are they not
merciful preuentions, meeting with your miseries? does he not even now by this
temporal death, deliver you from eternal destruction both of body and soul
for ever? Surely the Lord has found you out in an acceptable time, when you
may redeem a bad life, with a blessed death, and in the waste and roaring
wilderness of this world, wherein ye have wandered tedious ways, he has
filled you with Mannah, and brought you to Canaan, I mean to heaven the land
of your inheritance.

But me thinks I see you sigh in the silence of your souls, and say with
grief of heart, notwithstanding all I have said of Christ in whom ye are
hid and secured, alas and woe is me therefore, though I be hid in my
Christ, yet I die in my sin, and then am I gone with those reprobate Jews,
Of whom Christ said, Ye shall seek me, and shall dye in your sins, and
whither I go, can ye not come.

Io. 8. V. 21.
Whereunto I answer, to break off sin by repentance, is a blessed thing: but
to live in the solace of sinning, and so to die, is most woeful and miserable:
And therefore I say; 1. That it if one thing to dye in sin. 2. An other thing
to dye with sin. 3. And a third thing to die for sin.


The Reprobate from God, they die in their sin, whiles they persevere in
sin to the end, having neither sense nor feeling of their wickedness: but
make shipwreck of a good conscience, without care to cure the malady of their
souls, either by Faith in Christ, or Repentance toward God: And so one lives
in his Idolatry, and dies in his Idolatry: another lives in his Adultery,
and dies in his Adultery: a third lives in his oppression, ad dies in his
oppression: a fourth lives in his malice, and dies in his malice: a fifth
lives in his stealth, and dies in his stealth. All in their impenitence
against the Lord, and never breaking off their sin, till sin have lodged
them in their graves, and buried them in their impiety.

Absolon lived in sin, and died in sin: he lived in sin, when he lay with
his fathers concubines in the sight of the son: Absolon died in sin, when
in the height of his ambition, pride, and rebellion, his own locks hanged
him, and Ioabs spear pierced him, quaelis vita, finis ita, such a life, such a
death: he sinned with sollace, but he died with sorrow: So I may say, of Saul,
Judas, Pharaoh, Julian, and of all the damned crew of desperate Epicures, who
dare say in despite of God and Christ, of death, and doom, let us eat and
drink, to morrow we shall die, and so an end. Nay then is no end, but a
beginning of sorrow never to end.

But to die with sin, is so to kill sin in this mortal body, as not to
suffer it to rise, rule, and rebel like a tyrant, but to suppress it, with a
continual fight and mortification, and though happily we cannot beat back
the fume but it will smoke in us, yet must we strive to quench the flame,
that it burn us not to sinders.

And thus have the godly of all ages died with their sin, and so fought
against sin, as they never died in their sin, always crying with the
blessed Apostle, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of sin. And with holy Job, If I wash my self with Snow water, Job. 9. v.
30.31.
and purge mine hands most clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and
mine own clothes shall make me filthy.

These feel their sins, but withal they find a savior: these sorrow for
their sins, and yet rejoice in their Infirmities. They fear a danger, but
they find a deliverance: yea, they know and are well assured, that though
sin do abound, yet grace does superabound, they wash their stoles in the
blood of the lamb, and their red bloody sins, are made shim white in the
tincture of his blood, every drop whereof is sufficient to redeem a thousand
worlds.

In a word, 2. Cor. 12. v. 9.
these are they who rejoice in weakness, and take pleasure in their
infirmities, that the power of God may dwell in them: these are they whom
Satan often buffeteth, least they should be exalted out of measure, with the
abundance of revelations: these pray to be delivered, and though they prevail
not, yet do they hear to the solace of their saved souls, even from him
whose lips are powdered with much grace, My grace is sufficient for thee, for
my power is made perfect through weakness, my grace has prevented thee, my
grace does assist thee, my grace shall perfect thee, these are they who mince
with no merit, but rely upon the mere mercy of their Christ, ever living in
sin, and yet dying to sin, with an assured hope that their sins are
purged, pardoned, forgotten, and not imputed, as and if their souls should
thus solace themselves in the free remission of their sins, those sins
which thou have not purged o my Christ, those have thou pardoned.

For he trod the winepresse alone, and of all the world there was none to
help him, he alone was the lamb of God that took away the sins of the
world, and the glorious voice that came down from heaven, fell upon him and
none other, This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.
What should I say more? he died, he died, the Just for the unjust, the innocent
for the delinquent, and he that knew no sin, died for all sin, all curse
and execration lay upon him, who deserved none, that it might be laid off us,
he matched all misery, that he might merit all mercy: Nay, he died for our
sins a dolorous death, that he might gain for us an eternal and glorious
life.

Good Lord how much are we obliged to thee and to thy death, we sinned and thou
smarted for us, we were in debt, and thou dischargedst it, we were even
dropping down to hell, and in suffering thou have made us sovereigns in
heaven. No sacrifice, no salve, no electuarie could cure the malady of our
sins, but the death of the Physician must be the life of the Patient, and
therefore in this I may say in some sense (as Tulli did to his wife Terentia in
that his woeful exile) In hoc miserior sum quam tu quae es miserima, quod
calamitas communis est vtrisque nostrum culpa mea propria: herein might it well
beseem me o my Christ to be more afflicted then thou whose afflictions are
above all afflictions, that the fall is common to us both, but the fault is
properly mine, for I have sinned, and thou have smarted, the Just for the
unjust.

And here the rather to break your hearts with the balm of Christ, his love,
who died for your sins, let me assure you in the faith, how diversely this his
unspeakable love is confirmed and sealed unto you, both by bond, and bail, for
he has sworn to your salvation, and he has put in himself body for body.
Nay, soul for soul, to answer the rigor of his father, that you his
children might be free.

Psalm. 9.10.
For the first, true it is the Lord has sworn, and it has not repented him,
thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizadecke: A Priest to pray,
a Priest to bleed, a Priest to plead, never wanting to stand up in the gap
for us most miserable sinners; Had it not been enough to have prayed for us
upon Mount Oliuet, but he must bleed for us upon Mount Caluerie? And had it
not been sufficient there to have bled for us, but yet in the heaven of
heavens to stand for us an advocate, even there to plead our cause? according
to that of Saint John, If any man sin we have an advocate with the father, 1.
Ioh. 2.
even Jesus Christ the righteous, etc.

Now in this oath and covenant he has made with us and for us, I observe, 1.
Stabilitie, In that it is from God, for so it is said, the Lord has sworn, he
has sworn that it is much, and he has sworn never to repent him of that he
has done: that is more, it repented God that he had made man, but it never
repented him that he had redeemed man: so much more excellent then is the work
of our Redemption, above that of our Creation: this of Creation grieved for,
but that of Redemption, never repented of: and no marvel, since the sins of
the old water, were once washed away with old water, but these with new
blood, strained out of the veins of Christ, every drop whereof was
sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds: and therefore I may well say of this
gift, above all that ever God gave to man, that these gifts of God are
Ametamellonta without repentance.

And this is the holy covenant the Lord made with us before the world was, for
the safe keeping whereof he has put in his Christ, to enter both bond and
bail, Life for life, body for body, soul for soul, as the blessed Apostle
says, A Surety of a better Covenant, the worthiness whereof as I have said is,
1. In firmitudine, as confirmed by oath, for the Lord has sworn: 2. in
perpetuitate as abiding ever, for of his kingdom there is no end: 3. in
pactionis modo ratified with blood, neither of Bulls nor Calves, but with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ: 4. In fine and virtute as purging our sins,
purchasing our place, and pleading our cause, whereas Moses testament was
established upon no such saving grounds, for it was confirmed without oath, and
but for a time, with the blood of Bulls and Goats, with the ashes of an Heyfer
scattered in the air, nor with any promise of eternal salvation, but of a
temporal rest and Canaan. And thus of the abundance of Christ his grace, we
have all received grace for grace: A grace preventing, when he thought upon
us, ere we thought upon him, and met our misery with his mercy: A grace
assisting, supporting our frailty, and fashioning our faith and obedience to
his holy will: and a grace perfecting, Never leaving us, till he have made us
to appear before his Father in perfect beauty, thus saying,

Oh Father here am I, and the Children which thou have given me, and now
pardon them because thou have plagued me; Me me adsum qui feci in me,
conuertite ferrum o Rutuli nihil iste nec ausus nec potuit. It is I, that have
been made sin for them, and paid the ransom for their deaths, thou (o my
GOD) have turned thy fury upon me, I have selte it: o turn it from them,
that they fall not, who neither durst (nor could) endure my danger, or drink
of my Cup: Shall not the Judge of all the world do according to right? That
which thou have punished in me, thou may not punish in them again. Oh my
GOD (hear my prayer,) forgive them, for they knew not what they did, and
forgive them their sins, with the punishment of their sins, for me thy
son, and their Saviors sake.

And here seasonable to you be it spoken, who are but lookers on and beholders
of these woeful tragedies, these are now ready to be sacrificed, and to act
the last and best part of their life, upon the Altar of their Cross, you stay
behind, how long God he knows, and must endure the wars and woes of this
wicked world, take heed you trample not under your feet the blood of that
covenant which these penitent sinners have laid to their hearts, and treasured
up in their dearest thoughts: Nor do you think that only they are sinners
upon whom this Tower of Siloah is fallen, for and if ye do not repent, ye
shall likewise perish: I dare not for my life secure you in your sins, there
be different deaths for different sins, which must be repented for, otherwise
ye shall die in your sins penitentiam dare possum securitatem non possum,
upon your repentance I dare pronounce remission, but upon your rebellions, I
dare give no security: Nusquam est securitas there is no safety where sin
seazeth, if Angels sin in heaven out they must, if Adam sin in Paradise
away he must, and if Judas shrink at the side of Christ he must be gone,
Malorum eiecto bonorum glorificatio, then are the good and godly glorified,
when the wicked and wayward are mortified.

There be two sins sensible in this dissolute age wherein we live, and they
are written in so great and capital letters, that a man may read them
running, the first is the fawning sin of presumption, the other is, the
fearful sin of desperation: In our presumption we soar too high, and the
fire upon the mount does scorch us: In our despair, we houer too low, and
the furies of hell do haunt us: In our presumption wear too much exaulted,
and we dare to sin, notwithstanding Gods judgments: In our despair, we are
too much dejected, and we do not repent, notwithstanding his mercies: Medio
Tutissimus ibis; A mean is best, and that is, to go by Christ, in whom
mercy and Truth meet together, righteousness and peace, kiss each other.

Surely we can go to no Pulpit, but Paul's passion does pearce our hearts,
to provoke our speech against the outrage of both, Many walk (of whom I have
told you often) and now tell you weeping, they are enemies to the cross of
Christ, their belly is their God, their glory is their shame, and they do
but mind Earthly things. Nay, you are well worse in your unrepentant lives,
then these poor sinners are in their penitent deaths: For they have their
conversation in Heaven; From whence they look for the Savior: Even the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change these our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself: Yea, that I may conclude with my
Text, These have their lives so hidden in Christ, as they are well assured,
that when Christ which is their life, shall appear, then shall they appear
with him in glory.

And so I pass to the last Wheel, turning and tending to that glory, which
shall be even upon your dissolution in soul, and upon the restoration of your
bodies, in the day of your Redemption, when Christ who is your life shall
appear.

Now in this Apparition what, shall I see? I shall see the second coming of my
CHRIST attended upon, Not with twelve poor Fishermen, but with all the Powers
of heaven. I shall see him come Ad Sententiandum, and ad Seperandum: when those
that have done good, shall go into everlasting life, whither God bring you,
and those that have done evil, into everlasting Condemnation, from which the
Lord deliver you.

But what shall ye see upon Christ his Apparition? Nay, rather what shall ye
not see upon your dissolution? Words spoken in season as Solomon says, are
like apples of silver in pictures of gold, therefore fly out my voice, and be
strong my spirit, evermore to express the glory of those unspeakable Joys
ye shall both see and feel within these few hours, when dead in body, but
ravished in soul, ye shall see the heavens open to give you ready passage to
eternal blessedness.

1 Where ye shall see God as he is face to face, I say God of so great
Majesty, might, bounty, beauty, and love, as if a man were filled with all
other blessings both temporal and eternal, and yet without that, as Plotinus
says, all were but misery and accursednes.

2 Ye shall see the comfortable face and countenance of Jesus Christ, fairer
then the sons of men, and whom the very Angels desire to behold.

3 Ye shall see the holy Ghost, proceeding from both, and breathing upon your
saved souls, like a soft air upon a garden, and more sweet then all the
trees of incense.

4 Ye shall see the bright court of Angels, Cherubines, and Zeraphines,
attending the Deity, and ever pressing to do his will, faithfully, speedily,
willingly, and never weary of watching, because they are never weary of well
doing.

5 Ye shall see the fair assembly of the Saints of God, Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles, with Abraham Isaac and Jacob, in that his glorious kingdom, ye
shall be tied with them in the bundle of the living, never to be loosed any
more, ye shall return as they have done into your rest, as into a retyring
camp after the day of battle, there shall ye follow the lamb whither
soever he goes, and there shall ye walk before the Lord in the land of the
living for evermore.

6 Ye shall see new Jerusalem come down from heaven, as a Bride prepared for
her husband, a City of solace whose ports are ever patent, whose streets are
paued with gold, and garnished with all manner of precious stones, the Jasper,
the Saphir, the Chalcedonie, and the Emarod, the Sardonix, the Sardius, the
Crisolite, and the Berill, the Topas, the Crisoparus, the Iacinth, and the
Amathist: ever splendent shall this City be, it shall need no Sun, for the
Lamb is the light of the place, the people that are saved, shall walk in the
Light of it, and the Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory and honor
unto it: The Gates of it shall not be shut by day, August. in Epistol. Ioh.
Tract. 4.
for there shall be no night there: and the glory both of Jew and Gentill
shall be brought unto it. What should I say more? Quomodo potuit, Lingua
sonuit, Caetera cord cogitentur. As I could, so have I told, let the heart
conceive the rest: and yet so, as Amoenissima Ciuitas: Amantissima Societas:
Iucundissima Foelicitas: A most pleasant place, A most joyful presence: And a
most happy estate of blessedness, shall be your portion, in an endless glory.

7 I cannot speak as I would, and yet my heart is full, break it will, if it
may not vent it, Pardon me therefore a while to beat back these fearful
passions, of your mortality, with further impressions of your aeternitie: ye
shall have Eyes without tears, hearts without sorrow, souls without sin,
green youth without greeuance of old age, health without sickness, fulness
without sacietie, freedom without bondage, beauty without blemish, glory
without shame, and life without death, your knowledge shall be without either
doubting, or discourse, for ye shall see God and all goodness, all at once, your
love shall level at the highest, nor shall it fail to fall upon the lowest of
his Saints.

8 Ye shall have what ye can desire, and ye shall desire nothing but what is
good: Aug. lib. 13. de triniti. cap. 5.
For as one has truly said, Beatus non est nisi qui and habet omnia que vult
and nihil vult male: He is not blessed who enjoys not all he will, and yet
wills nothing but what is good.

9 Ye shall hear Melodious Songs, even songs of Sion, Psalms, Hymmes and
praises, more sweet then the harmony of the heavens, when all that Celestial
host, shall fill that holy vault with an Halaluiah to the Almighty, and say,
Honor, Glory, Majesty, Power, dominion and might, be ascribed unto him that
sits upon the throne both now and ever. Thus shall all Angels cry aloude,
the heavens and all the powers therein, Cherubin and Seraphin continually shall
cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Beati ergo qui habitant in domo
tua, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they shall always praise thee,
and the praises of God shall be their daily practice.

10 Lastly, and to your endless comforts, all this, and all former joys shall
be for ever, and without interruption, for of this kingdom shall be no end:
Nec quoad Regem, nec quoad Legem, nec quoad Subditos, nec quoad fines Imperij:
The King is Christ, the law is love, the subjects are Saints, and the
bondaries of this empire are endless, all tied to no return, either of term
or time, for time shall be no more.

And for your speedy passage out of this world, into that endless glory, ye
shall go, Nay ye shall fly, Eadem facilitate qua faelicitate: as S.
Augustine says, with as great have as happiness. This day says Christ, Amodo
says John: Even now, and in Ictu oculi, in the twinkling of an eye, says
blessed Paul, all shall be changed at the day of doom. And why not in this
day of death? For if Corpus erit vbi volet animus, If the body shall be where
the mind will when it is glorified, why shall not the soul be where and when
God will, when it is delivered? I say delivered out of the bondage wherein it
is, to the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

The silly eye of flesh and blood may happily demurre upon the distance, and
think how it is possible the soul should pass with such speed from this
earthly house, and house of clay, to that high and heavenly habitation, the
eight sphere as some write, being distant from the earth every where, 20000.
Semidiamiters, which calculated a right, and numbered with our miles, makes a
million of German miles, which is one thousand thousand. Surely I dare
determine of no particular, but in the general say as Balaam did of Israel, Who
can number the dust of Israel? So who can tell the distance of the heavens?
Pro. 25.3.
The heavens in height, and the earth in deepenes, and the Kings heart can no
man search: Howbeit, be the distance never so great, yet speedy may be the
souls passage, when it is done by the power of God, which passes all
possibility of man, to conceive how.

And so to conclude and close with your saved souls, who are now by death to
make a speedy passage into all these joys, and so for a while to prevent us
of that glory, Lift up your herts above the height of all Sublimitie, where
true joys are to be found, Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in
the morning, Joy, Joy, Joy, such as neither eye has seen, nor tongue can
tell, Angels feel it, they cannot speak it, and therefore I leave it as a
Selah to my soul, till I see in glory, what I feel in grace. And when even
in an instant, and less then a thought, I shall pass from the bowels of this
earth, to the bosom of my Christ; Whither God bring both you and us, for his
sons sake. To whom be glory, power, and praises, both now and ever. Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Fol. 1. For good, read God, in the second line of the Text.

Fol. 18. Line 12. for Bonony, read Benony.


