ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT AGAINST WILLIAM ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY,
Feb. 25. 1640.

Published by a true and perfect Copy.

Printed in the year 1640

Articles of the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, AGAINST WILLIAM LAWD,
Archbishop of Canterbury, in maintenance of their Accusation, whereby he stands
charged with High Treason, Febr. 25. 1640.
I. THat he, the said William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, traitorously
labored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom by
giving his Majesty advice, privately, and at Counsel Table, High Commission,
and in other places, that he would have governed by Civil Laws, and further
said, he would make the proudest Subject in the Kingdom to give way unto him:
and being told it was against Law, he said he would make it Law, and that the
King might at his own pleasure take away without Law, and make it warrantable
by Gods Law.

II. His countenancing of books, and their Authors, for the maintenance of his
unlimited and absolute power, whereby the power of Parliament is denied, and
the Bishops power of Prelacie set up.

III. That he traitorously went about to interrupt the Judges by his
threatenings, and other means, to constrain them to give false judgment in
the case of Shipmony, as will appear both by writings under his hand, and by
testimony of diverse persons of good worth and quality.

IV. That he has taken bribes, and sold justice in the High Commission as
Archbishop, and has not only corrupted the Judges there, but also sold
Judicious places to be corrupted.

V. That he has endeavored the incroachment of Jurisdiction and Institution
of Canons, which are not only unlawful, but prejudicial to the subject. And
that he has exercised his authority very cruelly, both as a Counselor,
Commissioner, and a Judge.

VI. That he has traitorously assumed a capital power over his Majesty's
subjects, denying his power of Prelacie as from the King.

VII. That by false enormious Doctrines and other synister ways and means He
went about to subvert the Religion established in this Kingdom, and to set up
Papistrie and superstition in the Church.

VIII. That by undue means and practice he has gotten into his hand the
power of nominating of Ministers to Spiritual promotion, and has preferred
none but scandalous Ministers thereunto, and that he preferred corrupt
Chaplains to His Majesty.

IX. That his own Ministers, as Haywood, Laifield and others, are notoriously
disaffected to Religion.

X. That he has Traitorously endeavored to reconcile us to the Church of
Rome, and to that end has employed a Jesuit and a Papist-Priest, and has
wrought with the Popes Agents in several points.

XI. That to suppress preaching, He has suspended diverse good men, and used
unlawful means by Letters, and otherwise to several Bishops, to suppress
them.

XII. That he has Traitorously endeavored to suppress the French Religion,
which is the same we are off, and the Dutch Church, and to set division
between them and us.

XIII. That he has Traitorously endeavored to set Division between the King
and his Subjects, and has gone about to bring in Innovations into the Church:
And has induced the King to War with the Scots, and many upon their death
Bedds, to give toward the maintenance of the War: And has caused the
Clergy to give freely toward the same, and has brought in many Superstitions
and Innovations into the Church of Scotland: And that he procured the King to
break the pacification, thereby to cause a bloody War between the Kingdoms.

XIIII. That to preserve Himself from being questioned, for these and other
his Traiterous designs, from the First of his Majesty's Reign until now. He
labored to subvert the Rights of Parliaments; by all which Words, Counsels,
and Actions he has Traitorously labored to Alienate the hearts of the Kings
liege people from his Majesty, to set a Division between them; and to ruin
and destroy His Majesty's Kingdoms.

For which they impeach him of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.

And the said Commons, by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Accusation or Impeachment against
the said WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury.

And also, to the replying of the Answers that He, the said Archbishop shall
make unto the said Articles, or any of them.

And of offering proof also of the Premises, or any of them, or any other
Impeachment or Accusation, that shall be exhibited by them, as the course of
Parliaments require.

DO PRAY; That he, the said William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, may be
put speedily to answer for all, and every of the Premises: That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, and Judgments, may be upon every of them,
had and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

FINIS.

