Peter Ramus HIS LOGIC In two Books. Not only truly Translate^ into
English, but also digested into Question and Answer, for the more easy
understanding of all men.

By R. F. Gent.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Inner Temple, near the Church-doore. 1636.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, MY ASSVRED loving Uncle, Bestney Barker Esquire, at Saint
Gilses in Essex.
Worshipful Sir, being excited, as well by the bond of kindred, as also by
your love and courtesy toward me, to show you some thankfulness, withal to
testify a reciprocal and mutual love toward you again, not forgetting that
duty, which both as a kinsman and friend I owe unto you, I adventured (albeit
my best strength be but weakness) upon a bold assay, namely, to translate this
work, and present it unto you, as a small mite of that tribute, which even
nature binds me to render. But seeing my first work unluckely suppressed it
self, I have added unto my former boldness, a more audacious part, namely,
not only to translate it again, but also to illustrate it according to my
small ability, by the plain and facile way of a Dialogue. May it croude it
self into your presence and gain the least aspect of a favorable
countenance, I shall think my time wa^ spent, and not only so, but employ my
self about weightier matters. What said (weightier? this Science and Author
may stand before Princes, if not spoiled by my own unskilfulnes. However it
shroudeth it self under your patronage, until the storms of reproach and
ignominy be overpassed, soliciting in the mean time a pardon for me, in that
I have presumed to offer such a trifle to such a kinsman. So hoping that the
work, though small, may be accepted, and benevolentlie entertained, I submit
both it and my self unto your favorable cogitations in all dutifulness; and
rest.

March 26. 1632. Your assured loving Nephew To. Fage.

To the Courteous Reader.
BEnevolent Reader, I do here present thee with this small work, hoping it
may produce good effects. Certainly it has assayed before time to thrust it
self into the world, but that it found so kind friends, who considering the
unworthiness, were pleased to suppress it and keep it prisoner in the goal
of their own houses. Howbeit now it is adventured abroad, and with the spring
begins to spring afresh. Its winters imprisonment is likely to better its
summers conditions, for I have labored so far as I could to prune and loppe
off the former errors, that so it may be the more plausible. I have also
adorned it with a new weed, to wit of a Dialogue, or questions and answers,
that so my book may even learn to stoop to the weakest capacities. If it
shall be thought to come in a new fashion, may you please to look into the
world, you may see abundance in this habit, our common Catechismes wear this
gown; yea, Mr. St: Egerton of the Black Friars in London, has contracted the
seven treatises of Mr. Rogers into this form. For my part, I hold it more
easy then the former tract, neither greatly prejudicial to the Author.

This adorned, I have given this my second son, full liberty to be a
freeman, banishing my first and worst labors, from the view (so far as I
can) of all men. For seeing it would not, when I would, I hold it not fit, that
now it should be published. Touching that work, it slowed so inconsiderately
from my pen, and slipped so rashly out of my hand, that it escaped not
without many defaultes, imperfections, obscurities and blemishes: that with the
Egyptian Grasshopper, it will not only consume some part, but utterly eat up
and waste the golden season and happy hours of the courteous reader. Let this
last work then kind reader find favor in thine eyes; if that winter bird
should be seen, it would appear like a Cuckoe at Christmas, or like the Oule
which is the admiration of other birds. I will only now show thee the causes
producing this last work, and the use thereof, and so leave it to thy discreet
judgment. The causes are manifold, first to stop the springing of that
Abortiue forespoken off, that so it might not thrive to the discredit of its
parent. Secondly that the gratuity and thankfulness to my Uncle aforesaid
might not be buried in oblivion, for tritum est perire quod facis ingrato.
Thirdly, for the benefit as I said of the simplest capacity. And finally for
the zeal I bear to mine own country, being willing and desirous, that not
only men, but even women, should exercise themselves in the study of the
sacred arts.

If any shall demand what benefit shall redownd hereby, or what may be the use
hereof? I answer, it will avail greatly, not only for civil and moral
discourse, but also for the overthrowing of all errors, either in manners or
doctrine, for says Ovid,

Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts emollit mores nec sinet esse
feros.

But may some say, I live privately, converse not in the world, what need have
I of this science? It seems to consist chiefly in disputing, but I employ my
self most in silence and meditation. Well friend, thou may have great
benefit by this science, even in that likewise, an example of which, word for
word, I have here produced out of Mr. Egertons treaty aforesaid, that so thou
might know how to benefit thy self by this science even in thy meditation.

What thing is this O my soul, that does so besot thee? or what manner of
thing may it be, wherewith thou art so delighted, or rather bewitched, and how
does the Holy Ghost in the scriptures define it, and set it forth? who are
sinners, but they that rebel against God, and against his holy will, revealed
in his word? Definition.
and what other thing is sin, but a breach and transgression of the law of
God, 1 John. 3.4. a turning out of the way of life, as the phrase of the old
Testament does import, and a swerving from the right mark and end, as the word
uses in the new testament to signify: viz. the glory of God and thine own
salvation. This cursed thing called sin, is not of one sort or kind; it is is
a monster of many heads, and (as it were) a beast of many horns. It is both
original, bred and borne with us, and actual springing out of us from that
venomous root of our original corruption. Again, it is either inward lurking
and boiling in the heart; or outward showing it self in the life and
conversation: sometimes it only inhabiteth and dwells in us, and often times
it does reign and overrule us; sometimes it is but an error and infirmity, and
sometimes it is a wilful and presumtuous evil, Psalm. 19.11, 12. sometimes it
is pardonable, by the free grace and mercy of God to them that truly believe
and repent; and sometimes it is utterly unpardonable and never to be forgiven,
being such that it is impossible that the committers thereof should be renewed
by repentance, Matthew. 12. Heb. 6. Sometimes it rusheth mediately and directly
against God, and sometimes it reaches more properly to the hurt of our
neighbor. But who is able to reckon up all the branches of this most bitter
and venomous tree, wherefore (to look more nearely unto it) whence proceeds
this deadly poison, Cause Eficient.
what may be the cause whereof it comes, and the fountain from whence it
springs? Surely my soul, it is even thy self: thou art the root that
brings forth all this bitterness, thou art the fountain from whence all
this deadly venom does arise. For every man is tempted to sin, and he is
drawn away of his own concupisence, and enticed. Beware therefore O rebellius
soul, that thou lay not the blame upon the Lord, neither make him the author
of thy sin: for thou O God as thou can not be tempted to evil thy self,
so thou temptest no man to commit sin, being a thing which thou so straightly
forbiddest to all, and so severely threatnest in whomsoever it is found, and
for which thou so grieveously plaguest the wicked, and so sharply correctest
thine own children, Iam. 1.13, 14. Heb 12.7, 8. Thou O Lord art holiness it
self and the fountain thereof, and there is none eternally, and unchangably
good but thee alone, Mat. 19. Thou made man good at the beginning, but he
sought many inventions Eccles. 12. so all the imaginations and thoughts f his
heart be came only evil continually, or every day, sabbath and all, Genesis 6.5.
True it is indeed, that the Devil that old Dragon using the subtle serpent for
his instrument, did offer the first occasion of sinning, whereby he became an
external cause of sin, and is called a murderer from the beginning, and the
author and father of all deceit, John 8.44. yet man had power to have resisted
him if he would, which he not doing, became the true and proper efficient cause
of corrupting himself, and all his posterity, who likewise by means of the
poison derived from his loins, became also the proper and immediate causes of
their own sins. Mark well then (O my soul) the root of this evil, and
further consider, what unsavory and cursed fruit it brings forth; surely even
such as it self is, The final Cause, or the end or fruit of sin.
for such as the tree is, such are the fruits: as is the root, so are the
branches; a poisoned fountain casts forth no wholesome streams, Iam. 3. and
who can bring (as the wiseman says) a clean thing out of filthiness? surely
there is not one, but only he who is holiness it self, John 14.4. And
without all controversy, the reward and wages of sin is death, and that not
only temporal and bodily, which is a separation of the body from the soul
for a season, but also spiritual and eternal both of soul and body for ever
and ever. Is any good thing withheld from us? let us thank our sin for it: is
any plague or punishment laid upon us? be sure that sin is the cause, or at
the least (even in the dearest children of God) the occasion of it. Is any good
blessing of God made of no force, or even turned to a curse to us? we may be
sure that it is by reason of our sin: for (as the Prophet says) the Lords hand
is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear,
but our iniquities separate betwixt us and our God, and our sins do hide his
face from us that he will not hear, Esaias 59.1, 2. Finally (as Job says)
misery springs not forth out of the dust, neither does affliction spring out
of the earth, but man is borne to labor as the sparkles fly upward, Job 5.6,
7. As if he should say, man is as prone by nature to sin against God, and
consequently to pull Gods judgments upon him self, as the fire (which is a
light element) is naturally prone to ascend and mount aloft. And to the end
that thou (my soul) may see upon what an ugly monster thou have set thy
delight, do dote upon, The o^posites and contraries
and art bewitched withal, consider how fair and amiable piety and virtue
are, for as they make a man lovely and honorable, so sin makes him loath
some and contemptible: The fear of God (says Solomon) makes the face of a man
to shine and be beautiful, but impiety and profaneness do deface and disfigure
the image of God in him, and cause both God and all good men to loath and
detest him as a polluted and filthy thing, Favor (says the same Wiseman) is
deceitful, and beauty is vanity, but the woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised, Prove. 31.39. A vile person is contemned (that is, a profane
man and basely esteemed how great soever he be in the world) in the eyes of him
that fears God, Psalm. 15.4. And piety is the only beauty that the Lord
himself is delighted with, 1 Pet. 3.4. Therefore it is clear in the contrary
part, that he loatheth and abhors impiety and sin, Comparisons.
and yet my soul to bring thee further out of love with this most ugly
monster, consider whereunto it is like and to what it may be compared. It is
like (says Esaias) to filthy rags, that are cast aside upon the dunghill, and
detested of all the passers by. It biteth as a serpent and stingeth as a
Coccatrice, creeps as a gangrene or deadly canker, that eats to the heart
and cannot be cured; and though it seem sweet in the beginning, yet it is
most bitter in the end, and that which relisheth like honey in the mouth, will
prove rank poison in the bowels. Testimonies
Finally O my soul if thou peruse the holy Scriptures, thou shall find no
book, no leaf, no chapter, no scarce any verse, wherein there is not some
precept, some prohibition, some promise, some threatening, or some example which
seems not very fitly and profitably to show forth the amiablenesse of virtue,
and the ugliness of sin, and with what care, zeal, watchfulness, etc, the
one is to be shunned, and the other to be embraced. Thus far Mr. Egerton,
Lib. ^. Cap. 6.

Now that thou may attain kind reader unto this sweet delight of
meditation, or to the top of whatsoever felicity thou aymest at by this art,
use my book in this manner following.

It consisting only of rules and examples, will be no great burden for thee
to commit it all to memory, and so whether thou meditatest or discoursest, of
sin or piety in the general, or any vice or virtue in the particular, thou
shall find from the head of this art after the example foreshewed, abundance
of matter to furnish thy meditation. So cum pacis sapientibus I commit my
labor to thy discreet and favorable construction, and with equal respect to
all indifferently rest.

R. F. Junior.

PETER RAMVS to the reader wishes health.
ARchymedes (O Reader) would have the reason of the spheres and clymates (in
which invention he had more vehemently labored) engraven upon his sepulcher.
And truly should thou ask me of my vigils, and studies, I desire a pillar
to be raised upon my grave from the instructions, of the art of Logic.
Touching the cause of the wish, they answer first to the accuratnes of the art,
the books of invention of arguments, and their disposition to be judged, not
only from Aristotle Organicall, Rhetorical, Physical, but from Cicero and
Quintilian, and so many Orators. In all which we have strived with all study
and diligence, by all reasonable ways, to contract them briefly into these two
books, that no particle, or the least shadow of Logic might be there
confused, whose truth might not be expressly delivered. And this shall be first
made known touching Archymedes his problem. They answer secondly to the use
of Logic, the elegance and dignity of all the parts to be explicated, to
stir up logical meditations, as well the popular phrases of Poets, Orators,
Historiographers, as also the liberal and ingenuous ar^es of a new body
delivered in a new form to the studious, adorned with excellent indowments:
and least any should fear least they should happen to be strangers, they are
given and committed to the liberal custodies of their School^s. This shall be
secondly made known touching Archymedes his problem. These therefore shall be
witness of so many days and night watches, touching the truth and vtility of
Logic, and shall answer for the cause of our wish, shall also admonish thee
(reader) as I hope of I know not what madness is in most academies of Europe,
disputing of their sophistical precepts, how that they are far unlike both
to the verity and vtility of Logic, and shall also inflame thee to the study
of the more true and profitable faculties. But beside this there is objected a
great company, extructed with theatricall reproaches, threatening pains of
tribunal judgment, condemnation at the least of filthy ignorance and calumny,
will thrust us from the whole kingdom of Philosophy as strange and unheard of
prescription, both with hands and tongue, whether will they forbid the small
cause of our wish? what freedom was obtained by King Henry from the envy of so
mad a Judge; to the more solid judgment of a milder censurer? what afterward,
(when this Logical ardor had set foot into the cause of religion) was a more
great offense, the life and health of us being aimed at by those three civil
wars? will these show no cause of our wish? yea rather they do admonish,
That we give great thanks to the almighty, who has aided and protected the
course of our studyes hitherto, neither would suffer them by any means to be
interrupted. Therefore I witness that this light of Logic will avail greatly
to the studious in setting forth the truth, as also to adorn the ingenuous
arts, as chiefly theillustrating the heavenly mysteries of the sacred
Doctrine: I pray that it may grow up more and more to these things, and and
that this book may be happily concluded to the glory of GOD.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters in the two books of Peter Ramus his Dialectica.
In the first book.
1. The definition of Dialectica. 2. The parts and kinds of arguments. 3. The
Efficient procreant and conservant Cause. 4. The Efficient alone and with
others. 5. The Efficient by himself or an Accident. 6. The Matter. 7. The
Form. 8. The End. 9. The Effects. 10. The Subject. 11. The Adiunct. 12.
Diverses. 13. Desperates. 14. Relates. 15. Adverses. 16. Contradicents. 17.
Privants. 18. Equals. 19. Greaters. 20. Lessers. 21. Likes. 22. Dislikes. 23.
Conjugates. 24. Notation. 25. Distribution. 26. Distribution of the Causes. 27.
Distribution of the Effects whether of Kind or Spece. 28. The Distribution from
the Subjects. 29. The Distribution from the Adiunct. 30. Definition. 31.
Description. 32. Testimony Divine. 33. Testimonies humane of Laws and
Sentences
In the second book.
1. Of Judgment. 2. Axiomas affirming or denying. 3. True and False. 4. The
simple Axioma. 5. The copulate Axioma. 6. The connexed Axioma. 7. The Discreet
Axioma. 8. The Disiunct Axioma. 9. The Sillogisme and his parts. 10. The simple
and contracted sillogisme. 11. The first kind of the simple explicates
Sillogisme. 12. The simple explicate Sillogisme. 13. The first connexed
Sillogisme. 14. The second connexed Sillogisme. 15. The first disiunct
Sillogisme. 16. The second disiunct Sillogisme. 17. The only method according
to Aristotle. 18. The first illustration of Method by examples of arts. 19.
The second example of Poets, Orators, and Historiographers. 20. The secrets of
Method.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF PETER RAMVS HIS DIALECTICA of Invention.
CAP. 1. What Dialectica is.
Q. What is Dialectica?

A. Dialectica is the art of disputing well, and in that sense is called
Logic.

CAP. 2. The parts of Dialectica and kinds of Arguments.
Q. How many ports has Dialectica?

A. Dialectica has two parts, Invention and Judgment.

Q. What is Invention?

A. Invention is a part of Dialectica of inventing Arguments.

Q. What is an Argument?

A. An Argument is that which is affected to argue any thing: such as are all
reasons considered a part and by themselves.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Artificial and Inartificiall.

Q. What is an Artificial Argument?

A. That which argues of it self.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A First, or derived from the First.

Q. What is First?

A. First is that which is of its own original.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Simple or Comparative.

Q. What is Simple?

A. Simple is that which is considered simply and absolutely.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Agreeing or disagreeing.

Q. What is Agreeing?

A. That which agrees with the thing which it argues.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Agreeing absolutely or after a certain manner.

Q. What is agreeing absolutely?

A. The Cause and Effect.

CAP. 3. The Efficient, Procreant, and Conservant Cause.
Q. What is the Cause?

A. The cause is that by whose force the thing is.

Q. What is the Profit of it?

A. This first place of invention is the fountain of all knowledge: and he is
believed to know, of whom the cause is held.

As the Poet says worthily:

The man sure happy is who cause of things does know.

Q. How is the Cause divided?

A. Into two kinds, Efficient and Matter, or form and end.

Q. What is the Efficient Cause?

A. The Efficient Cause is that from which the thing is.

Q. How many Kinds has it?

A. There appears to us no true Kinds, yet the great plenty of it is
distinguished by certain means.

Q. What is that which effects by the first means?

A. That which procreateth or defends.

Q. Give me an example out of some Poet?

A. Ovid first, remedio amoris.

Therefore when thou shall look in this our medsonal Art
My admonition do, set Idleness apart.
This causes thee to love, this does defend it still,
This is the cause of Joy, as meat sometimes breeds ill
Take lastly sloth away, God Cupids bow is lost,
His torches lose their light, co^temd away the'r tossed.
Q. Give me a more familiar example?

A. The Father and Mother procreate, the Nurse defends.

Q. Give an example of this out of some Poet?

A. 4. Aeneid.

Thou Art no Gods Child, ne Dardanus his son,
Thou rather from the steep hard rocks did come.
Of Caucasus: it seems of that breed,
Hyrcanian Tygars thee with breasts did feed.
Aeglog. 8.
Now what this whoreson love is I well wot,
It is a little busy boy begot.
Not of man's seed ne sibb to one of us,
But farthest Garamants and Ismarus.
Or rockie Rhodope as it should seem,
In their rough ragged hills engendered him.
Q. Do not builders and governors of Cities come under this head?

A. Yes Romulus the builder of the City of Rome, also all other Kings,
Consulls, and Emperors are defenders and keepers.

CAP. 4. The Efficient done and with others.
Q. What is that which effects by the second means?

A. That which effects alone or with others.

Q. What are those others?

A. Some oftentimes are Principal, others are helping and Ministers.

Q. Give an example of the Cause that effects by it self?

A. Aneid. 6. Nisus calls back both the blame and the punishment of the
Slaughter from Enryalus upon himself: because he was the only author.

Lo here I am who only did this deed,
Latians, against me turn your swords with speed;
Tw'as my deceit: He could it never do,
Ne would his courage serve him thereunto.
Q. Give an example of the solitary Cause with Principalls and Fellows out of
some Orator?

A. The Solitary cause with many both Principalls and Fellows, is diversely set
forth pro Marcello. For the warlike praises (says the Orator) they are wont to
extenuate truly by words, and to detract them from their leaders, to
communicate them with many; least they should be proper to their Commanders:
and certainly in war, the strength of the Soldiers, opportunity of places,
help of fellows, ranks, provision do much avail. But Fortune (as it were) by
her own right, challenges the chiefest part to her self, and whasoever is
prosperously carried, that altogether she leads. But yet of this glory (o
Caesar) which a little before thou did obtain, thou have no companion: all
that, how much soever it is, (which truly is the chiefest) all (I say) is
thine. The centurion, president, Ranks and companies have taken from thee none
of this praise: Yea even the Lady of humane affairs, Fortune offers not her
self into the society of this glory, to thee she gives place, and confesses
it all and wholly to be thine.

Q. Are not Instruments numbered among helping Causes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example of it?

A. By this Argument the impious Epicure disputes that the world was never
made. Primo de Not. For by what eyes of the mind (says he) could your Plato
behold the frame of so great a work, whereby he makes it constructed and
builded of God? what labor? what iron Ingens? what Lever? what devises? what
Ministers were there of so great a work?

CAP. 5. The Efficient by it self or an Accident
Q. What is that which effects by the third means?

A. That which effects by it self or an Accident.

Q. How effects it by it self?

A. When it effects by its own faculty.

Q. How effects it by its own faculty?

A. When it effects by nature or counsel.

Q. Give an example of that which effects by Nature?

A. The Efficient of the winds is Natural.

Aeneid. 1.

The East and South winds on the Sea do blow,
They rush through deep, till on the top they show.
The afric often with these his blasts conioynes,
And so the floods are cast up by the winds.
Q. Give some example of that which effects by Council?

A. That confession of Cicero, touching himself, is an example of Council.
The war taken in hand (o Caesar) waged also for the most part, not
constrained by any of my Judgment and will, I came forth to those wars which
were undertaken against thee.

Q. How does the Efficient Cause effect by an Accident?

A. When it effects by an external faculty.

Q. How does it effect by an external faculty?

A. When it is done by Necessity or Fortune.

Q. How by Necessity?

A. When as the Efficient is constrained to to the Effect.

Q. Give an example of this?

A. There is one in the excuse of the Pompeians. But to me truly (says the
Orator) if there may be sought out a proper and true name of our evil, it does
seem that we are fallen into a certain fatal calamity, that has occupied the
vnprovident minds of men; that none should wonder how humane Council is
overcome by Divine Necessity.

Q. How by Fortune?

A. When somewhat happened beyond the scope of the Efficient.

Q. Give an example?

A. So the case chanced (says Tullius tertio de Not: deo:) That Pherius the
enemy was profitable to Jason, who opened his impostume with his sword; which
the Physicians could by no means heal.

Q May not imprudence be numbered amongst these kind of Causes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example?

A. Ovid. de Trist. 2.

Why hurtful light or ought else did I see?
The fault way mine and not unknown to me.
Wise Acteon Diana Naked saw,
And food became to's Dogs devouring maw.
Blind fortune among the Gods is surely blamed,
Ne pardon gets, the Gods she has so harmed.
Q. Do not Deprecations then proceed from hence?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example?

A. Pro P. L. Pardon o Father: he has erred: he is slipped: he thought not: if
ever hereafter. And a little after I have erred: I have done rashly: it
repents me: I fly to thy clemency: I ask pardon for mine offense: I entreat
thee that thou will pardon me.

Q. What first caused the name of Fortune.

A. The ignorance of the Causes has feigned this name: for when as something
happenned beyond Council and Hope, it was called by the common people Fortune.

Q. What is Iuvenals opinion of it?

A. Wise if we were no God should want but Fortune: We place thee high and
often thee importune.

CAP. 6. The Matter.
Q. What is the Matter?

A. The Matter is the cause of which the thing is.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. By this feigned Argument, the house of the Sun is compounded of gold,
carbunkles, Yvory and Silver. Ovid 2. Mettamorf.

The Suns high place was built with pillars tall,
The gold did shine Carbunkles flames let fall,
The top thereof was laid with Yvory neat,
And silver doors in portall shined feate.
Aeglog. 3.
A merry Musor framed of beech in tree,
Carved work, by hand of divine Alcimeden,
It Is round impaled with a scattering trayle,
Of tender Vine, and over all between,
A pale green Ivy, wherewith as a vale,
The thick diffussed clusters shaded been.
Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Caesar 1. Bell. Civil: Caesar commanded his soldiers to make ships of that
kind, which in former years the use of the Britains had taught him: first
they made the keyle and pinns of light matter, the rest of the body of the ship
being knit together with Osiers, was covered over with Leather.

CAP. 7. The Form.
Q. The first kind of the cause, in the Efficient and Matter being expounded;
the second follows, in the form and the end; what therefore is the form?

A. The form is the Cause by which the thing is that which it is.

Q. What is the benefit of it?

A. From hence the thing is distinguished from all other things, and the Form
is ingenerated together with the thing it self.

Q. Give some example of it?

A. A reasonable soul is the form of a man, because by it a man is a man, and
is distinguished from all other creatures thereby. The form of the geometrical
figures is in triangles and quadrangles. Heaven, Earth, Trees, Fishes are the
form of Physical things. From whence the chief explication of things, as it
is by nature, so (if it may be found out) it shall be as in artificial things
it is more easily met withal.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Caesar lib. 7. But all the French walls are almost of this Form, the
beams long and plain, with equal distance between them about two foot, are
placed upon the foundation. These are bound within and fastened very strongly:
for those spaces (of which we spoke) are filled up to the top with great
stones. These placed and knit together, an other row is also added* that the
same might keep the spaces: neither do the beams touch one another, but
being distant by equal spaces, all of them are strongly fastened great stones
being placed between them. And even so is the whole work knit together until
the just height of the wall he fulfilled. This work therefore is not deformed,
as well for the comeliness and variety, beams and stones being by courses
which keep their rows in right loins, as, because it has the chief
strength for profit and defense of Cities, because it does defend both from
the mischeife of stones, and the material ram, which with its forty feet,
being often bound to the long beams inward, can neither be broken or drawn
back again.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 1. Virgill describes the form of his port.

Between two seas two Islandes there does lie;
Sidewayes they are made, the water runns fast by.
Huge double Rocks that do reach up to heaven,
Under the which the seas lie still and calm:
And by the that place green woods there are growing
Forth from the same comes great black darkness flowing
Under which rock a dens made very fleet,
Wherein's rich living stones and waters sweet.
Houses for Nimphs and chains for ships there laid
Which would not by the Ancor or the chains be staid
CAP. 8. The End.
Q. What is the end?

A. The End is the Cause for whose sake the thing is.

Q. Give example?

A. To Physical things the proposed end is man to man, God. There is some
chief good and last end of all arts: as to speak well, of Grammar: to plead
well, of Rethoricke: to dispute well, of Logic.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 1. Juno assumeth the end of Marriage when as she promises Deiopeia
to Eolus to wit for solace and childrens sake.

Nimphs full fourteen I have of bodies rare
But who so is most beautiful and fair,
Even Deiopeia I to thee do give
Her year in Marriage state with thee to live,
Thee to reward for thy love unto me,
And cause thine of spring beautiful to be.
Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero pro Lig. Urges Tubero his accuser, when as he presses the end of
the wars taken up against Caesar. And truly (says he) he is come forth armed
against Caesar himself. But what did this Tubero his sword do in the
Pharsalian Army? whose sides did the sharp point aim at? who was to feel
the force of thy weapon? where was thy mind, eyes, hands, courage? what did
thou desire? what did thou wish?

CAP. 9. The Effects.
Q. What is the Effect?

A. The Effect is that which arises from the causes, whether begotten or
corrupted, or whether any thing be moved by any means. Here the motion, and
the thing done by motion, is called the Effect. Of this place are praises and
disprayses, of which sacred and Profane books are full.

Q. Give example of this out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 6. The facts of diverse people are compared to the praises of the
Romans.

Some finely carve upon the boiling brass,
They Will on the marble grave a living face,
They wish the causes better, they will descry
Heavens shining parts, and tell the stars ith sky,
Remember thou Romes people brave to rule,
These things shall be thine art, peace to impose,
To spare thy subjects, and subdue proud foes.
Q. What else comes under this head?

A. Hitherto are speeches and writings referd

Q. Give an example?

A. Pericles and Hortentius did celebrate the praise of pleading well: and by
the same argument also Demosthenes and Cicero writing well.

Q. What further?

A. To this place are referred counsels and deliberations, although not
brought to their end.

Q. Give an example?

A. Per^menio and Phylotus were beaten to death, because they were suspected to
be of the conspiracy against Alexander, as Curtius and Arianus have remembered
touching Lentulus, Cethegus and others, the accomplices of Cateline, they
suffered punishment by judgment of the Senate.

Q. Have not virtues and vices their Effects also?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example.

A. Horace after this manner describes the Effects of drunkenness.

Secrets it shows, and hope it does command,
Unto the wars it drives, although unarmd,
It takes the burden from the careful man,
It teaches art to all that will or can,
Who ere was drunk that wanted Eloquence?
Was any poor that used this defense?
CAP. 10. The Subject.
Q. The argument agreeing after a certain manner succeeds, what is that then?

A. The Subject and Adiunct.

Q. What is the Subject?

A. The Subject is that to which any thing is adioined.

Q. Make this playner by examples?

A. The mind is the Subject of science, ignorance, virtue, vice, because these
happen beside the being. The body, of health, sickness, strength, weakness,
beauty, deformity. Man is the Subject of riches, poverty, honor, infamy,
apparel, company. The place is the Subject of the thing placed.

Q. how prove you this last by testimony and example?

The Philosophers attribute a place to divine beings, although wanting part and
greatness. So the place of Geometry and the difference of places is in
Geometrical things: so of physic, it is more diligently considered in
physical things: In the world, in simple elements, in compound things.

Q. Give example out of sonte Poet.

A. So Virgill in his Georgicks admonishes that the place be diligently
sought out for things proposed: as come, trees, plants, pastures.

Before we pass into a sea unknown,
Know we the wind and various manner of heaven,
Our native soil and every habitation,
What will refuse or grow in any nation:
Some bears corn, the other with grapes does pass
Some with tall trees, the rest with unsowne grass.
Q. Proceed further in explicating the subject?

A. The subjects of senses are called sensibles; of virtues or vices things
proposed to virtues or vices.

Q. Give an example of the former?

A. Color is the subject of the sight, sound of the hearing; because these
senses are occupied and exercised in the sensibles.

Q. Give an example of the latter?

A. Virtues and vices are set forth in morrall philosophy by this argument,
temperance and intemperance by pleasure: magnanimity and sloth, by danger:
liberality, and covetousnes, by riches.

Q. Explicate the subject further?

A. So things numerable of arithmeticke: measurable (as I may say) are the
subjects of geometry.

Q. Give example of the subject out of some Orator?

A. By the same subject ( Cicero (second Agra) disputes that there was no
contention amongst the people of Campania, because there was no honor. They
are not carried (says he) with the desire of glory: because where there is no
public honor, there the desire of glory cannot be. There is no discord,
neither by contention nor ambition: for there is nothing for which they should
strive, nothing for which they should war, nothing for which they should
contend.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

Propertius uses this argument.
Of winds the Saylors talk, the Husbandmen of Bulls
The Soldiers of their wounds, and shepherds of their woolls
CAP. 11. The Adiunct.
Q. What is the Adiunct?

A. The Adiunct is that to which any thing is subjected: which argument though
it be lighter then the subject, yet more copious and frequent: therefore of its
signs Ovid speaks Second: Rem: Anno.

Some man (for such there be) may count this small
Yet that helps some which does not profit all.
Q. Make this playner?

A. Those things which are called good and evil of the mind, body, and the
whole man, are the adjuncts of the mind, body, man: also whatsoever happens
without the subject is the Adiunct.

Q. May not time also be reduced unto this head?

A. Yes, as place was in the subject, so is time in the Adiunct, viz. the
enduring of things past, present, to come.

Q. What further is comprised under this head?

A. All those quallities beside the causes, adjoined to the subject, whether
they be propet or common.

Q. What it Proper?

A. That which agrees only and wholly with the subject, as laughing with a
man, neying with a horse, barking with a dog.

Q. What is common?

A. That which is not proper after this manner.

Q. Give example of the Adiunct out of some Orator.

A. By this kind of argument, Cicero in the defense of Roscius the Comedian,
cavelleth with Fanius Chereus. Does not his head and eye-brewes, altogether
bald, seem to favor of malice, and cry out of deceit, does he not seem to be
compounded from the foot to the head, (if a man may conjecture by his shape)
of frauds fallacies, lies? Who therefore is altogether bald on the head and
eyebrewes, least he should be said to have one hair of a good man.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. So Martial lib. 2. mocketh Zoylus.

Red hair, black mouth, short feet and ilke squint eyes
It Is marvel Zoylus if goodness in thee lies.
Q. What further may be reduced under this head?

A. Garments and company are Adjuncts.

Q. Give example?

A. By this kind of circumstance, Dido going a hunting is magnificently set
forth, Aeneid: 4.

The morn appeard, Dido forsook the sea,
The day stir up, toth heaven youth guides the way
Both nets and gins with pick stanes all were reddy
Messalian horse with hunting dogs so greedy
Princes did wait, the slow queen did expect.
With fair clad horse, her way for to direct,
Forth comes she at length with mighty train
In her long robe with many a long seame,
Her horse down trapt, with gold her hair was trest
Her robes with golden books, together did she wrest.
Q. What is the benefit of Adjuncts?

A. There is great use of Adjuncts to the subjects by which they are occupied.

Q. Give example?

A. By this argument Plato foretold those cities to be miserable, where the
multitude of Physicians and Judges were wanting: because, of necessity, there
was conversant in those cities, both intemperance, and injustice.

And thus much for the place of agreeings, from whence every agreeing argument
may be said to be one or the same: and all manner of unity and (as I may say)
identity are referred hither as the first and simple fountains.

CAP. 12. Diverses.
Q. You have expounded the first agreeing argument: the disagreeing follows,
what then is disagreeing?

A. That which disagreeth from the thing.

Q. How are disagreeings manifested?

A. Disagreeings are equally manifested amongst themselves, and equally argued
one of another, although they do more clearly shine in their Disagreeings.

Q. What are the kinds of disagreeings?

A. Two, Diverse and Opposite.

Q. What are Diverses?

A. Diverses are disagreeings which disagree only in reason.

Q. What are the most frequent notes of speech for this Argument?

A. These. Not this, but that; although, yet.

Q. Give example from some Orator?

A. Pro Pempeio. He carried not the victory, but the ensigns of the victory.

Q. Give some other examples?

A. Ovid secund: Art: Amand:

Ulysses was nos fair but Eloquent.

Aeneid: 2.

This Triamus though held in dust of death Yetseased not.

Also this of the like matter, Pro Lig: call thou that wicked (o Tub^ro)
why, he has not hitherto deserved this name. For some called error, some
fear, that which more hardly, hope, desire, hatred, pertinacy* the most grave
temerity, none wicked besides thy self.

CAP. 13. Desperates
Q. What are Opposites?

A. Opposites are disagreeings, which disagree in reason and thing; therefore
cannot be attributed to the same, according to the same, to the same, and at
the same time.

Q. Make this plain by example.

A. So Socrates cannot be black and white of one and the same part. Father and
son of the same man; whole and sick at the same time; but he may be white on
the one part, black on another; Father of this, son of that man; sound to
day, sick to morrow.

Q. It should seem by this, that the one being affirmed the other is denied?

A. So it is.

Q. What are the kinds of Opposites?

A. Disparates or contraries.

Q. What are Disparates?

A. Disparates are opposites whereof one is opposed equally to many.

Q. Give example?

A. Green, Ashcolor, Red, are means between white and black, which are
Disparates, both with the extremes and among themselves. So liberality and
covetousness are disparates among themselves. So a man a tree, a stone and
infinite of this kind are Disparates; neither can one thing be, a man, a tree,
a stone.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Virgill: Aeneid: 1. disputes by this Argument.

O virgin how shall I remember thee
Whose countenance not mortal seems to be:
Thy voice is sure above the humane reach
Both which thee Gods proves and so do teach.
Cap. 14. Relates.
Q. What are contraries?

A. Contraries are Opposites whereof one is opposed to one only.

Q What are the kinds of it?

A. They are either affirming or denying.

Q. What is affirming?

A. Affirming is that of which both of them affirm.

Q. How many kinds has it?

A. Two, Relates and Adverses.

Q. What are Relates?

A. Relates are Contraries, affirming of which one consists of the mutual
affection of the other: and from hence they are named Relates.

Q. Make this plain by example?

A. The Father, who has a son, and the son who has a Father, are relates.

Q. They may seem by this to be together by nature?

A. So they are, so that he which perfectly knows the one, knows also the
rest.

Q. Give some examples of Relates?

A. Pro Marc. By which thou truly understandest how much praise there is for
the benefit given, when as for the receiving, is so much glory, Marc: against
Sosib.

Sosibian, thou yeeld'st thou wast borne thrall When flattering thou thy Father
Lord do call.

So Quint. lib. 5. cap. 10. If it be honest to place himself at Rhoades, and
to lodge at Hirmaereon. After which manner Tullius, in the perfect oration. It
is therefore dangerous (says he) least any should think it dishonestie, to
teach that in the great and glorious Art to others, which it was honesty for
him to learn.

Q. Does not earnest affection sometimes flow from these Relates?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero in his oration has brought forth a certain earnest affection from
these Relates. Now these are grave (says he) wife of the Son in law,
stepmother of the Son, and baude of the daughter.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. All this Ovid has affected manifestly in his description of the Iron age,
Met. 1.

Ne does the guest safe in his Inn remain
His host him troubles who does him retain,
Sisters ene from their brethren are not free
The husband longs the death of's wife to see
She hates him and against him does conspire
The Cursed stepdam's always in an ire.
The Son before his time doth's fathers years in quire
Q. But the argument of such relations has nothing contrary: yea it rather
argues mutual causes: as, thou art my Father, I therefore am thy son, how
then appears the Contraries?

A. When I say I am thy father, I am not therefore thy Son, then are the
contraries true.

CAP. 15. Adverses.
Q. What are adverses?

A. Adverses are Contraries affirming, which are perpetually adverse among
themselves.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aneid: 11. No health in war, we all desire peace?

Q. Give further example.

A. White and black, hot and cold, virtue and vice, are opposed.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Parad. 1. Cont. Epe. Yet they do hold strongly and defend accurately, that
pleasure is the chief good: which to me truly does seem to be the voice of
beasts, not of men; whenas whether God, or nature (as I may say) the mother of
all things has given thee a soul, then which nothing is more excellent,
nothing more divine; do thou so cast, and throw down thy self, as that thou
think there is no difference betwixt thee and the four footed beasts.

Q. Wherein consists the force of this example?

A. Cicero has opposed beasts and men, Adverses: pleasure is the good of
beasts, and therefore of men.

Q. Give another example out of some Poet?

A. So liberty and servitude in Tib. lib. 2. So servitude I see prepared for
me, Yet parents freedom would far better be.

Q. Give example out of an Orator?

A. Pro Marcell. For temerity is never joined with wisdom, neither is chance
admitted to council.

CAP. 16. Contradicents
Q. Having spoken of contraries affirming, we are come to contraries denying,
what are they then?

A. Contraries denying are such, of which one says, the other denies the same.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. They are Contradicents or Privants.

Q. What are Contradicents?

A. Contradicents are Contraries denying, of which one denies every where.

Q. Give example?

A. Just; not just, a creature, not acreature; it is, it is not: These are
Contradicents.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Pro Murena. The sentences of Cato and Cicero are Contraries; this of the
Stoics, that man of the Academicks. The Dialogue is in these words. Thou have
known nothing, yea something, but not all things. Thou have done nothing
merely for thanks, yet refuse not thanks when as thine office and trust
requires it. Be not moved with mercy in condemning. But yet there is some
praise of humanity. Stand in thine own opinion: except a better should
overcome.

Q. Give example from some Poet?

A. Mart. lib. 2.

Thou Art fair Fabulla, rich, and all is a maid,
Can you deny, it is truth that I have said?
But if thou boastest of thy self too much,
Thou Art neither fair, a virgin, nor yet rich.
Q. give another example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero primo Tusc. Forces Atticus the Epicure by this argument to
confess, that the dead were not miserable, if they were not at all; as the
Epicures believe, I had rather (says he) thou should fear Cerberus, then
speak so inconsiderately. Atticus, why? Marcus, that that which thou deniest
that thou say. Where is thy wit? For when as thou say he is miserable,
thou then say, he is, which is not. Then after long disputation Atticus
said, go to, now I grant that those which are dead are not miserable: because
thou have forced me to confess, that they be not all, lest they should be
miserable.

Q. Give another example?

A. Terrence in Ev. Phedria frames his speech to Dorus, when as he had
affirmed that which he denied afterward. After a manner (says he) he says,
after a manner he denies.

CAP. 17. Privants.
Q. What are Privants?

A. Privants are contraries denying, of which one denies in the same subject
only, in which the affirmative (of its own nature) is.

Q. What is the affirmative called?

A. The Habit.

Q. And what the negative?

A. Privation.

Q. Make this playner?

A. Motion and rest, drunkenness and sobriety, are comprised under this head.

Q. Give example?

A. Mart. lib. 3.

Thou Art drunken sure, sober thou would not do it,
Q. What may further be under this head?

A. To be blind, and to see.

Q. Give example.

A. Pro Celio. There is therefore one of this family, and he truly is greatly
blind: for he shall take no grief who shall not see her.

Q. What may further be under this head?

A. Poverty and riches are thus opposed.

Q. Give example?

A. Mart. lib. 5.

Poor shall thou be Emilian if poor:
Wealths never given but to the rich before.
Q. What further?

A. Death and life.

Q. Give example?

A. Cont. Mil. Sit ye still O revengers of this man's death; whose life if you
thought you could restore, would you?

Q. What further?

A. Silence and Speech.

Q. Give example?

A. Primo Cat. What expectest thou the authority of the speaker, whose silence
thou beholdest to be their pleasures?

Q. What more?

A. Mortality and Immortality.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Maro. I grieve when as the common wealth ought to be immortal, that it
consists of one mortal life.

And this suffices to be spoken of Disagreeing, from whence every thing may
differ from another by certain means.

CAP. 18. Equals.
Q. Simple arguments were agreeings and disagreeings; we are now come unto
Comparatives; what are Comparatives therefore?

A. Comparatives are those which are compared amongst themselves.

Q. How are they manifested?

A. Although they be equally known by the nature of comparison, yet one to
another is more known and illustrated then another: and oftentimes are judged
by shorter notes, sometimes distinguished by fuller patts.

Q. What may these parts be called?

A. They are named the Proposition and Reditio^.

Q. May not comparatives also argue fictions?

A. Yes, Comparatives do argue feigned things, and go cause trust.

Q. What be the kinds of Comparisons?

A. Comparison, is in Quantity, or Quality.

Q. What is Quantity?

A. Quantity is that whereby is showed how much the thing compared is.

Q. What be the kinds of Quantity?

A. Equals or unequalls.

Q. What are Equals.

A. Equals are those of which there is one quantity.

Q. What is an Equal argument then?

A. An equal argument is, when an Equal is explicated by an Equal.

Q. What are the notes of it?

A. Even, equal, like, the same, that, so much the more, how much the more, by
so much, by how much, so much, how much, not more not less.

Q. Give example?

A. Aeneid. 2. Equal with light winds.

Aeneid. 3.

And mow't should grow in equal age with thee.

Aeneid 6.

Behold this thing Great Rome with earth is even
The spirit of man shall also equal heaven.
Q. What further is necessary to these equals?

A. A proposition or Reddition does distinguish them.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Quart: Cat: Whose things done, and the virtues to the same, by which things
only the course is contained in its regions and bounds.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 4.

As well a bruiter of things false that be,
As messenger of truth and verity.
Cat.
By how much I am worst of poets all,
By so much thee men best of patrons call.
Ovid de Trist. 4.

As many shells on shore, as roses sweet.
As many sleeps as men, by popy seeds do get.
As many beasts in woods, fish in the sea do lie,
As many birds as in the ayrie heavens do fly,
So many griefs me pass, their number should I tell
Icarian waters I must surely number well.
Q. Proceed to further examples?

A. Phil. 9. Neither had he more skill of the law then of justice: therefore
those things which the laws had brought forth, chiefly the civil, he always
referred to ease and equity: neither had he rather approve actions of strife,
then take away controversies.

Ovid de Art. Amand: It Is no less virtue for to keep then get.

Pro Mur. I acknowledge this to be equal for Lucius Murena: and so equal,
that neither he shall be overcome by dignity, neither by dignity shall
overcome thee.

Phil. 2. Whose burden being common, why not a common pray of them?

Ter in Adelph. When as I care not for thine, care not thou for mine.

Q. What may further be comprised under this head?

A. Of this place are those that follow derived truly from contraries, but
treated of in the place of equals; as this of Mart. Sosibian thou yeeld'st,
thou wast borne thrall, When flattering thou thy father lord do call.

Ovid 1. Fast.

There Is price in price, the Censors honors give;
He gives friendship, poor alone do live.
Q. But are they not more frequent from adverses?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Cicero Syl. Neither do I understand my self to have been angry. But if I
defend him whom thou accusest, why should I not be angry with thee, who
accusest him whom I defend? he says I accuse mine own enemy; and I said, I
defend my friend. So primo Tusc: But when as they confess that there is force
enough in vices to cause a miserable life, why should it not be granted that
there is force enough in virtues to effect a blessed life.

Q. It should seem by this, that contraries are sequences of contraries?

A. So they are.

Q. What may further be comprised under this head?

A. Sometimes there is put forth like for like.

Q. Give example?

A. Such is the contention of the shepherds in Virg: Aeglog: 3. Damaetas first
of all putting forth this riddle.

Tell in what place and I will herry thee,
For great Apollo's self, the welken large
Just three else broad and no more seems to be:
And Menalcas answering in this other riddle.
Tell in what place the flowers have their marge,
With kings names in their leaves inscribed plain;
And to thy self take Phillis for thy pain.
Q. Give example of feigned equals?

A Feigned equals are such as is in Aeschinus Sacraticus wherein Socrates
shows Aspatia speaking to Zenophons wife, and Zenophon himself. Tell me I
pray thee thou wife of Zenophon, if thy neighbor should have better gold then
thou, whether had thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. And if
she have a goune, and other women's garments of a greater price then thou,
whether had thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. Go to then if
she have a better husband then thou, had thou rather have hers? here the
woman blushed. But Aspatia spoke to Zenophon himself, I pray thee (said she)
if thy neighbor have a better horse then thou, had thou not rather have his
or thine? His, said he: but if he have better ground then thou, whether had
thou rather have his? His, said he: viz. the best. But if he have a better
wife then thou have, whether had thou rather have his or thine? And here
Zenophon also himself held his peace.

CAP. 18. Greaters
Q. What are unequalls?

A. Unequals are those of which the quantity is not one.

Q. What be the kinds of unequals?

A. Unequal is greater or lesser.

Q. What is greater?

A. Greater is that which quantity exceeds.

Q. What be the proper notes of it?

A. Not only, but also, I had rather this, then that, more also by grammatical
comparison.

Q. Give example.

A. Cicero pro Mur. There is taken from amongst us not only that verbal
counterfeit of prudence, but also that Lady of things Wisdom it self: The
thing is carried by force, not only the hateful Orator in pleading, or the
pratler, but also the truly good is despised. A horrid soldier is loved.

Q. Is not a certain logical gradation, sometime joined with a rethoricall
climax taken from hence?

A. Yes.

Q. Show example?

A. Pro. Mil. Neither did he so handle himself to the people only, but also
to the Senate, neither to the Senate only, but also to the public president
and soldiers: neither to these alone, but also to the power of those, to whom
the care of Senate soldiers, and the whole common wealth of Italy was
committed.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A. Iu. Sat. 8. Against a proud noble man, Rather had I Thirses thy Sire should
be, Whilst that Aeacides is like to thee: And that thou should with Vulcan
armor make, Then for Achilles son men should thee take. Or that thy feature
should like Thirses be.

Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Pro. Marc. Having more admiration then glory, Aeneid. 1.

O fellows we these evils knew before, God will them end, we greater far have
bore.

Cic. pro Mur. Be not so unjust, that when as thy fountains are opened by
thine enemies, our rivers should be stopped up even by our friends.

Q. Give an example of a gradation, without a rethoricall climax?

A. Ter. Thr. But does Thais give me many thanks for it? Gn. Many. Thr. say
thou so? is she glad? Gn. Not so much for the gift it self, as that it was
given by thee; for that she triumphs in good earnest.

Q. Are not also greaters feigned?

A. Yes, and of great force.

Q. Give example?

A. Ter. Heart. A noble man if he be made a lover can never undergo the
charges, much less thou then. Aeneid. 5.

O great Aeneas although love should not
Promise to help or aid me now one jot,
I hope that Italy shall reach to heaven,
The winds once changed their forces cross have driven.
Ariseing from black night in the city cast,
Our power is weak, our greatest strength but wast.
CAP. 20. Lessers.
Q. What is Lesser?

A. Lesser is that whose quantity is exceeded.

Q. How is a Lesser judged?

A. Oftentimes by proper notes.

Q. What be these notes?

A. Not only, but not at all: rather this then that, when as, as also.

Q. How else?

A. By grammatical, comparison.

Q. How lastly?

A. By the denying of parts.

Q. Give example of the notes out of some Orator?

A. Cic. secund. Cat. No man not only of Rome, but in no corner of all Italy
was ever oppressed with so great a tax, as that he once knew of so incredible
a Caesar. Cat. 1. Thou can rather as an Exul tempt, then as a Consul vex the
common wealth. Ag. 2. Which when to all it is very hard and an evil reason,
then truly to me above the rest.

Q. Give poetical examples.

A. Ovid Trist. 1.

More fierce then Busiros, more fierce then he,
Who in flow fire his Ox burnt furiously.
Ovid. pri. de rem. amor.

Thy body to redeem bear sword and fire,
Ne drink to cool thy thirsly hot desire:
To save thy soul will thou not all forbear,
This part exceedes the other price by far.
Q. Give example of those which are done by the denying of parts.

A. Phil. 9. All in all ages who have had the understanding of the law in this
city, if they might be brought together into one place are not to be equalled
with Servius Sulpitius: Cat. 2. Although those which say that Catilina is gone
to Messilia, do not so much complain of it, as fear it.

Q. Is it not sometimes without notes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Mur: Thou art so much wanting from the perfection of great works, as
the foundation, which thou think thou have not yet laid. Pro Arch: The
stones and desartes often times answer to the voice; wild beasts are tamed and
subdued by singing: shall not then the instructions of the Poets in the best
thing move us?

Q. Is there not also a gradation from lessers?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Ver: 7. Is it a great act to overthrow the city Rome, to beat a knave, to
kill a Parriside, what shall I say? to hang him upon the gallows.

Q. Are not lessers also sometimes feigned?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Virg: Aeglog: 1.

The light held hynds in the air shall feed therefore,
And in the Ocean all the fishes die:
For want of water on the naked shore,
The wandering Parthyan first shall drinken dry tide,
Huge Araxis, and gusling Germany:
Suck down their thirsty throats, swift Tigris
Ere his dear lovely face shall from my bosom slide.
Q. Give another example.

A. Phil. 2. O filthy thing? not only in the sight but also to hear of? if it
had happened to thee amongst thine inhumane pots, who would not have accounted
it filthy? but in the assembly of the Romans about public affairs* the
master of the horse to whom it is not comely to belch, he vomiting a crust of
bread and wine, filled his lap and all the tribunal with stink.

CAP. 21. Likes.
Q. You have expounded comparison in quantity, comparison in quality follows,
what therefore is quality?

A. Quality is that whereby the things compared are said to be such.

Q. What are the kinds of quality?

A. Like or dislike?

Q. What are likes?

A. Likes are those of which there is the same quality.

Q. What are likes called?

A. Like is called proportion, as the likes are proportionable.

Q. What are the notes of likeness, whereby it is concluded in one word?

A. Like, effigies, in that manner as also denials of dislikenes.

Q. What be they?

A. Such as this not otherwise.

Q. Give example of the first sort?

A. Aeneid: 1. His mouth and shoulders being like to God. Phil: 9. Although
Servius Suspicius could leave no clearer monument then his son, the effigies
of his manners, virtues, constancy, piety, wit.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Ovid. Trist. 1.

For he or none, even he that made the wound,
Only Achilles it is can make me sound.
Q. Proceed to farther examples?

A. In Phis. There was one day which was to me the likeness of immortality,
wherein I returned to my country. Ver: 1. But presently from the same likeness
of a man as it were by some Circean pot, he is made a Bear. Pro Pomp.
Therefore all in this place do behold Cons. Pompeius not as one sent from the
city, but fallen from heaven. Aeneid. 3. They do not that which I have
commanded. Ter: I am not, neither have been otherwise then he.

Q. What is the partition of likeness?

A. Disjoined or continued.

Q. What is a disjoined similitude?

A. A disjoined similitude is when as four terms are distinguished to the
thing.

Q. Give example?

A. Eglog: 5.

So me thy song as sleep on grass does queme
The travailer, his weary lims to drench.
Q. What is the force of this example?

A. The songs to the hearers, as sleep to the weary, are four distinct terms.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ad fratrem: As the best governors can not overcome the force of the
tempest, so the wisest men often times cannot overcome the violence of fortune.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here are four terms, as the governor to the ship, so wise men to
fortune.

Q. Proceed to farther examples?

A. Trist. 1.

Eve^ as the yellow gold in flaming fire is seen,
So men may trust, behold, in time that is sharp and keen
Cic. Phil. 2. But even as those who in a great sickness do not taste the
sweetness of meat, so the lustful, covetous, wicked have not the taste of
true praise. Virg. made these verses.

All night it rained, next day the signs are seen,
The Empires parted Caesar and love between.
Battillus arrogated them to himself and obtained a great reward: therefore
Virgill in these verses mocketh Battillus.

I made these rimes, another had the land,
So birds you neasts not for your selves have made,
So you o Bees make honey not for you:
So you o Sheep bear wool but not for you,
So you o Oxen plough but not for you.
Q. Are not the notes sometimes omitted?

A. Yes, sometimes there is no note at all.

Q. Give an example?

A. Virg: Eglog: 2.

Ah my fair boy trust not thy hew too much,
Hurtles though black, by every handsome hand
Are plucked, while dayses none vouchsafe to touch,
All be they white, yet shed they as they stand.
Q. What is continual likeness?

A. A continual likeness is when as the first term is to the second, so the
second to the third.

Q. Give an example?

A. De Leg: 3. See you not that this is the Magistrates power that he should
rule and prescribe right, profitable, and agreeing things with the laws: for
as the laws do govern the Magistrates, so the Magistrates do rule the
people.

Q. What is the force of this example?

A. Here are three terms, Laws, Magistrates, People.

Q. Have not feigned likenesses equal force with these above?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. It appears chiefly in this explicated similitude of Esope his Apology
taken out of

Horace Epist. 1.
But if Romes people ask me happily.
Why not amongst Judges on the bench sit I:
And do that which they love, fly that they hate?
I answer as the crafty Fox of late.
When tooth-sick lion he this message sent,
Feign would I come to that thing was I bent:
But that I saw the steps of many feet,
That way to go, none back again to get.
CAP. 22. Dislikes.
Q. What are dislikes.

A. Dislikes are comparatives, whose quality is diverse.

Q. What are the proper notes of dislikes?

A. Dislike, different, another.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Plan. Although the paying of money and thanks be unlike. Aeneid. 1. O
ancient house? O how unlike for that Lord to govern Caes. Pri. Bell. Gal. All
these differed in their tongues, instructions, laws. Agra. 2. One is known by
his countenance, another by his voice, another by his gate. De Not. Deo. 2.
Because I have begun to do otherwise then I had said in the beginning.

Q. Are not dislikes also known by denying she likes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. De Orat: 2. Philosophy is not like the other arts: Aeneid: 2. But he was
not of that seed wherein thou remembrest Achilles, such was Priamus his enemy.
Lor. Epist. 2. There is not the same age, the same mind, ad frat. 1. So thy
ring is not as a certain vessel, but as thy self: Phil: 3. This certain day
he is wont to expect not so much of sacrifice as counsel.

Q. Give some poetical examples?

A. By this argument the shepherd confesses his error. Aeglog: 1.

Ah fond friend Melibe I whilom dempt,
That famous city which I now and then,
In common chat amongst our country men:
Have heard yea cliped by the name of Rome,
Certes for all the world cib to our homely home: and by and by,
-- so did I dare.
Kids liken to their Goats, whelps to their dams,
And moule hills wont to mountains to compare.
Q. Show the force of this example?

A. As neither the whelps to the dogs, nor kids to their dams, so neither is
Mantua like to Rome.

Q. Be not notes of dislikes sometimes wanting?

A. Yes, often times, and the dislikenesse is more clearly explicated.

Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Quint. l. 1. c. 11. Brutus slew the children of the traitors: Muntius did
punish by death the virtue of his son.

Q. Give another example?

A. Cat: the sun sets and rises again: but when our little light sets,
there is a perpetual night.

CAP. 23. Conjugates.
Q. Hitherto you have expounded the first arguments, those derived from the
first follow, what are they then?

A. Those derived from the first are these, which are even to that which they
argue, as the first from whence they are derived.

Q. What be the kinds of these arguments?

A. A conjugate, a notation, a distribution, and a definition.

Q. What are conjugates?

A. Conjugates are names drawn diversely from the same principle.

Q. Give example?

A. Justice, just, justly.

Q. Is there not a symboll in conjugates of agreeing arguments?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Propert: lib: 2.

Because in love there is no liberty,
Who ever loves that man can never be free.
Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here liberty is the cause why we should be free.

Q. Give another example?

A. Cic: Not: Deo: 2. Where he speaks of Dionysius the Tyrant. He commanded
that the tables of silver in which were the images of the gods, should be taken
away, in which after the manner of the Grecians should be engraven. The goods
of the gods, saying, that he was willing to use of their goodness.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. The Gods are good, therefore their goodness is to be used: here from the
effects it is directed to the causes.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ter: I am a man, no humane thing is strange to me.

Q. Is it not sometimes from the subject to the adjunct?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Phil: 2. I will not handle thee as a Consul, least thou handle me as one
standing for the consulship. In Pis: When as all the cause was of the Consuls
and Senate, both the Consuls and Senate had need of my help.

CAP. 24. Notations.
Q. What is notation?

A. Notation is the interpretation of a name.

Q. What are names?

A. Names truly are notes of things.

Q. May there not be rendered a reason of the names?

A. Yes, either from the derivation or composition, if they be made by true
notation, from some first argument.

Q. Give example?

A. Homo ab humo. Ovid: Fast: 6.

Stat vi terra sua, vi stando vesta vocatur.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the cause.

Q. Give another example?

A. At focus a flammis, and quod fovit omnia dictus:

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the effects.

Q. Give another example?

A. Vir: 4. O Verrea praeclara! quid enim accessisti, quo non attuleris tecum
istum diem? and enim quam tu domum, quam urbem adijsti, quod fanum denique,
quod non eversum atque extersum reliqueris? quare appellentur sane ista Verrea
quae non ex nomine, sed ex moribus, naturaque tua constituta esse videantur.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is also a notation from the effects.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ovid: Fast: 1.

Prima dies tibi carua datur, dea cardinis haec est.

Nomine clausa aperit, claudit aperta suo.

Q. Wherein is the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the subjects in the inward, about which the deity
of this goddess is exercised.

Q. Give another example?

A. From the adjuncts, there is a notation from Bambalion. Phil. 2. Quia balbus
and stupidus: hinc igitur cavilatio in Antonium generum. Tuae conjugis, bonae
faeminae, locupletat is quidem certe, Bambalio quidem pater, homo nullo numero,
nihil illo contemptius, qui propter haesitantiam linquae stuporemque cordis
cognomen ex contumelia traxerit.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from adjuncts.

Q. Are there not notations also from disagreeings?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example.

A. Quint. lib. 1. cap. 6. Lucus, quia umbra apacus, parum luceat: and ludus
quia sit longissime a lusu, and dis quia minime dives.

Q. May not notation be also from comparatives?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Pyropus, quod ignis flammam imitotur.

Q. But is there not, as to the notation to his name, so an affection of the
name to the notation?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Animi plenus, ergo animosus.

Q. Show the contrary?

A. Animosus, ergo animi plenus.

CAP. 25. Distribution.
Q. What are the other derived arguments?

A. Distribution and definition.

Q. Is there not a reciprocal affection in both these?

A. Yes.

Q. What is the affection in the distribution?

A. Of all parts with the whole.

Q. What is the affection in the definition?

A. Of the definition with the things designed.

Q. What is a distribution?

A. A distribution is, when the whole is distributed into parts.

Q. What is the whole?

A. The whole is that which contains parts.

Q. What are parts?

A. Parts are those which are contained of the whole.

Q. It should seem then that the distinction of the whole into parts is
distribution?

A. So I said.

Q. What is then the collection of the parts to the making up of the whole?

A. It is called induction.

Q. Whence is distribution taken?

A. Distribution is taken from arguments altogether agreeing, but disagreeing
amongst themselves: therefore it shall be by so much more accurate, by how
much the agreeings of the parts shall be with the whole, and the disagreeing
among themselves.

CAP. 26. The distribution from the cause.
Q. Whence is the first distribution?

A. The first distribution is from absolute agreeings.

Q. What are these absolute agreeings?

A. The causes and effects.

Q. What is distribution from the causes?

A. Distribution from the causes, is when the parts are causes of the whole.
Here the distribution of perfect into its members is greatly praised.

Q. What is perfect?

A. Perfect is the whole, to which the parts are essential.

Q. What is a member?

A. A member is a part of the whole.

Q. Give example?

A. Grammar is divided into Etymology, and Syntaxis; Rhetoric, into Elocution
and action; Dialectica, into invention and judgment: for those arts are
constituted of those parts.

Q. What is the principal distribution?

A. When the explication of a longer thing is received.

Q. Give examples?

A. Georg: 1.

What makes glad corn, and how to till the ground,
How to plant elms that be so strong and sound:
How to guide oxen, cattle how to tend,
And how the little pretty be defend,
I will declare. --
Q. Give another example?

A. Cic: pro Mur: I understand O you Judges, that the whole accusation has
thre^ parts, one of which is in reprehension of life, another in contention of
dignity, the third touching the fault.

Q. How is the second kind of handling this kind of argument?

A. Either from the parts to the whole; or from the whole to the parts.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat:

Quintia is fair to many, so to me,
I will not therefore this same thing deny;
But wholly fair I will not say she is not:
True beauty in her there is not a jot,
Lesbius fair in every part most fine,
Venus adorned her, clear did make her shine.
CAP. 27. The distribution from the effects, also the genus and species.
Q. What is the distribution from the effects?

A. The distribution from the effects, is when the parts are effects.

Q. Give example?

A. In a ship the seamen, some scale the masts, some run in at the doors,
some draw water, the governor holds the rudder in the ship.

Q. May not distribution of genus into species be comprised under this head?

A. Yes, distribution of genus into species does here excel.

Q. What is genus?

A. Genus is the whole essential in parts.

Q. What is species?

A. Species is the parts of genus.

Q. Give example?

A. We say a living creature is the genus of a man, and a beast: for a living
creature is the whole of that effect, viz. a corporal living substance, which
commonly pertains to the beasts and men: we say the species of a man and a
beast is living because they are parts of a living subject, which living
essence they have common: we say a man the genus of every man, and a lion the
genus of every lion, but contrary, every man the species of a man, every lion
of a lion.

Q. What is the kinds of the genus?

A. The genus is most general or subalternat.

Q. What are the kinds of the species?

A. The species is subalternate or most special.

Q. What is the most general genus?

A. The most general genus is that of which there is no kinds.

Q. Give example?

A. In logical invention an argument is the most general genus of
artificialls and inartificialls.

Q. What is the subalternate genus, and the subalternate species?

A. The subalternate genus, as also the subalternate species, is that which is
the species of this, but the genus of that.

Q. Give example?

A. The cause is the species of an absolute arguing argument, but the genus of
the matter and form.

Q. But what is the most special species?

A. The most special species is that which is individable into other species.

Q. Give example?

A. The matter and form singly.

Q. What are the genus and species notes of?

A. Of the causes and effects.

Q. Give example?

A. In a living thing there is a corporeal essence which in the matter is
belonging commonly to the species, as also the faculty of life and sense, which
in the form pertains commonly to the species.

Q. It should seem that the genus contains the causes, which do attain to
the species of it; and therefore contrarily, the species contains the effects
of their genus?

A. So it is.

Q. From whence then is that universal famousnes and excellency?

A. From hence, because it declares the causes.

Q. Show some example now of the distributions of the genus into species?

A. Distribution of genus into species is very excellent truly, but hard and
seldom found, yet we will bring what illustrations and examples we can. Ovid:
Met: 1. Divides living creatures into five species; stars, birds, beasts,
fish, men: he gives life to the stars as the Philosophers do.

No region is without some living thing,
Stars in the skies the forms of gods being:
Birds in the air in abundance be,
Beasts on the earth, and fishes in the sea.
But yet amongst these a creature more divine,
Who may them rule and govern all in fine;
There wanted much until that man was borne.
So Cic: Offic: 1. divides virtue into four species, prudence, justice,
fortitude, and temperance; but all that is honest springs out of one of these
four parts, for either it is conversant in the knowledge and skill of the
truth, or in the defending the society of men, and giving every one his own;
also in trust of things bargained, or in a high mind and admirable greatness
and courage, or lastly in all things which are made and called order and means
in which is modesty and temperance,

Q. What is distribution of the genus into the forms of the species?

A. Distribution of the genus into the forms of the species is the same;
because the form with the genus, constitute their species.

Q. Give example?

A. Of living creatures, one is speaking, another dumb.

Q. May not genus and species be handled apart and severally?

A. Yes, genus and species are not only handled after this simple form of
division, but also apart one from another.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Arc: But least any should wonder that we say so, that there is a
certain faculty of wit, and this reason or discipline of speaking, neither
that we have truly given our selves altogether to this study; for all arts
which pertain to humanity, have a certain common band, and are contained (as
it were) in a certain knowledge amongst themselves.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Art is the genus, poesy and eloquence the species.

Q. Is not the genus handled also by the species?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Ovid: de Trist: 4.

Fill thy sad matter with thy virtues grave,
Hot glory does decay, it none can save:
Who had known Hector if Troy well had been?
Through public vices way to virtue's seen.
Thine art o Typhis lies, if in the sea
There be no floods, if men be well truly,
Then Phoebus art decays instantly.
That which they hid, and is not known for good,
Appears at last, and shows where evil stood.
Q. But are there no special examples fitted to this kind?
A. Yes, such as this. Attic. 7. Will thou leave the city? what if the French
men come? The common wealth he says is not in walls but altars and religion.
Theomistocles did the same, and a whole host of Barbarians were not able to
take one city. But? Pericles did not so, who in the year almost before fifty,
when he kept nothing but a wall; our city before being taken they kept the
tower notwithstanding.

CAP. 28. Distribution from the subject.
Q. What is the other distribution?
A. The other distribution is of agreeings after a certain manner.
Q. What are agreeings after a certain manner?

A The subjects and adjuncts.

Q. What is the distribution from subjects?

A. The distribution from subjects is, when the parts are subjects.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat:

Thy maiden head's not wholly thine I wene,
One part thy father gave, the part between
Thou of thy mother had, so that to thee
None but the third remains for to be.
Therefore resist not two, cast not away
The thing thy parents gave to thee I say.
Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Cic: Tusc: 1. There are therefore three kinds of good, as I understand
from the Stoics, to whose use oftener then I am wont we give place. There are
therefore those kinds of good, whilst that the external things of the body are
cast upon the ground, and because they are to be undertaken they are called
good. There are other divine things which do more nearly concern us, and are
heavenly, so that those who have attained them, why may I not call them after a
manner blessed, yea most happy.

CAP. 29. Distribution from adjuncts.
Q. What is distribution from adjuncts?

A. Distribution from adjuncts is, when the parts are adjuncts.

Q. Give example?

A. Of men, some are sound, some sick, some rich, some poor.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A. Virg: Georg: 1. Divides the world into five parts, the middle scorching
hot, the other two extreme cold, the two last temperate.

Five zones the heavens do hold, the middle hot:
The Sun there burns, cold in it there is not,
But on the right and left hand there is seen.
Rain, frost and cold, that is bitter, sharp and keen.
The two last temperate, yet in them is
Mortality, and many sicknesses.
Q. Give an Orators example?

A. Caes: Bell: Gal: 1. All France is divided into three parts; of which, one
the Belgians inhabit, the other the Aequitans, the third those who in their
tongue are called Cetts, in our language the Gauls.

CAP. 30. Definition.
Q. What is definition?

A. Definition is when it is explicated what the thing is, and that
interchangeably may be argued with the thing defined.

Q. What are the kinds of definition?

A. A definition is perfect or imperfect.

Q. What is the perfect definition called?

A. This is properly called a definition.

Q. What is the imperfect called?

A. A description.

Q. What is a perfect definition?

A. A perfect definition is a definition consisting of the only causes which
constitute the essence: such as the causes comprehended by the genus and form.

Q. Give example?

A. After this manner is a man defined, viz. by the genus, (a living creature)
we understand (as it is said) a corporeal essence full of life and sense,
which is the matter and a part of the form of a man, to which (if thou addest
reasonable) thou comprehendest the whole form of a man, by the whole faculty
of his life, sense, reason.

Q. It should seem then that the perfect definition is nothing else then an
universal symboll of the causes, constituting the essence and nature of things?

A. So it is.

Q. Give an example?

A. The arts have such definitions, Grammar of well speaking; Rethoricke of
pleading well; Dialectica of disputing well; Arithmeticke of numbering well;
Geometry of measuring well.

CAP. 31. Description.
Q. What is description?

A. Description is a definition defining the thing from other arguments also.

Q. Give example?

A. This is the description of a man, a man is a living creature, mortal,
capable of discipline.

Q. Are not proper circumstances also mingled with common causes sometimes?

A. Yes.

Q. Then it seems that succint brevity is not always in this kind?

A. No, oftentimes it desires a clearer and greater explication.

Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. In Mil: Glory is described. But yet of all rewards of virtue (if there be a
reason of rerewardes) the greatest is glory; this one comfort us touching
the shortness of our life, causes that we are present with the absent dead,
makes us to live to conclude, by these steps we do seem to ascend into
heaven.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A Aeneid: 4. Fame is described.

From Libeans temple comes forth great fame,
Naught swifter then ill news which bears this name,
Moving she goes, by going strength she gets,
She fears at first, at last with winds she fleets.
Walks on the earth, her head she lifts to the sky,
Earth brought her forth, the Gods were angry;
In Caeus and Encelladus his land,
She was at last as I do understand;
Her feet were swift, her wings most hurful were
A horrid monster, wicked, full of fear,
As many feathers as upon her are:
So many eyes attend her every where.
So many tongues, so many mouths do sound,
So many years do lessen her around.
In night she flies through heaven, and in the shade
About the earth she goes, no noise is made:
She sits by the light on houses high,
And causes towns to quiver fearfully;
As well a bruiter of things false that be,
As messengers of truth and verity.
Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Such are the descriptions of plant? an living creatures, in physic: also
of rivers mountains, cities, in geography and history.

CAP. 32. Divine testimony.
Q. You have expounded the artificial arguments, the inartificiall follows;
tell me then what an inartificiall argument is?

A. An inartificiall argument is, that which argues not by its own nature,
but takes force from some artificial argument.

Q. It seems by this when a hidden truth of things is more subtily searched
for, that this argument has small force of proof?

A. So it is, but in civil and humane things oftentimes this argument
effects the greatest trust, from the moving arguments, if wisdom, virtue,
and good will be present.

Q. What is it called?

A. In one name it is called testimony.

Q. What are the kinds of testimony?

A. Divine or humane.

A. What may be comprised under the head of divine testimony?

A. Not only the miracles of the gods, but also the answers of prophets and
fortunetellers, are counted amongst divine testimonies.

Q. Give example?

A. All these are brought forth. Cat: 3. For that I may omit (says the Orator)
the fires seen in the night from the West, and the burning of heaven, as also
lightning, as earthquakes, with other many things done to us Consuls, as those
which are now done, do seem to proclaim the gods immortality. And a little
after, at which time when the Araspatians were come together out of all
Herturia, they said that slaughter, burning, perishing of the laws, civil and
domestical war, and the fall of the whole city and empire approached,
unless the immortal gods pleased by all reason, by their power should change
those destinies. At length when he had said that they mocked at the answer of
the Arispatians, and that they did more regard the sign of Jove, turning to
the East, he then said; but is not he so present that it should seem to be
done at the beck of the mighty Jove, that when this morning before my door by
my command and conjuration, the Judges being then in the house of Concordia, at
the same time there appeared a sign: which being turned toward you and the
Senate, both you and the Senate saw manifestly laid open, who they were that
were against the health of all men.

Q. Give another example?

A. That of Tibullus is more short.

But if that oracles true things do tell,
Then this in our name see thou do declare:
That he does promise Delius to give,
To be thy spouse with whom thou wilt happy live.
CAP. 33. Testimony from humane law and sentences.
Q. What be the kinds of humane testimony?

A. Humane testimony is common or proper.

Q. What is common?

A. Law; and a famous sentence.

Q. What is legal testimony?

A. Legal testimony is both unwritten and written.

Q. Bring forth authority for this?

A. Pro Mil: For there is (O ye Judges) a law not written, but borne with us;
which we have not received, learned, read; but taken, drawn, expressed from
nature: as if our life should be in some hazard, force danger, either of
thieves or enemies, all honest reason were to be sought of safety; but if the
twelve tables will have the night thief, yea the day thief to, if he defend
himself after any manner killed without punishment; who is there that will
think him that is slain to be punished, when as there is a sword reached to
us, to kill that man by the laws themselves.

Q. What are famous sentences?

A. Proverbes.

Q. Give example?

A. They be such as these. Pares cum paribus facilime congregantur. Spartam
nactus es, hanc ex orna.

Q. What may farther be under this head?

A. Sayings of wisdom also.

Q. Give example?

A. Nosce teipsum. Nequid nimis. Sponde praesto ad detrimentum.

Q. What is proper testimony?

A. Such as this of Plato. 1. ad Quinti: frat: And then truly Plato the Prince
of wisdom and learning thought those common wealths blessed, if either
learned and wise men governed them, or those that did govern, placed all their
study in wisdom and learning.

Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Such were in the Poets Aeneid: 4. Learn justice and admonitions, and
contemn not the rich. So in Homer.

(...).
Ajax led out of Salaminus twelve ships.
The Magatenses were overcome by the Athonians.
Q. What are testimonies of the living?

A. Testimonies of the living, are not only when it is inquired of ground,
felling of wood and such like business, but also there are testimonies of
obligation, confessing oath.

Q. Give an example of obligation?

A. Phil: 5. For I dare bind my faith, (P. C.) to you and the people of Rome,
that truly when no force constrained me I durst not do; and I feared an
opinion of timerity, in a thing greatly hurtful; I promise and swear (P. C.)
to become always such a citizen to Caesar as he himself is, and as we ought
chiefly to wish or desire.

Q. Have we not an obligation set forth sometimes with a pledge?

A. Yes. Virg Eglog: 3.

Wilt then by turns, we hand to hand do try,
What either can, and prove each by our deed;
I Will paune this heifer, (which least thou deny)
She twice has come already to the payle,
And two twins suckles at this time now say,
What paune thou wilt gage with her to countervail.
Q. What are the kinds of confession?

A. Confession is free or extorted by torments.

Q. What is this latters properly called?

A. A question.

Q. Give example?

A. Such an argument there is against Milon whom Cicero derided. Go to then,
what or how is the question? How? where was Roscius? where was Casca? Does
Clodius lay snares for Milon? he has done; surely the gallows. He has done
nothing.

Q. What further may be reduced hitherto?

A. Hitherto may be referred the argument which we used when we bring forth
our approbation, and experience of our affirmative.

Q. Give example.

A. Ver: 4. Even Volcatio if he had come freely, would he have given a little
book? he shall come, he shall be tried; no man truly receives it. Ter: spend
thy time in letters, in the woods, in music: it is meet for youth to know
these liberal things, I will give diligence.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A. Ovid. Trist: 3.

The which that thou may better credit me,
Try thou my pains, believe it then to be.
Q. Give an example also of the testimony of an oath.

A. Aeneid: 6.

I swear byth' gods, and all in earth unseene;
I have departed from thy shore o queen.
Q. This reciprocation seems to be more obscure, as because the testimony is
true, the witness is also true?

A. So it is: and thus much suffiseth to have spoken of invention, the first
part of the science Dialectica.

THE SECOND BOOK OF PETER RAMVS HIS Dialectica of Judgment.
Cap. 1. What Judgment is.
Q. Hitherto the first part of Dialectica in Invention has bin expounded, the
other part follows, in Judgment, what then is Judgment?

A. Judgment is the second part of Logic of disposing arguments to be
judged well.

Q. How are they judged?

A. Every thing is judged by a certain rule of disposition.

Q. It may be thought then that this part of Logic is called both judgment
and disposition from hence?

A. So it is.

CAP. 2. An affirmative or negative Axioma.
Q. What are the kinds of Judgment?

A. Judgment is Axiomaticall, or Dianocticall.

Q. What is an Axioma?

A. An Axioma is the disposition of an argument, with an argument, wherein
somewhat is judged to be, or not to be.

Q. What is it called, and whence receives it the name?

A. In the Lattin of Enuntiatum, it is called Enuntiation; of Pronuntiatum,
Pronuntiation.

Q. What are the affections of an Axioma?

A. An Axioma is affirmative or negative.

Q. What is affirmative?

A. Affirmative is when the force of it is affirmd.

Q. And what negative.

A. When it is denied. From hence springs the contradiction of Axiomas, when
the same argument is affirmed or denied.

Cap. 3. True and False.
Q. What may be a second kind of the affections of an Axioma?

A. An Axioma secondly is true or false.

Q. How true?

A. When it pronounces as the thing is.

Q. How false?

A. Contrary.

Q. What are the affections of a true Axioma?

A. A true Axioma is contingent or necessary.

Q. How contingent?

A. When it is so true that it may sometimes be false.

Q. Give example?

A. Fortune helps the bold; for it may be that which is true to day, to
morrow may be false: and therefore the judgment of this contingent verity, is
called opinion: those things of the time past or present, may be certain to a
man, but of time to come they cannot by nature, although with God all things
are present. Therefore Martial does worthily mock Priscus

Priscus thou often asksts what I shall be,

If now most rich, hereafter what truly?
Things for to come can thou not tell them me,
If thou a Lion art, what will thou thou be?
Q. How necessary?

A. When it is always true, neither can be false.

Q. What is this affirmative called?

A. This affirmative is called Katapantos of every thing.

Q. How imposible?

A. Contrarily where it can be true of nothing.

Q. What belongs to an Axioma of the arts?

A. An axioma of the arts ought to be Kantapantos as also Homogene and
Catholic

Q. What is an homogene axioma?

A. An homogene axioma is when the parts are essential among themselves: as
the form to the thing formed, the subject to its proper adiunct.

Q. what is this called?

A This Genus of the Species is called Kath' auto by it self.

Q. What it a Catholic axioma.

A. A Catholic axioma is when the consequent is always true of the
anticedent; not only in every thing and by it self, but also reciprocally.

Q. Give example?

A. A man is a living creature, reasonable, number is equal or unequal.

Q. What is this called?

A. This is called Katholon proton universally first.

Q. What then are the laws of the proper documents of the arts.

A. These three: the first, Catapantos the law of verity: the second Kath' auto
the law of justice: the third Katholou proton called the law of wisdom, and
such is the judgment of Catholic axiomas, the most true and chief knowledge.

CAP. 4. The simple Axioma.
Q. You have expounded the common affections of axiomas, the kinds follow,
what are then the kinds of an axioma?

A. An axioma is simple or compound.

Q. What is simple?

A. Simple is that which is contained in the force of one word; and therefore
by an affirmative or negative word it affirms or denies.

Q. Give example?

A. Fire burns, fire is hot, fire is not water.

Q. Show the force of these examples?

A. Here fire is the anticedent, burns, the consequent: and this is the first
disposition of invented things; of che cause with the effect, as in the first
example; the subject with the adiunct as in the second; the disagreeing with
the disagreeing, in the third: after a certain manner, any argument may be
enuntiated (except those full of comparison and distribution) agreeings truly
by affirming, disagreeings by denying.

Q. What are the kinds of a simple axioma?

A. A simple axioma is general or special.

Q. What is general?

A. General is when the common consequent is attributed generally to the
common antecedent. and this contradiction, does not always devide the true and
false, but both parts of the contingent, as also not of contingents may be
false.

Q. Give example of the first?

A. Eaeh place delighted is, with Baijs pleasant
No place delighted is with Baijs pleasant rooms.
Q. Give example of the second?

A Every creature is reasonable, no creature is reasonable.

Q. What is a special axioma?

A. A special axioma is when the consequent is not attributed to every
antecedent, and here the contradiction ever divides the true from the false.

Q. What are the kinds of special?

A. Special is particular or proper.

Q. What is particular?

A. Particular is when the common consequent is attributed particularly to the
antecedent: but to this axioma it is generally contradicted.

Q. Give examples.

A. Somewhat is to be pardoned: Nothing is to be pardoned. Some clemency is not
to be praised. All clemency is to be praised.

Q. What is a proper axioma?

A. A proper axioma is when the co^sequent is attributed to a proper antecedent.

Q. Give example?

A. Fabulla is fair, whose negative and contradiction is Fabulla, is not fair.

CAP. 5. The copulative axioma.
Q. What is the compound axioma?

The compound axioma is that which is contained in the force of a coniuction.
Therefore from an affirmative or negative conjunction it is affirmed or denied.
And a part of the contradiction is true, a part false.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. A compound Enunciate is for his conjunction congregative, or segregative.

Q. What is congregatiue?

A. Congregative is that which enuntiateth all agreeings by affirmings and
disagreeings by denying.

Q. What are the kinds.

A. Copulative or connexed.

Q. What is copulative?

A. Copulative is that whose conjunction is copulative.

Q. Give example?

A. Eneid: 1.

The east and south winds on the seas do blow,
They rush through deep till on the top they show,
The affricke often with these his blasts conioynes.
This therefore shall be the negative and contradiction.

The east and south winds not on seas do blow,
They rush not through the deep, ne on top show,
The affricke does not often his blasts conioyne.
Q. But whereupon depends the judgment of the copulative enunciate?

A. The judgment of the coplative Enunciate being true depends of the truth
of all parts: false, at the least of one part false.

Q. What may further be comprised under this head?

A. The enunciate of a relative quallity is of this kind, whose conjunction is
the relation it self.

Q. Give example?

A. Eglog. 3.

So me thy song as sleep on grass does queme
The travailer his weary lims to drench.
Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here the coplative judgment is as if he should say, sleep is grateful to
the weary, and so thy song is pleasing to me.

Q. What is the Negative hereof?

A. Not me thy song as sleep on grass does queme The travailer his weary lims
to drench.

CAP. 6. The Connexed Axioma.
Q. What is a connexed Axioma.

A. A connexed axioma is congregatiue, whose coniection is connexiue.

Q. Give example?

A. Eneid. 2. If fortune does feign Simon miserable, it dishonesly feigneth
him to be vain and a liar, whose negative is if fortune does not feign Simon
miserable it dishonesly feigneth him to be vain and a liar:

Q. Is not this conjunction also denied more manifestly, by denying the
consequent?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Amer. I am not a murderer though in their company. De fato: Neither if
every Enunciation be true or false, does it follow therefore that the causes
are immutable; For affirmation signifies, if the antecedent be, that the
consequent is also. Negation therefore and contradiction determines if the
antecedent be that therefore the consequent is not. Wherefore, when thou shall
judge the connexiue to be absolutely true, thou shall judge it also necessary,
and thou shall understand this necessity to spring from the necessary connection
of parts, the which may also be even in false parts.

Q. Give example of this?

A. If a man be a Lion, he is also a four footed, this is a necessary
connection.

Q. But if the connection be contingent, and only put for his probability, how
shall it be judged then?

A. Its judgment then shall be only opinion.

Q. Give example?

A. Ter: and Phamphilus if thou do this, this day is the last thou shall see
me.

Q. What may be further under this head?

A. This relation connexive of consequence is like to the connexed axioma, as
when Tullius is said to be an orrator, he has also skill in pleading well,
and thus much of the congregative axioma.

CAP. 7. The discreet Axioma.
Q. What is a segregative axioma?

A. A segregatiue axioma is that whose conjunction is segregative, and
therefore enunciateth disagreeing arguments.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. A segregatiue enunciation is discreet or disiunct.

Q. What is discreet?

A. Discreet is that whose conjunction is discretiue, and therefore of
disagreeings it chiefly enunciateth diuerses.

Q. Give example?

A. Tusc. 5. Although they may be judged by the force of the body, yet they are
referred to the mind: whose negative and contradiction is, although they may
be judged by the sense of the body, yet they are referred to the mind, or,
although they may be judged by the sense of the body, yet they are not referred
to the mind. For yet is here a chief conjunction.

Q. How is the discreet Enunciat judged to be true?

A. The discreet enunciation is judged to be true and lawful, if the parts be
not only true but may be also discreet.

Q. How is the false or ridiculous judged?

A. Contrarily.

CAP. 8. The disiunct Axioma.
Q. What is a disiunct axioma?

A. A disiunct axioma is a segregative axioma whose conjunction is disiunct.

Q. Give example?

A. Georg. 1.

There as they say is either silent night
Always most dark and void of any light,
Or else the morning from us here does go
And brings the day unto them there also.
Q. Show another example?

A. Do fato every enunciation is true or false

Q. Here it seems is signified from the disiunct, that one only is true?

A. So it is.

Q. What shall the negative and contradiction be.

A. Not every enunciation is true or false.

Q. And what does the contradiction signify?

A. That one of them is not true by necessity, for if the disjunction be
absolutely true, it is also necessary: and the parts of the disiunct are
opposite without any means.

Q But although the disjunction be absolutely and also necessary may there not
be a necessity, that the parts should be seperately necessary?

A. No.

Q. Give example?

A. A man is good or not good, here the disjunction is necessary, and yet a man
is good is not a necessary enunciation, also a man is not good, is not a
necessary enunciation.

Q. Whereupon then depends the necessity of the disjunction.

A. The necessity of the disjunction depends on the necessary opposition, and
disjunction of the parts, not as their necessary verity.

Q. But is not the disjunction of tentimes from condition.

A. Yes.

Q. Give example.

A. As if it be though whether Cleon will come, or Socrates, because it was so
agreed that one of them only should come.

Q. It seems by this that if the disjunction be contingent, it is not
absolutely true, but is only opinionable?

A. So it is, and that more frequently in the use of man.

Q. Give example?

A. Ovid: Epist: Lean.

Either good hap shall now unto me fall,
Or else feirce death the end of loving thrall.
CAP. 9. The Syllogism and its parts.
Q. You have manifested in its self the axiomaticall judgment, by axiomas:
the dianoeticall follows, what therefore is dianoia?

A. Dianoia is when one axioma is derived from another.

Q. What are the kinds of dianoyia?

A. Syllogism or method?

Q. What is a Syllogism?

A. A Syllogism is a dianoia whereby the question is so disposed with the
argument, as the antecedent put, it is necessarity concluded.

Q. Make this plainer?

A. When the axioma is doubtful the question is effected, and there is need
of a third argument to be placed with the question, for its trust.

Q. How many parts has the antecedent?

A. The antecedent of a Syllogism has two parts, a proposition, and an
assumption.

Q. What is a proposition?

A. A proposition is the first part of the antecedent, whereby the consequent
of the question, is at least disposed with the argument.

Q. What is the assumption?

A. The assumption is the second part of the antecedent, which is affirmed from
the proposition.

Q. But what is the consequent part of the syllogism?

A. The consequent part of the syllogism, is that which imbraceth the part of
the question and concludes it.

Q. What is it called?

A. It is called from the nature of it complexion and conclusion.

Q. If any part of the syllogism want, what is said to be?

A. It is called Enthymema.

Q. But what if any part happen to be besides its parts?

A. Then it is called a Porsyllogisme.

Q. Is not the order of the parts oftentimes confounded?

A. Yes.

Q. What then if any doubt shall arise from it?

A. Then that shall be filled up which wants, those cut of which abound: and
every part digested into his place.

CAP. 10. The simple contracted syllogism.
Q. What are the kinds of a syllogism?

A. A syllogism is simple or compound.

Q. What is simple?

A. Simple is where the consequent part of the question is placed in the
proportion, the antecedent part in the assumption.

Q. What are the affections of it?

A. It is affirmed, denied, general, special, and proper.

Q. How is it affirmed?

A. From all the affirmative parts.

Q. How is it denied?

A. From one negative of the antecedent parts, with complexion.

Q. How is it general?

A. From the general proposition and assumption.

Q. How is it special?

A. From one of the generals only.

Q. And how is it proper?

A. From both propers.

Q. What are the kinds of the simple syllogism?

A. The simple syllogism is contracted by parts, or explicated.

Q. What is contract?

A. Contract is when the argument for the example is so subjected to a
particular question, that the antecedent may be understood to affirm each
part; and in the assumption.

Q. Give an example?

A. Certain confidence is virtue, as constancy, certain confidence is not
virtue, as boldness.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This argument is understood to go before each part of the question, as if
it were expressed, constancy is a virtue, and confidence, and therefore
certain confidence is a virtue: also boldness is not a virtue, and yet it is
confidence; and therefore some confidence is not a virtue. So in the use of
disputing the master of the Syllogism draws the judgment, neither is it set
forth otherwise. And this exposition the beginning of the Syllogism is
expounded by Aristotle, so that the Syllogism in its full judgment is more
clear and manifest.

CAP. 11. The first kind of the simple explicated Syllogism.
Q. What is the explicated Syllogism?

A. The explicated Syllogism whose parts are explicated.

Q. What are the proprieties in this explicated Syllogism?

A. Two, first the proposition is general or proper, secondly the conclusion
is like to the antecedent or the weaker part.

Q. What are the kinds of it?

A. The kinds are twofold.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first is where the argument always follows the negative in the other
part.

Q. Show some Syllogism of this kind?

A. GENESIS 1.

Cesare. A troubled man uses not his reason well:
But a wife man uses his reason well,
A wife man is not therefore troubled.
Q. Produce, the example of some Orator for this Syllogism?

A. This judgment is so brought forth of Cicero Tusc: 3. And when (says he)
the eye is troubled, it is not honestly affected to the fulfilling of its duty:
and the rest of the parts, as also the whole body, when it is moved from its
state, wants its office and function, so a troubled mind is not honestly
affected to fulfill his duty. But the duty of the mind is to use reason, and a
wise man is always so affected, that he uses reason most excellently; he is
therefore never troubled.

Q. Give example of another general Syllogism?

A. GENESIS 2.

Camestres. A mortal thing is compound.
A soul is not compound.
A soul therefore is not mortal.
Q. Produce the authority of some ancient, avouching this Syllogism?

A. Cicero judges the soul to be immortal by this Syllogism. Tusc: 1. For
we cannot doubt says he in our minds, unless we be perchance ignorant in
physical things, but that there is nothing knit to souls, nothing connexed,
nothing copulate, nothing joined, nothing double; which when it is so, can
surely never be parted, nor divided, nor severed, nor drawn asunder, neither
perish therefore: for perishing is as it were a departure and separation or
breach of those parts, which before the perishing were joined together.

Q. Give an example of a special syllogism?

A. SPEC. 1.

Festino. A pale man is not courageous.
Maximus is courageous.
Maximus therefore is not pale.
Q. Produce authority for this syllogism?

A. By this judgment Ovid: concludes. De Pont: 3. El: 3.

Palenes and sloth are not in the high mind,
Rather with vipers them on ground we find*
In highest things thy mind excels we see,
No name I find to express the wit of thee.
Some miseries do taste, hurt and out worn,
Are made to feel sharp pricking of the thorn:
Yet thou art wont to help complaning men,
Amongst which number pray let me be then.
Q. Show another example of the special syllogism.

A. SPEC. 2.

Baioco. A dauncer is Lecherous.
Murena is not Lecherous.
Murena therefore is no dauncer.
Q. Produce some Orator for this syllogism?

A. Cic: pro Mur: For no man almost being sober daunceth, unless perchance he
be mad, neither alone, nor at a moderate and honest banquet; for dancing is
the companion of untimely banquets, pleasant places, and many delights, thou
snatchest that from me that it is necessary that vices should be: thou leavest
that whereby this removed, this vice ought not to be at all: no filthy banquet,
no love, no glotteny is showed, and when we find not all these things which
have the name of pleasure, and are vices; there thou can not find lechery,
nay think thou to find a shadow of lust in such.

Q. Avouch some other authority after the like manner?

A. After this manner of judgment Ovid: de Trist: 1. concludes triply,
whilst he sets forth the excuse of his verses.

They that make verses should not merry be,
Our time is clouded with adversity:
They that write verses should enjoy their ease,
The seas, the winds, with winter fierce me press.
Good poets should not fear, but I fear death,
I dread least swords do take away my breath:
Then what is here, a right judge will admire,
If reading them they satisfi's desire.
Q. Give example of proper syllogismes?

A. PRO. 1.

Agesilaus is not painted by Apelles.

Alexander is painted by Apelles.

Alexander therefore is not Ageselaus.

Q. Give another example of a proper Syllogism?

A. PRO. 2.

Caesar oppressed his country.
Tullius opressed not his country.
Tullius therefore is not Caesar.
CAP. 12. The second kind of the simple explicate Syllogism.
Q. What is the second kind of the explicate Syllogism?

A. The second kind of the explicate Syllogism is, when the argument goes
before in the proposition, the affirmative follows in the assumption.

Q. Give an example of an affirmative general after this kind.

A. AFF Genesis

Barbara. Every just thing is profitable.
Every honest thing is just.
Every honest thing therefore is profitable
Q. Produce some Orator avouching this Syllogism?

A. Thus Cicero concludes, Offic: 2. The Philosophers truly with great
authority, severely, soundly and honestly, do distinguish these three confused
kinds by cogitation. For whatsoever is just, that also they think to be
profitable: also, whatsoever is honest, that is just; from whence arises, that
whatsoever is honest, that is also profitable.

Q. Give an example of a negative general Syllogism?

A. NEG. GENESIS

Celarent. A fearful man is not free.
A covetous man is fearful.
A covetous man therefore is not free.
Q. Prove this by some Poet?

A. It is thus concluded and judged by Horrace: Epist: 1.

Who freer is he that as servant dwells,
Or he that in his moneys love excels:
I do not see, he that desires does fear,
And he that fears his freedom does not bear.
Q. Give another example of this kind of Syllogism?

A. Ten: in Eu* concludes and judges this, That which is void of counsel,
cannot be governed by counsel.

Love is void of counsel.

It cannot therefore be governed by counsel.

A. Produce the words of Terrence?

A. The former Syllogism follows in these words: master, that thing which
has in it neither counsel nor means, that thou can not govern by
counsel. In love are all these vices, injuries, suspicions, enmities,
flatteries, war, peace again: these uncertain things if thou would guide
by certain reason, thou do no more then if thou should labor to to be
mad with reason.

Q. Give an example of the affirmative special syllogism?

A. AFF. SPE.

Darii. Consuls made by virtue ought studiously to defend the common wealth.

Cicero is made Consul by virtue.

Cicero therefore ought studiously to defend the common wealth.

Q. Produce Tullies words avouching this syllogism?

A. The Orator does both conclude and judge his own diligence. Agr: 2. For the
great care and diligence as well of all the Consuls, ought to be placed in
defending the common wealth, as of those who not in the cradle; but in the
camp were made Consuls: none of our ancients promised to the people of Rome
for me that I ought to be trusted: to ask of me that I ought, even when I
did ask, none of our ancestors commended me to you, therefore if I neglect
any thing, there is none who shall entreat me for you. Yet while my life lasts
(I being he who am able to defend it from their wickedness) I promise this to
you O Quirites, that you have committed the common wealth to the providence of
a good trust: to a watchful man, not a coward; to a diligent man, not a
sluggard.

Q. Show another syllogism of this kind?

A. That which comes wished for is grateful.

Lesbia comes wished for to Catullus.
She is therefore grateful.
Q. Set forth Catullus his words wherein he thus concludes?

A. That which we long for with desires great,
Is acceptable to us when we heat:
Wherefore this grateful is, more dear then gold,
That Lesbia is come our friend of old.
Thou do our wishes grant, our hope restore;
O light most clear! who is there that is more
Happy then I, who have what I desire;
Even what I wish there is naught I can require.
Q. Give an example of an negative special?

A. NEG. SPE.

Ferio. The deceiver of a loving maid is not to be praised.

Demophoon is the deceiver of a loving maid, to wit Phyllis.

Demophoon therefore is not to be praised.

Q. Set forth the words of Phillis in Ovid so judgeing.

A. It is no glory virgins to deceive,
Who love a man and wish him for to have;
Simplicity should rather favrur gain,
But I that love and all is a woman am.
Deceived am by thee with flattering style,
The gods thy praises make it all the while.
Q. Give an example of an affirmative proper?

A. AFF. PRO.

Octavius is Cesars heir.
I am Octavius.
I am therefore Cesars heir.
Q. Give an example of a negative proper?

A. NEG. PRO.

Anthony is not Cesars son.
Thou art Anthony.
Thou art not therefore Cesars son.
CAP. 13. The first connexed Syllogism.
Q. You have expounded hitherto the simple Syllogism, what now is the compound
Syllogism?

A. The compound Syllogism is a Syllogism where the whole question is another
part of the affirmed and compound proposition, the argument is another part.

Q. But what if any thing were taken away in the compound Syllogism?

A. That were to put a special contradiction.

Q. What are the kinds of a compound Syllogism?

A. A compound Syllogism is connexed or disjunct.

Q. What is a connexed syllogism?

A. A connexed syllogism, is a compound syllogism, of a connexed proposition.

Q. How many are the manners of distinction?

A. It is of two manners.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first manner of the connexed syllogism is that which assumeth the
antecedent, and the consequent concludes.

Q. Give an example of this?

A. After this manner Cicero concludes. lib. 2. De Divinatione.

If they be gods it is divination.
But they are gods.
It is divination therefore.
Q. Give another example?

A. Offic: 3. And if also nature prescribes this, that a man to a man,
whatsoever he be for that same cause that he is a man, will use consultation
it is necessary according to the same nature, that the profit of all should be
common. Which if it be so all of us are contained in one, and the same law of
nature; and this if it be so indeed we are certainly forbidden by the law of
nature to violate one another: but the first is true, the last therefore i^
also true.

Q. Give another example?

A. Aeneid: 4. Dido judges Aeneas to ^maine with her.

Do thou me fly by these tears I thee pray,
By thy right hand I thee beseech to stay:
Else thou will leave me wretched here alone,
By our dear marriage, our dear love like none.
If I do ought deserve if thou have been
Sweet unto me, have pity on me then:
Look on thy slippery house, and now I pray,
If any place for prayers be I say:
For Libians sake, for Nomades his kings,
Who hated me and for all other things.
Which I for thee did bear, my credits lost,
I am alone, for thee thus am I crossed:
Besides all this, my fame is quite decayed,
Rather I had my flesh in dust were laid.
Q. Does it always assume the same?

A. Oftentimes not the same but a greater.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat: 1. If thy parents feared and hated thee, neither could thou please
them by any reason, in my opinion thou were to abstain a little from their
sight: now the country (which is our common parent) hates and fears thee,
and of a long time judges nothing of thee, except it be touching thy death,
can thou neither avoid its authority, neither follow its judgment, neither
fear thou its force.

Q. What may farther be under this head?

A. This manner of concluding is the very same when the proposition is a relate
of time.

Q. Give example?

A. After this kind the nymph O Enon in Ovid, concludes the error of her
foolishnes.

When Paris O Enon hoped to forsake,
It would to Xanthus with all speed betake:
Xanthus make haste return thou back again,
That so this Paris O Enon may sustain.
CAP. 14. The second connexive syllogism.
Q. What is the second manner of the connexed syllogism?

A. The second manner of the connexed syllogism takes away the consequent
that it may take away the antecedent.

Q. Give example?

A. If a wise man assent to any thing, sometimes also he shall be opinated.

Therefore he shall assent to nothing.

Q. Give another example?

A. By the like syllogism Ovid: Trist: 12. judges his foolishnes.

If I were wise those sisters I should hate,
Deities hurtful to whom on them wait:
But now so great my foolishness is seen,
I build them alters whom my hurt have been.
These two kinds of the syllogism are most usual of all.

CAP 15. The first disjunct syllogism.
Q. What is the disjunct syllogism?

A. The disjunct syllogism is the syllogism composed of a disjunct
proposition.

Q. What are the manners of distinction?

A. Two.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first takes away one and concludes the rest,

Q. Give example?

A. Either it is day, or it is night.

But it is not day?

It is therefore night.

Q. Give another example?

A. The judgment of Cicero in defense of Cluventius is such: But when as this
condition was proposed to him, that either he should accuse justly and piously,
or die sharply or unworthily: (...) would rather accuse after that manner then
(...) after this.

Q. Make the disjunction appear clearer?

A. Either he must accuse or die.

He must not die,

He must accuse therefore.

Q. Give another example like to this?

A. There is the like reasoning Phil. 2. do thou not understand it is
determined, that either, those who have done this thing are homicides or
revengers of liberty? But attend a little and take the thoughts of a sober man
for a little time, and I who am of them, as my self does confess, will
familiarly argue with thee as a fellow: I deny that there is any mean: I grant
that they are, except they be deliverers and conserveres of the Roman common
wealth more then villainy, more then homicides, more parricides: if truly it be
cruelty, rather to be a father to the country, then a murderer of ones self:
Thou art a wise and considerate man what say thou: if they be particides, why
were they honored of thee, and called to this order by the Roman people why was
Marcus Brutus by thy means freed from the law, if he were absent more then
ten days from the city? why did Apolinares receive Marcus Brutus with
incredible honor? why was the provinces given to Cassius and Brutus, why were
their questors added? why were the number of Legates increased and this done by
thee? they are not therefore homicides. It follows then that by thine own
judgment they are deliverers, when as truly there can be no third admitted.

Q. If the parts of the disiunct proposition shall be more then two, how shall
they be judged then?

A. The art of judging them and concluding them shall be the same.

Q. Give example?

A. So Cicero judges Rabitious to be among the consulls: And we see (says
he) these three to be in the nature of things, to wit that either he should
be with Saturninus, or with the good, or that he should lie hid. But to lie
hid is proper to the dead and rotten: to be with Saturninus of sury and
wickedness: virtue and honesty and shamefastness constrained him to be with
the consulls.

CAP. 16. The second disiunct?
Q. What is the second disiunct?

A. The second disiunct, from the proposition the affirmative assumeth one, and
takes away, the rest.

Q Give example?

A. It is day or it is night.

But it is day,

It is not therefore night.

Q. Give another example after this manner?

A. Thus Juno concludes with Jove touching Turnus, Aeneid. 10.

What if thou say the thing thou do not mean?
And should to Turnus give life again,
Now I remain in misery and woe,
And hope for that which will not happen so:
But rather than this ill should come to pass,
I Will mock my self and hope past hope alas.
Q. Show another syllogism of this kind?

A. There is the like Syllogism effected from a proposition copulative
negative, which is called negative complexion, and which obtains the force of
an affirmative disjunction.

Q. Give example?

A. It is not both day and night,

But it is day,

It is not therefore night.

CAP. 17. The only method according to Aristotle.
Q. What is method?

A. Method is a dianoia of diverse homogene axioma, preposed for the clearenes
of their nature, from whence the agreeing amongst themselves of them are judged
and comprehended in memory.

Q. What is to be considered in method?

A. As verity and falsity is beheld in the axioma consequence and inconsequence
in the syllogism, so in method it is to be considered that by it the more
clear may precede, the more obscure may follow, and that altogether order and
confusion be judged.

Q. Make this plainer?

A. After this manner is disposed from homogene axiomas in the first place by
an absolute notion, the first; in the second place the second, in the the third
place the third, and so forward.

Q. It seems by this that method does continually pass from vniversalls to
singulars?

A. So it is, for by this sole and only way it proceeds from antecedents
altogether, and absolute notions, to the declaring of unknown consequences,
and this is the only method that Aristotle taught.

CAP. 18. The first illustration of methods by illustration of arts.
Q. But do not examples set forth this head more clearly?

A. Yes, the examples of doctrines and arts do chiefly demonstrate and set
forth the unity of method, in the which although all the rules are general and
universal, yet the degrees of them are distinguished: and by how much every
thing shall be more general, by so much it shall more precede.

Q. Why shall the first be in the most general place and order?

A. Because in light and knowledge it is first.

Q. Why shall the subalternates follow?

A. Because in their clearenes they are next.

Q It seems by this that those things which by nature are more known shall
precede, those which are less known are subisttute, and at length the most
special follow?

A. So it is.

Q. What then shall precede and be first?

A. The most general definition shall be first.

Q. What shall follow?

A. The distribution.

Q. But how if their be many.

A. Then the partition in perfect parts shall precede.

Q. What shall follow?

A. The division into kinds.

Q. What then?

A. The parts themselves and the kinds are in the same order to be handled
and defined again in which they were distributed.

Q. What further is required?

A. If there shall be a long explication of them they are to be chained together
by the chains of transcition.

Q. What benefit redowndeth from hence?

A. It refreshes and recreateth the Auditor.

Q. But may not example be under this head?

A Yes as a more familiar thing is taken, so a more familiar example must be
used.

Q. Give example of what you have here showed out of the art of grammar?

A. All definitions, distributions, are found in the rules of grammar, and
every one of them severally judged, and all these documents inscribed in
diverse tables, are confounded and mingled together as it were in a certain
port.

Q. What part of dialectica teaches us to compose these confused rules and
digest them into order: first there is no need of the places of invention, when
as they are all found: neither in the first judgment of axiomas, when as every
axioma is proved and valued: neither of the second judgment of the filogisme,
when as all of them are disputed and concluded controversies of several things
by these only syllogismes: it seems therefore to be only method, is it not?

A. Yes it is only method.

Q. How is it done?

A. The Logitian by this light of artificial method selecteth out of this pott
the definition of grammar (for that is most general) and places it in the
first place: grammar is the doctrine of speaking well. Then he takes out of
the same Oven the particion of grammar, and places it in the second place: the
parts of grammar are two: Etymology and Syntaxis. Then out of the same vessel
he seperateth the definition of Etymology of word, and joyneth it in the
third place to those that go before: then he seeks out the parts of words
in letters and syllables, and the kinds in words of number, and without
number, and places them with their transcitions in their several places. And
so the definitions of all the parts of Etymology, together with their
distributions, colligations, and most special examples he places in their
several places, and so likewise in the Syntax. This way all the arts have
proposed to themselves.

CAP. 19. The second example of method by example of Poets, Orators,
Histriographers.
Q. But is method only set forth in matter of the arts and doctrines?

A. No, it is also declared in all things which we would teach easily and
plainly: therefore Poets, Orators, and all manner of writers as often as they
propose any thing to teach to their auditors, do follow this way, although
they do not enter and insist upon it all alike.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. Virgil in his Georgicks distributeth as I said before the proposed matter
into four parts, and in the first book follows common things, as
Astrology, Meteorology, and of corn and tillage; this was the first part of
his work: then the transcition is adhibited in the beginning of the second
book.

Thus far of tillage and of stars were we,
Now of the Bacchus we will sing presently.
Then he writes generally of trees, as also specially of plants; the second
transcition is adhibited to the third part, but more imperfect and without an
Epilogue. In the beginning of the third book of Oxen, Horses, Sheep, Goats,
Dogs.

We Will sing of gods Pales, all is of him,
Who by Amphryso kept his sheep most trim.
At length in the beginning of the fourth book there is the third transcition
of the fourth part, but also imperfect from the only preposition of their Bees.

Now of the air honey Be I Will speak.

So therefore the Poet studdieth to place the most general first, the
subalternate middle, the most special in the last place.

Q. Give another poetical example?

A. Ovid: in Fast: uses this kind of disposition, proposing in the beginning
the sum of his work.

I Will sing of times that pass throughout the year, Fall of the stars and
rising I Will declare.

By and by having made imploration he determines the partition of the year
made first by Tumulus into ten months, which he reprehendeth.

When as Romes builder did the year devide, In it he made five months and
five beside.

And a little after he adjoyneth Numa his more full devisor.

But Numa neither Ianus did omit,
Nor yet the ancient shadows out did put:
But to the old months two more appointed he.
Here the Poet having interpreted the common differences of holy days,
working-dayes, banquet-dayes, kalends, nones, ides, at the last he follows
every month in his place, and with a preface after this order he passes from
generals to the study of specialls.

Ith what I have you showed what these things be,
It now remains, we part them presantly.
At length after the exposition of every part the transcition is joined as in
the end of the first and beginning of the second book.

The first part of my task is ended now,
The month is done, my little book also:
Ianus is done, another month begins,
Another book now with that month renews.
And in every one of his books afterward the transcitions are adhibited, but
less accurately

Q. How do the Orators follow this method?

A. The Orators in poems, narrations, confirmations, perorations do follow
this order as the nature both of the art and the order of the thing do
require, and sometimes more studiously too.

Q. Give example?

A. Cicero in an accusation first by propounding, then by parting, follows
this order. Questor Cn: Paxeris says he, thou have been Confull unto this
time fourteen years, and from that day unto this day in which thou have made
me, I call thee into judgment; there was no void hour found in robbery,
wickedness, cruelty, iniquity. This is the proposition and definition of the
chief matter, as in this judgment most general. The partition follows:
these are the years consume in the questorship, end a Sciatican embassage, and
the Urban pretorship, and in the Sicilian pretorship: wherefore this shall be
the fourefold disposition of my accusation, which four parts with their
particular partitions he has also handled in their several order and place,
and coupled them with transcitions; the three first in the third book.
Wherefore (says he) his questorship being showed, and his first magistracy,
together with his theft and wickedness looked unto, let us attend to the rest.
Then having expounded the faults of his embassadorship, the transcition to his
pretorship follows. But let us now come to that famous pretorship, and those
faults which were more known to those which were present, then to us who come
meditated and prepared to pleading. This transcition is more imperfect without
an epilogue: at length in the beginning of the fourth oration there is the like
transcition to the fourth part of the Sicilian pretorship. Many necessary
things O Judges I must pretermit, that I may in some manner speak of thos^
things which are committed to my trust, for I have received the cause of
Sicilia, that province has drawn me unto this business.

Q. Give an example out of some Historiographer?

A. Livy does so embrace the sum of seventy years in the beginning, then
divides them by tennes.

CAP. 20. The secrets of method.
Q. It seems that in the diverse axiomaticall homogens, as also in the
judgment of the syllogism, the notes of method shall be as often as any
thing is taught clearly: but is there no other kind of method?

A. Yes, when as the auditor shall be deceived in a certain part with,
delectation and a greater motion, then certain homogens are rejected, as the
lights of definition, partition and transcition: and certain heterogens are
assumed, as digressions from the matter, and commorations upon the thing; but
chiefly the order of things in the beginning is turned over, and certain
antecedents are put after consequents. Therefore to that rule of perfect method
this may seem somewhat more imperfect; the form is not only lame, things
being detracted; or abounding, things being added; but also the order of it
being inverted by certain degrees is preposterous.

Q. Give an example of it?

A. The like the Poet makes with a certain greater kind of artificialnes,
while he propounds to himself to lead the people. viz. the beast like
heads of the multitude, and therefore he deceives diverse ways, he
begins in the middle, and there oftentimes he comprehends the first, to
conclude the last, he places in an uncerca ne and an unthought of chance. So
as ( Horace says) Homer disposes his Iliads.

Ne does this man Troyes wars divide so well,
He always makes haste the vent to tell:
Even in the midst reader he does catch,
Leaves off his tract, with haste from it does snatch,
And thus he lies, thus mingles false with true,
So that ne first nor midst in it I view.
Q. Proceed to further examples.

A. So Virgil takes Aeneas from Sicilia, and makes a narration of him in the
banquet of Carthage; and at last brings in his diverse troubles. So the
commedian Poets, although with great judgment they have distinguished their
Comedies by acts and seenes yet do so effect, that all things seem to be
done by chance. The Orators attribute all to victory. Therefore this seems to
be placed chiefly by them not so much to teach as to persuade, when as also
those things which do equally excel, are kept even unto the last, and the
means are conferred into the middle, according to Homers disposition.

FINIS.

