AN ADVERTISEMENT TO EVERY GODLY READER OF Mr. Thomas Brightman his book.
namely, A REVELATION OF THE APOCALYPSE.

In which advertisement is showed how corruptly he teaches, that
notwithstanding all the sins and abominations that are in the Church of
England, and by him showed, yet that it is blasphemous to separate from it.

1 King. 18.21. How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
follow him: but if Baal be he, then go after him. Imprinted in the year 1612.

AN EPISTLE To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, the causes that have moved me to put forth this short writing,
are chiefly three; the first, the glory of the Lord my God, Lev. 19.2. 1 Pet.
1.15.16.
who as he is holy, so does he require that all his people should be holy, in
all manner of conversation: and that all those that call upon the name of
Christ should depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19. The second, the fervent desire
which I have of the salvation of men's souls, and gaynning of them unto God;
the means whereof being, Iam. 5.19.20.
in showing unto them their erring from the truth, and to convert them from
going astray, out of the way. The third, is in respect of my self; for having
had a hand both in the translating and printing of M. B. book, and there being
in it, as I am fully persuaded, and as by the grace of God I shall show, out of
the holy scriptures, errors and abberations from the truth of the living God;
If I had held my peace and said nothing, I could not have cleared my self from
partaking with other men's synns; and so should have done, contrary unto that
holy commandment of the Apostle to Timothy. 1 Timothy 5.22


To the end therefore, that the reader may the better perceive the thing
intended in this writing, namely, how corruptly Mr. Brightman, does teach, not
to separate from the Church of Engl. notwithstanding all the corruptions which
he shows to be in her; this is the order that I shall observe, to wit, that
first I will set down some of the particulars whereby he blames that Church of
England, for partaking with the corruptions and manner of government of
Antichrist. Secondly I shall show some of the praises, which notwithstanding
these corruptions, he gives unto the same. And thirdly what is the collection
or conclusion that he gathers thereupon: which having done I shall also declare
my mind concerning these things. And thus (Christian Reader) I shall commit the
approving, or censuring of all, to thy godly wisdom, grounded upon the canon
and holy writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles. Fare well.

Thine as thou art the Lords Iean de Lescluse.

An Advertisement concerning M. Brightman upon the Apocalypse.
FOr to come therefore unto the matter I will begin with that which is written
in the 103 page of his book, translated into English, where he showed the I
could not but mourn from the bottom of mine heart when I beheld in her, Christ
fastidientem.
lothing us, and very greatly provoked against us.

The second blame which he lays upon the back of the Church of England is,
that the most mighty King Henry had expelled the Pope, but page 104 of the said
book.

The third evil wherewith he charge that Church of England is, that there is
such a form of Church established as is neither cold nor hot, but set in the
mids, and made of both: and again in the same place about 2. or 3 lines
after he has these words: Hot in deed she is not, whose outward government for
the most part is yet still Romish: In the degrees of their Clergy, in
Elections, and ordinations, and whole administration of the Censures: which
temperatio purioris doctrinae.
mixing of the pure doctrine, and Romish regiment together, makes this
lukewarmnes, whereby we stand in the mids between cold and hot, between the
Romish and the reformed Churches, of both which we are conflamur.
composed: and a few lines after he produces the testimony of the learned and
godly, Martin Bucer, in a letter of his written to a friend at Cambridge in the
year 1550, where he complayneth of the corruption of the Church of England, in
these words; There be some who by most humane wisdom and vanishing
cogitations, would join together God and Belial, by the leaven of Antichrist:
Such are the words of Martin Bucer: which are thus confirmed by Mr Brightmans:
These things he did write, which we at this day find by experience too true.
pa. 108. of his book.

4. He makes the condition of the poor blind Papists, to be far for in this
place Christ prefers the blind Papists, before those Angels, who bewitched
with ambition and covetousnes, do refuse holy reformation. page 109. And in
the 111 page, speaking of the punishment to be inflicted upon this English Angel
for his sins, he speaks also thus of the whole Church. It is also to be
feared, that the Church may feel some adversity through contagion and
consenting to. Such as are the Angels, such becomes she for the most part:
and none is so ignorant of the matters, that sees not plainly, that the whole
body is sick of the same disease. And so by his own grant, the whole state of
that Church to be worse then that of the Church of Rome.

Jn our England the congruency is so manifest, that nothing could have been
expressed more lively: for what other cause can we bring of our lukewarmnes,
the Popish government mingled with the pure doctrine then the love of riches
and honors? etc.

But our Bishops are Peers of the Realm, superior in honor to many great
states: also in riches, company of men and maid servants, in magnificence of
howses, and all the other pomp of the world, equal to any, even the greatest
Earls. How rich is the rest of the Clergy? The Deanes, Archdeacons,
Prebendaries, Chaplains, etc. And that these and the like are the Angel of the
Church of England whereof he speaks so often in this book, it appears by
that which follows in the beginning of the page 113 in these words: Do not
this amplify and increase very greatly the glory of the Church, that her
Ministers do shine in garments of silk and velvet. etc. and also by that which
is in page 117. thus, Thou art therefore a beggar o thou English Angel:
comprehending under the name of this English Angel, which he calls a beggar,
Curates, Prebendaries, Archdeacons, Deacons, and the Bishops themselves, as it
may be plainly seen in the 116 and 117 pages of his book, in which places
observe also by the way, the manner of entrance into the Ministry of the
Church of England, plainly described by Mr Brightmans.

So reprehensions are silent, nequitia regnat.
naughtines reigns, the hand of God is heavy upon us, and whither the matter
will grow at last, prudent men fear not without just cause. With which is to
be added that which he says in the page 117, namely that the laws of Christ
are not kept in the Ch: of Engl. in these words: we avayle nothing with our
Laws; where the laws of Christ are not kept.

Excellent ordinances in deed; for which the reformed Churches may be ashamed.

except the Bishop have not been heard in the Church: thus, What is this
ancient use of pronouncing the sentence by them, whose names, except only the
Bishop, have not been heard in deed in the Church, as long as the true honor
and dignity of excommunication remained?

The tenth and last charge of his, which I do here purpose to Repent of the
injuries which thou have done to the brethren, in casting some into prison, in
turning others out of their goods, in depriving many of the power to preach the
word, in reproching and traducing all with the odious names of Anabaptists etc.
and in the same page a few lines after; thus he speaks, That was a notable
calumny, whereby both thou have deceived the PRINCE, and also have procured
hatred to the brethren: etc.

These and many the like charges are in his book, whereby he shows the
fearfulnes of the estate of the Church of England.

Now follows to show briefly some of the praises which he also gives unto
her, whereby as with a salve, he cures all her soars.

And first in the very title of his Epistle dedicatory to the Churches To the
holy reformed Churches of etc. where note that the Church of Britany, that is
the Church of England has this honorable title given her with the rest, holy
reformed: unto which title add that which also he says in the 102 page of this
book, where he makes the Church of England to be the Antitype of the Church of
Laodicea, thus; The Antitype is the third reformed Church;

The second good thing which he shows to be in the Church double blessings in
the Church of Engl.
in the 104 and 105 pages of his book; the first in respect of earthly
blessings: the second in respect of spiritual: for the first thus he speaks:
From hence the laws are in force, judgments are exercised, every one inioyeth
his own; injuries are restrained; wantonness is repressed, etc. The second is
thus, Earthly.
And to what end were all these good things if we could not have the wholesome
doctrine of truth? Spiritual.
But ever since the first times of our most peaceable Queen, he has raised up
continually deligent and learned Pastors and Teachers, who have preached the
word purely and syncerely. Neither at this day are wanting many, by his
infinite mercy, who bestow all their labor in imparting to his people the
whole will of God, and that pure and incorrupt from all leaven of falsehood.
Add unto this also the sanctification of these Pastors by Christ in the 106
page, thus; But he that is a faithful and true witness, sanctifies the
Pastors with the truth beyond all hope: in whose lips he dwells even
hitherto:

as it came to pass in our England, to which Christ at the sound of the seventh
trumpet, in the year 1558, gave the most gracious Queen Elizabeth, who again
gave her Kingdom to Christ, in rooting out through all her dominions, the most
part of the Romish superstitions, and in restoring to her people the sincere
and wholesome truth, that we might worship the Lord our God according to his
ordinance.

These things therefore do prove, that a double and great good thing do abide
in the English Church, that is to say, the preaching of the word, and the
lawful administration of the sacraments: In both which Christ bestows himself
upon his people, keeping a mutual feast with them, he first being received of
us by hearing of the word; secondly, entertayning us again with the supper of
his body.

And thus much touching some of the praises which he gives unto that Church of
England: now let the godly see in these words of his following, what conclusion
he makes hereupon; which may be read in the 131 page of his book thus:
Therefore wicked and blasphemous is their error, who do fall away so from this
Church, as if Christ were banished wholly from hence; and that there could not
be any hope of salvation for them that tarry there. Let them mind here Christ
feasting with his people. Will they be ashamed to sit down there, where they see
Christ not to be ashamed? Are they purer and holyer then he? etc.

These things being thus set down, it rests now that according to my promise,
I do also show my mind concerning them? thus therefore, first to begin with
that which I have set for the first charge, which he lays upon the Church of
England; I desire the reader to observe the word which he uses of Christ
loathing them, fastidientem nostri.
which word of loathing seems to be taken from the 95. Psalm. ver. 10. where
the Prophet speaking in the person of the Lord himself, says that fowrty years
long he had loathed that generation: saying that they are a people erring in
heart, and not knowing his ways, wherefore he swear in his wrath that they
should not enter into his rest. So that by M. Brightmans own grant this Church
of England is in no better estate then were those rebels in the wilderness, all
which were consumed and entered not into his rest, as he had sworn.

But that the Lord has more just cause to loath the Church of England, then
that of the Israelites in the wilderness, let the reader observe it in these
particulars; first that that Church had a true Ministry, and true Offices and
Officers; and so has not the Church of England by M. Brightmans own grant:
Secondly the Officers of that Church never persecuted the faithful Jews for
practicing the holy ordinances of God; as he affirms that the Angel of the
Ch: of England does, those that will not submit to their government. Thirdly,
their government was not a mixed government partly of the Egyptians, partly of
the Moabites, and Edomites or Cananeans, but simple and pure according to the
true pattern showed to Moses in the mount: but that of England is not so, for Mr
Brightman affirms it to be partly Romish and partly reformed, and so not the
true government which Christ has appointed in his eternal Testament:
Fourthly, none of that Church were admitted unto any office but only such as
were lawfully called thereunto as Aaron was, but so it is not in the Church of
England, for such Offices and Officers are there admitted as are unknown unto
the true Church of Christ by Mr Brightmans own doctrine. Therefore it does
necessarily follow that the estate of the Church of England is worse then was
the estate of those rebels in the wilderness, and that there is nothing to be
expected from Christ, by any member thereof, but a pouring out of his eternal
wrath upon them.

Concerning his second charge of King Henry expelling the Pope but reteyning
the popish superstition; this is that which I say, that the Pope cannot
properly be said to be expelled when his doctrine and superstition is retained;
for as concerning the Popes own person he could not be expelled from England
for he was never there. But it may be that Mr Brightman means that some of
the Monks and Friars were driven out and their revenues taken away from them;
as also that their manner of worshipping of God which was in the Latin tongue,
was then translated into English: but what of all this? can this be said to be
an expelling of the Pope? No; for in deed and properly, it is the doctrine and
superstition of the Pope which does corrupt the hearts and souls of men, which
can be done either in a Kingdom or in a Province or in a parish, or in a house
without the presence either of the Pope himself or of any of his Monks and
Friars, by their doctrine, superstitions, false manner of worship, which are
spread too far abroad in the world by their books and writings, and even now
retained ^o this day in England, as Mr. Brightman himself do write.

The third is that the established form of the Church of England is neither
cold nor hot, and again, that she is not hot whose outward government for the
most part is yet still Romish; and again that this mixing of the pure doctrine
and Romish government together makes this lukewarmnes; whereby they stand
between cold and hot, between the Romish and the reformed Churches, of both
which they are composed: join with this th^^ which we have set for the fifth
charge where he says, that no other cause can be brought of their lukewarmnes,
the Popish government mingled with the pure doctrine, then the love of riches
and honors?

Now I beseech the reader to compare this with his first praise of the Church
of England which is in the very title of his Epistle dedicatory, where he
entitled the Church of England to be a reformed Church. Is it possible that
holiness and unholynes can reign together? Is there any communion between
Christ and Antichrist? between light and darkness? between Idols and the true
God? Can any Kingdom, any Church, any family, any man submit unto the
government, of Antichrist and not be defiled thereby? No God himself and his
Prophets; Christ and his Apostles do teach otherwise, therefore let all such as
do so teach, remember that saying of the Prophet Isayas, Woe unto him that
calls evil good, etc.

Moreover in his fourth charge where he makes the state of the poor blind
Papists far better, then the condition of the Angel of the Church of England,
and that also such as are the Angels such becomes the Church for the most
part, I do observe that by his own doctrine the estate of the Church of
England is worse then Babylon it self; which Babylon is granted by all to be
that Synagogue and Church of Antichrist devoted unto destruction in the day of
the eternal wrath of the Lamb. And where are then those great praises of all
manner of blessings upon that Church rehearsed in the second article, but
chiefly these spiritual blessings of the word purely and syncerely taught in
it? Yea in that Church of which he says in the seventh article of his charges,
that naughtynes reigns in it, the hand of God is heavy upon it and again,
that in her the laws of Christ are not kept. But what is there then to be
done, even this, that every soul who has any care of salvation and of
escaping the eternal flames of everlasting damnation be careful to come out
with speed from Babylon and not to partake any longer with her sins, least
they patake also of her plagues. For it is unpossible to be both a holy member
of Christ, and worse then a Papist; Christ nor his members cannot be coupled
with a harlot and her members, and whosoever coupleth himself with a harlot, is
made one body with her, as witnesses the holy Apostle.

As concerning therefore the outward blessings of peace and prosperity in
earthly things, let every godly mind that by it no Church, no man, can have any
assurance to be in the favor of God: but let every soul be sure that where
there is no repentance from evil works they are but fatlings against the day of
slaughter.

But because I do see that this writing enlarges it self beyond that which I
had determined, I shall now begin to draw to an end concerning his charges
against the Church of England and the Angel thereof: and therefore will here bring
the rest into a short sum, and they at these, first, that the entrance into
the Ministry of the Church of England is such as for which the other reformed
Churches may be ashamed: secondly that the names of the officers of that Church
have not been heard in the Church, but only the Bishops; finally that the
Angel of that Church, is both a persecuter of the brethren, and a deceiver of
the Prince: when I do consider these things and others also which I have both
seen and heard, I cannot but lament and deplore the estate both of those most
noble Princes of England as also of their poor subjects, which are thus
misused by those sonns of Anak though I be but a stranger unto them and under
the jurisdiction of an other Prince. It is now 46 years ago that indeed the
reformed Churches began to be ashamed of some things which they had but heard
concerning the estate of the Church of England, as namely the plurality of
benefices, licenses of non residency, licenses to contract marriages, the use of
meats and the like, which things they then judged, not to be a corruption of
Christianity, but a manifest apostasy from Christ: for which see my countryman
of famous and happy memory Theodorus Beza in his Epistle to Edmu^d Grindal then
Bishop of London. Epist. ^. toward the end. And if these things were thus
written so many years ago, what may all the reformed Churches now say of the
estate of that of England which they have as yet embraced as their sister
hitherto, when they shall both see and know by this man even a professed friend
of hers, thus to speak, concerning her estate: But yet concerning this point I
must needs say, that in deed the reformed Churches have not dealt with that
Church of England so syncerely and plainly as they should have done. For what
is it, if one or two of the most famous members of them have thus in a few
words and as it were by the way set down some few of her corruptions? Have they
not many thowsands of them both learned and unlearned, seen and heard the
estate of the officers of that Ch: to be Antichristian? and that the very
offspring of every one of them is from the Archbishops, which very name may not
be attributed unto any either man or Angel without blasphemy against Christ
Jesus who is the alone head and chief of all Bishops and Pastors? Have they
not also seen that the manner of worshipping God in their Cathedral Churches,
as they call them, with singing men, and singing boys clothed with white
surplices, with Orgens and all manner of music? Have they not seen and heard
that all manner of wicked livers both Papists and others are compelled to
partake with the rest, and of a confused multitude, to make the Church and body
of Christ, and so force and compel men to take their condemnation and judgment?
Have they not also heard and known that the Archbishops and Bishops and others
of the officers of that Church have so many years continually opposed and
showed themselves to be deadly enemies unto all godly reformation? Yea
doubtless, they do know and have known all these things and many more: But how
have they dealt in this respect? Have they at any time Christianly and soundly
admonished, reproved, convinced that Church of their corruptions by the law
and word of God as they ought to have done? not at al; but they have rather
either held their peace or flattered them in their sins, or so little spoken
or written of them, as that they may well and justly be ashamed, of their
unkindnes in this respect toward that Kingdom and people of whom they have
received so many benefits in time of their calamities and banishments.
Concerning the names of the officers of that Church, they were (says he)
unknown unto the Church of Christ. etc. And what is this? Shall then any soul
in whom there is but a very small sparkle of the fear of God, be so bold as
to dare submitt under the government and guidance of such unlawful Ministers
and Ministry? Are they not all thieves and robbers which enter not in by the
door, but climb up another way? And will any man of wisdom commit unto the
protection and keeping of thieves the least part of his worldly goods? No, none
will be so unwise, for every one knows that they will but make a pray of them
and spoil and rob them. And shall any then be so careful for things of so
small importance, and shall he not care unto whom he does commit the guidance
of that which is the principal, namely of his soul? Let them alone therefore,
for as our savior Christ says, they are blind leaders of the blind: and both
of them shall surely fall into the pit.

Finally, the Angel of the Church of England is both a persecuter of the
brethren and a deceiver of the Prince. Marvelous; and is he still for all this,
the Angel of the Church in Mr. Brightmans judgment? In mine doubtless he is
altogether otherwise; even that Angel of the bottomless pit, who is a King
over those Locusts spoken of in the ninth of the Revelation; like unto that
wicked Haman spoken of in the book of Esther who both persecuted the brethren
of the Church of God, and also deceived the King: but let these take heed, for
God who has the hearts of Kings and Princes in his hands for to turn them as
the Rivers of waters, shall no doubt discover the malice of this Angel unto the
Princes of that land, and then shall they be rewarded as Haman was* Besides let
every godly Reader observe, that to be a persecuter of Gods people and saints,
is and has been always a sure mark of Antichrist and of his kingdom.

To conclude therefore this writing, I will come unto that which we have set for
the fourth praise of the Church of England, and the conclusions that he does
infer thereupon, which are these. These things therefore prove that a double
and great good thing does abide in the English Church, that is to say, the
preaching of the word, and the lawful administration of the sacraments: etc.
his 2. conclusion follows thereupon thus: Therefore wicked and blasphemous is
their error, who do so fall away from this Church as if Christ were banished
wholly from hence. etc. And so by this whatsoever sins, errors, wickednesses
abominations, he has showed before to be, both in the Angel and in the Church
it self, all is now cured by this salve: o most miserable dawbing with
untempered mortar! Can any preach in the office of an Angel purely and
syncerely who is a theife and a robber? Shall any man administer purely, who is
not lawfully called thereunto as Aaron was? Can any unlawful minister
administer lawfully the seals of Gods Covenant unto dogs and swyne purely and
sincerely? O cease to do evil and learn to do good! God who is jealous of
his honor and glory shall not long suffer this wickedness unpunished. Are the
bodies of Idolatrous Papists, or abominable whores and whoremongers and of all
manner of wicked ones, the temples of the holy Ghost? No; whosoever coupleth
himself with a harlot is made one body with her, as he witnesses to the
Corinthians: Therefore Christ is far from that Church in respect of any blessing
or approving of their worship, howsoever Mr Brightman persuaded otherwise: And
therefore the two synns whereof he accused before that Angel of the Ch: of
England, are here found upon him: namely that in thus writing he has been both
a persecutor of the brethren and a deceiver of the Prince: for what greater
persecution could he put upon those poor souls which have separated
themselves from those evils by himself set down, then to accuse or charge
them of blasphemy; yea it is such a persecution as that it is unto death; for
by the law of God, a blasphemer must dye. And how has he also deceived the
Princes he and others of his mind by causing them to banish and keep in
banishment their most loyal and faithful subjects? And in deed although I am
but a stranger unto them and one of an other people, yet the truth caused me to
speak thus in their behalf, that I know not any people at this day under the
Sun more loyal and faithful unto their Prince and country; and more zealous
and religious toward God, then they are: and these things are seen in them and
among them both privately and publikly: yea in such measure as that, I am fully
persuaded that they are, and shall be if they continue faithful unto the end,
that people by which chiefly Antichrist the man of sin shall be rooted out: for
by that purity of doctrine which they do teach, and by the sincere and public
administration of the glorious Kingdom of Christ publikly and before all the
people; as also by professing that glorious liberty in the Gospel, that if any
sin be showed or manifested unto them by the word of God is amended
whatsoever opposition may be to the contrary; by those things, I say, by them
professed, practiced, and taught, it is impossible that where they have place,
Antichrist can or have any door to come in. And for my part I do bless the
day in which I had that grace from my God to know both the people and their
faithful walking in their ways and religion of God; and J beseech the Lord of
his grace even with tears that he vouchsafe to open the eyes of their most
noble and wise Prince that he may see the justice and equity of their cause,
and cause them to see his Royal face and presence again with joy and gladness
of heart under his dominions and jurisdictions, Amen.

And so I do here end, though many more things might be said touching
separation from evil, and adjoining or following that which is good: and in
deed in a word, we shall not read even from the beginning of the world to this
day, that there was ever any true Church of God truly established but by
separation: and therefore this people not to be blasphemers, but true worshipers
of GOD.


