A Perambulation of Kent: Containing the description, History, and Customs of
that Shyre.

Collected and written (for the most part) in the year. 1570. by William
Lambard of Lincolnes Inn Gent. and now increased by the addition of some
things which the Author him self has observed since that time.

Iuuat immemorata ferentem
Ingeniis, oculisque legi, manibusque teneri.
Imprinted at London for Ralphe Nevvberie, dwelling in Fleetestreete a little
above the Conduit.

Anno. 1576.

To his Countriemen, the Gentlemen of the County of Kent.
THis Book fair written (in gift) lately sent unto me, do J fair printed
(by dedication) now send and commend unto you.

I know not (in respect of the place) unto whom I may more fitly thus send it
then unto you, that are either bred and well brought up here, or by the
goodness of God and your own good provision, are well settled here: and here
lawfullye possess, or are near unto sundry of those things, that this book
specially speaks of: and thus, as of your selfs, do you see what they are
now, and thus as of this book, may you know why they were, and by whom they
were, and what they were long agone.

I know not (in respect of the persons,) unto who^ I may more fitly thus send
it, then unto you: with whom, I have been best and longest acquainted: from
who^ (by points of singular courtesy) I have been many ways much pleasured:
Toward whom, for the general conjunction and association of your minds, and
your selfs in good amity and familiarity, one toward an other: and all, in
good zeal toward the advancement of Christian religion: and for the
indifferent and discrete course ye keep in handling and compounding such
controversies, as many times fall (and thereby in nourishing peace, a Jewel
most precious) between your honest and tractable neighbors, (things unto
almighty God, very acceptable: unto her Majesty, very gratfull: unto your
country, very fruitful: unto your selfs, very commendable:) Toward whom, I
say, for these causes which, as a member of this Cou^tie with others I see
joyfully and generally: and for the two first causes which derived from you,
light upon me self particularly, I have been, and am, and must be very
louingelye affected.

I know not how I may more fitly and effectually commend it the^ to say, that
it is in substance, an history: treating of the parts (and actions of
greatest weight a good time together, done by the most famous persons) of one
special Country: fet from great antiquity, which many men are much delighted
with: out of sundry books with great study collected, painfully: by this
authoure in the matter set out, truly: with good words well placed, eloquently.
In commendation of this book, upon a fit occasion, the like in a manner,
Alexander Neuil, Norwicus.
is in Latin lately written by a Gentleman of our Country, known to be very
honest, and, I think, very well learned: and so under the authority of his
good judgment, may I (without blame) the more boldly commend it unto you.

What utility follows the study of Hystories, many of them have well
declared that have published hystories written by them selfs, or have set out
Hystories written by others. And therefore already sufficiently done, I need
not (unlearned me self, I can not) therein say much. And yet thus much I may
breefely say, and fit for the thing I have in hand (me thinks) I must
needs say, that (the sacred word of Almighty God always excepted) there is
nothing either for our instruction more profitable, or to our minds more
delectable, or within the compass of common understanding more easy or
facile, then the study of hystories: nor that study for none estate more
meet, the^ for the estate of Gentlemen: nor for the Gentlemen of England, no
History so meet, as the History of England. For, the dexterity that men
have either in providing for theimselfes, or in comforting their friends (two
very good things) or in serving their King and Country (of all outward things,
the best thing) does rest chiefly upon their own and other folks experience:
which I may assuredly account (for, Sir Thomas Moore Knight, in the history of
King Richard the third.
in an history, in our tongue as well written as any thing ever was, or I think
ever shall be, great experience derived from a proof of two such things, as
prosperity and adversity be, upon a fit occasion under the person of a very
wisema^, is rightly accounted) to be the very mother and maistres of wisdom.
Now that that a number of folks does generally, is much more then that, that
any one of us can do specially, and so by other folks experience, are we taught
largely: and that, that other folks for their King, their country,
theimselfes, their friends, like good men do virtuously, ought to provoke us
with good devotion inwardly to love them: and with good words openly much to
commend them, and in their virtuous actions, rightly to follow them. And
that, that other folks against their King, their country, their friends (and
so against them selfs) like foolish men do ignorantly, or like leude men do
wickedly, ought to move us first (as our neighbors) Christianly to bewail
them: and the^ (as by presidents of peril procured through their own follies
and faults) dutifully and wisely to beware by them. And so by these men's
experience (which like the burnt child, that then too late the fire dreadthe)
with much repentance they bye dearly) are we taught and brought out of danger
to settle our selves, as it were, in a seat of surety. Thus you see what
experience does, and thus you see where other folks experience is to be had:
which, for the good estate of England (resting chiefly upon the good judgment
and service of the Gentlemen of England) is as J think, most properly fet from
the History of England. And this for this purpose, I say both unto you my
country men the Gentlemen of this County (a portion of the Realm) specially,
and to all the Gentlemen of the whole Realm beside, generally.

There rests that for this book (which I do upon these respects thus
send, and with these reasons thus commend unto you) we should unto the
Author William Lambard, yield our very hearty and perpetual thanks: as
our Country man in our words and deeds lovingly use him: as a man learned,
duly esteem him: Mathewe Parker Archbishop of Canterbury in his Preface to
the Book de rebus gestis Aelfredi Regis.
(for a late very well learned and reverend father has publicly and rightly
so reputed him) as a Gentleman religious and very honest, make right account
of him: which, for my part, I think meet to do, and mean to do: and for
your parts, I desire heartely you should do, and I hope assuredly you will do.
And if by you he might (and would) be moved at his good leisure, to do as
much for all the rest of the Counties of this Realm generally, as he has
done for this County specially (toward which J know, by great pain and good
cost, he has already under the title of a Topographical dictionarie gathered
together great store of very good matter) himself (the Author of it) were
worthy of good reward, and singular commendation for it. You (the motioners) in
the reading, shall receive great pleasure by it: the rest of the Gentlemen of
this Realm, that of themselfes see what things in their own countries are of
gretest fame now, and by that book shall know, what those things and other
things were long agone, must needs with great delight receive it: and surely,
being as he is unto me, a very dear freende, for mine own part, J mean
also (God willing) upon some fit occasion, with my request to further it. The
xvj. of April. 1576. Your Country man and very loving friend.

J: W:

GVLIELMVS FLETEwodus Vrbis Londinensis Recordator, ad candidum Lectorem.
EN tibi Lector, adest series dignissima reru^,
Canticolum si nosse cupis pia stemmata, sieve
Si tibi sacra placent horum co^mixta prophanis,
Sieve meare libet per compita, flumina, pontes,
Seu reserare velis septem diademata regum:
Cuncta Topographia hac La^bardus pingit aperte,
Jngenio rarus, grauis art, labor notandus.
Cuius mellifluo debet nunc Cantia libro
Plurima, myriades rerum dum ventilat apt:
Quas been si capias, habet hic cu^ foenore sorte^.
The Saxon Characters, and their values.
Characters. values. a a b b c c d d e e f f g g h h i i k k l l m m n n o o p
p q q r r s s s s t t u u w x x y y z z The abbreuiations. Their values. and
and that that th th th th TH th g ge

The points.
Comma, which is marked after the common periode, thus (.) Periode, which is
here signed as the Greek interrogatiue, thus (;)

Sundry faults (gentle Reader) have we unwillingly committed, in this Book,
imprinted in the absence of the Author. Of these, some do blemish only the
beauty of our own workmanship: others do offend against the laws of
Orthographie: Some do shrewdly pervert the sense of the writer, and will stay
thee: others do utterly euert his meaning, and will much trouble thee. Such
therefore as be most dangerous, we have here set before thine eye, beseeching
thee to amend them with thine own pen, before thou enter into the Book: The
which labor (we doubt not) but thou will the more willingly undertake in this
one copy, when thou shall have rightly weighed, what a work it would be for
us, to perform it in six hundredth books.
Page Lin. Error. Correction. 2 4 Sctos. Scots. 7 3 Zenagogus. Xenagogus. 48 6
bropam. Broxam 29 Haniswel. Hamswell. Southfrith for. Southfrith forest. 54
add (Wye) to the Schools there. Richard Agall. Richard Argall. 56 17 Sir
Humfrey Iilbert. S. Humfrey Gilbert. add John French to the names in F. there.
57 William Lambade. William Lambarde. 58 add S. Walt. Waller to the names in
W. 60 27 in Latin. into Latin. 64 29 Kenulfus. Kenulfus. Amend the numbers of
the. 2. pages, following next after the page. 67. 76 1 take out this (Malm.
Covent.) 77 13 partly for the. partly by the. 78 5 aenEt. thaenEt. 22 aenEt.
thaenEt. 84 20 Leoswine. Leoswine. 103 27 Simon Barley. Simon Burley. 108 1
then were appoin. that were appointed 109 18 Aulaf. Anlaf. 110 15 Syphinus.
Syphnius. 112 34 which drew. withdrewe. 119 1 Dorus. Doris. 121 16 kept till.
keep till. 32 a Captain. a Captive. 122 20 and speed. and sped. 123 20
Borieux. Baieux. 124 8 Borieux. Baieux. 126 5 tenure. terror. 28 contained.
continued. 128 32 a new work. the new work. 130 2 port sail. portsale. 3
crown, lands. Crownelandes. 131 18 strengthened. straightned. 135 27 a little.
a title. 136 12 you know of. you know out of. 34 to edify. to deifie. 137 22
shriued. shryned. 142 15 had at Rumney. did at Rumney. 21 upon the^ to the
last man. upon them and slew them to the last man. 143 16 Badhenham.
Hadhenham. 147 3 to the wood. into the wood. 13 in a place stronger. stronger
in a place. 150 32 had received her. had recovered her. 155 2 then order. then
ordered. 156 19 Borieux. Baieux. 159 17 used in. have used in. After the page.
160. amend the numbers of the next eight pages following. 161 3 to the very
end. to the very same end. 162 9 landed in Pontein. landed in Pontieu. 10
angeon, poieton. angeou, poietou. 24 and conuerture. and couerture. 163 15
eight carnes. eight Carews. 166 18 procured the Pope. procured of ye Pope. 167
18 contained four. contented four. 169 8 in weald. in the weald. 174 34
pronounce it of. pronounce of. 177 10 and in a company. and in the company.
178 3 Augustine. Augustines. 180 15 cyditE. cylditE. 181 10 possession.
profession. 182 29 take out these four words. (as it is sure.) 187 25 if you
offer. if you offered. 190 11 Kemsley town. Kemsley down. 191 18 hearted in
his. hearted to his. 192 7 preachment (after. in which (after. 193 11
exercerentur. exercentur. 195 2 thangcEastsE thangcEastrE 15 Thongraster, or
Thwangraster. Thongcaster, or Thwangcaster. 209 29 the very first. their very
first. After the page. 211. amend the numbers of the two next pages following.
214 10 not greatly. not greedely. 219 8 Kings reward. Kings awarde. 220 13 on
the otherside. they on ye other side. 222 13 church adjoining. churches
adjoining. 228 18 chart of donation. charter of donation. 229 8 the justice of.
the injustice of. 233 31 has now sustained. has sustained. 236 6 dissolved
the. dissolved there. 13 and like the. and let the. 241 22 Claredowne.
Clarendune. 243 19 writes it. twyteth it. 244 26 not their manner. not the
manner. 247 6 was given then. was given them. 251 in the margin, S.
Sepulchers. S. Stephans. 252 29 to (maugre his myter) race. (maugre his myter
to race. 261 26 gotten by pattern. gotten by perjury. 262 34 with might. with
night. 264 18 sufficiently defended. sufficiently defenced. 270 5 and yet
lost. and yet left. 271 13 recital of. the recital of. 22 Gibmandus.
Gibmundus. 272 2 Alstanns. Aelsstanus. 15 Gualeramus. Gualerannus. 273 1 and
there it is. and there is. 276 28 Cadishe. Achates. 279 16 tythed the number.
tythed that number. 282 25 (...). (...). 33 displeasure received. displeasure
conceived. 283 4 pountion. pountion. 12 pountion. pountion. 289 2 again the
Britons. against the Britons. 6 stead of Horse. stead of Horsa. In the margin
of ye page: Horstede borne in. Horstede barn, nere. 295 23 less worthy. less
worth. 296 19 Borieux. Baieux. 297 13 strengthened. straightened. 299 29
accomplement. accouplement. 304 8. 9 debet sull. debet. 3. sull. 15 de Althe.
de Athle. 24 Nedestane. Medestane. 27 Heyburne. Heyhorne. 313 19 and. 2. Ric.
2. 316 26 weariness. wariness. 317 11 as is in. as he is in. 318 16 put our
seals. put to our seals. 325 12 that number of. the number of. 329 16
peucata. Leucata. 341 7 burgHEr. burHEs. 342 10 the word which. the which
word. 344 17 rejected. eiected. 358 27 caelcE. aelcE. 361 23 other uche. other
such. 362 15 Hi Hrto. Hi Thereto. 18 E Hit. thE Hit. 366 25 three estales.
three estates. 370 1 vaginacae. vagniacae. 3 yrHam. yrtHam. 391 32 in feodo. in
feoda. 392 10 in feodo. in feoda. 396 in the mar. that call. call that. 399 11
shall entree. shall enter. 12 condtion. condition. 33 exemplfied. exemplified.
400 29 and in case not. and not in case. 30 is justified. is iustised. 406 25
seiset. seisei. 407 24 may waine her. may waiue her.

Saxones

ANGLIAE HEPTARCHIA.



The exposition of this Map of the English Heptarchie, or seven Kingdoms.
TO the end, that it may be understood, what is meant by the terms of
Eastsaxons, Westsaxons, Mercia, Northumberland, and such other, of which there
is common mention in the Treatise following: I have thought good to prefixe a
chard of the seven sundry Kingdoms into the which this Realm was sometime
divided. But yet, for the better and more plain explication of the matter, it
shall be good first to know, that all these Nations following have had to do
within this our Country: The Brittons, the Romans, the Scotts and Pictes,
the Saxons, the Danes, and the Normanes. The Brytaines.


The Bryttons (after the Samothees, and Albionees, which be of no great fame
in our history) were the most ancient Inhabitants of this land, and possessed
it in peace, until Julius Caesar (the Roman Emperor) invaded them: for so
much may a man gather of Horace his words, where he says, Intactus aut
Brytannus,
Sacra vt descenderet catenatus via. etc.


These therefore wear by Julius Caesar subdued to the Roman Empire, and their
country made a tributarie Province: in which case it continued many years
together, until at the length they being greiuously vexed with the Pictes and
Scotts their neighbors on the North, and being utterly void of all hope of
aid to be had from the Romans their patrons (who also at the same time wear
sore afflicted with the invasion of the Hunnes, and Vandales, like barbarous
nations) they wear enforced to seek for further help: And therefore sent
into Germany, from whence they received hired Soldiers, of the Nations
called Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, under the conduicte of Hengist and Horsa, two
natural brethren, and both very valiant Captains.

The Scots and pictes.
These Sctos (as them selves do write) wear a people of Scythia, that came
first into Spain, then into Ireland, and from thence to the North part of
Britain our Island, where they yet inhabit: They were called Scots, or Scyttes,
of Scyttan, which is to shoot: The Pictes also came from the same place after
them, and occupied the parts where Westmorland and Galoway now be. And they
were called Pictes, either for that they used to paynte their bodies, to the
end to seem the more terrible, or else of the word^ (...), which signifies a
Champion, by reason of their great courage and hardiness.

The Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, The Saxons, Iutes, and Angles.
wear the Germains that came over, (as we have said) in aid of the Britons,
of which the first sort inhabited Saxony: the second were of Gotland, and
therefore called Gutes, or Gottes: The third wear of Angria, or Anglia, a
country adjoining to Saxony, of which the Duke of Saxony is Lord till this
day, and bears the name thereof in his style, or title of honor, and of these
last we all be called Angli, English men.

These Germans, for a season served against the Scots, and Picts: But
afterward (entised by the pleasure of this country, and the fraud of the
enemies) they joined hands with them, and all at once set upon the Britons
that brought them in: and so, driving them into France, Wales, and Cornwall,
possessed their dwelling places, and divided the country amongst themselves.
Howbeit, they also wa^ted not their plague: For after that they had long warred
one upon another, for the enlarging of their particular kingdoms, and had at
the last so beaten ye one the other, that the whole was by the Westsaxons
reduced into one entier Monarchy, suddenly the Danes (a people of Norway, and
Denmark) came upon them, and after much mischief done, in the end took the
crown quite and clean from them.

But they were expulsed after thirty years trouble, and the English and
Saxon Nation restoared to the royal dignity: which yet they enjoyed not many
years after. The Normans.
For straight upon the death of Edward the Confessor, William of Normandy
(whose people at the first came from Norway also, and were therefore called
Normans) demanded the Crown, and wan it of Harold in the Field, whose
posterity holds it till this day.

Thus much of the Nations, that have had interest in this Realm: Now to our
purpose, that is, The seven kingdoms
to the division of the same into the sundry kingdoms under the Saxons. And
although (by reason of the continual contention that was amongst them for
enlarging their bounds) there can no certain limits of their kingdoms be
appointed, yet we will go as near the troth as we can, and follow the best
approved authors that have written thereof.

Westsaxons, because it was in the West part of the Realm, and it
comprehended the whole Shires of Southampton, Berk, Wilton, Dorset, and
Somerset, besides some parts of Surrey, Gloucester, and Deuonshyre: As for the
residue of Deuonshyre, and whole Cornwall, the Britons retained it, whose
language is not there as yet forgotten.

Southsaxon Kingdom, (so termed because it lay South) and contained whole
Sussex, and the remain of Surrey.

Kentish Kingdom, and had for the most part the same bounds, yt the Shyre of
Kent yet has, although at some time, and by the prowes of some King, it was
extended much further.

Estsex, or of the Estsaxons was the fourth, which was named of the situation
also, and included the whole Shires of Estsex, and Midlesex, with some portion
of Hartfordshyre.

Angles, or East Englishmen, consisting of the I Will of Elye, and the Shyres of
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge.

Mercia, or Mearclande, had the sixth place, which was so called of the Saxon
words Mearc signifiyng a bound, limit, or mark, as we yet speak: and that,
because it lay in the midst of this our Island, as upon the which all the
residue of the Kingdoms did bound, and wear bordered. In this Kingdom wear
wholly these Shyres, Lincoln, Northampton, Rutlande, Huntingdon, Bedford,
Buckingham, Oxford, Chester, Derby, Notingham, Stafforde: And partly Hereford,
Hartford, Warwick, Shropshire, and Gloucestershire.

Northumberlande (so called, because it lay North from the River Humber) was
the seventh Kingdom: and it enuironned Yorkshire, Durham, Northumberlande,
Cumberlande, and Westmerlande wholly, and so much of Lancashire besides, as was
not in Mercia.

This Kingdom was for a season divided into twain, that is to say, Deira, and
Bernicia, but for as much as neither that division endured long, nor the acts
of their Kings were greatly famous, I will not stay upon them: But to the end
it may appear by what laws and customs these Kingdoms wear guided (for of
them also we must make mention in this history) I will proceed to set forth
the rest of the use of this chard of the English Heptarchie.

As each Country therefore, has his propre laws, Three sorts of Laws, in
old time.
customs, and manners of life, so no man ought to doubt but that these
peoples, being aggregated of so many sundry Nations, had their several rules,
orders, and institutes. Howbeit, amongst the rest those be most famous, which
our ancient writers call the Dane law, West Saxon law, and Merchen law: The
first of which was brought in by the Danes: The second was used amongst the
west Saxons: and the last was exercised in the kingdom of Mercia: and yet not
so exercised amongst them selves alone, but that they spread over some parts of
the rest of the land also, being either embraced for their equity above the
rest, or commanded by such the Kings as prevailed above others.

Westsaxons law therefore, al such were subject, as inhabited the Kingdoms of
Kent, Sussex, or Westsex.

Eastsaxons, Estangles, and they of the kingdom of Northumberland (al which
were much mingled with the Danes) lived under the Danes law.

Mercia, had their own law, but not throwout: for after some men's opinions,
the East and Northeparts of it lived after the law of the Danes also. The Laws
of our time
Al these laws, King William the Conqueror collected together, and (after a
discreet view had) by advice of his counsel allowed some, altered others, and
quite abrogated a great many, in place of which he established the laws of
Normandy his own country.

The description and history, of the Shyre of Kent.
These things be all handeled, in the induction to the Topographical
Dictionarie.
Having thus before hand exhibited in generality, the names, situation, and
compass of the Realm, the number of the sondrye Nations inhabiting within the
same, the several laws, languages, rites, and manners of the peoples, the
conversion of the country to christianity, the divisions and lymites of the
Kingdoms, the beginnings and alterations of Bishoprics, and such other
things incident to the whole: Order now requires, that I show in particular,
the bounds of each Shyre and County, the several Regiments, Bishops Sees,
Lasts, Hundrethes, Fraunchises, Liberties, Cities, Markets, Borroughs, Castles,
Religious houses, and Scooles: The Ports, Havens, Rivers, Waters, and Bridges:
And finally, the Hills and dales, Parkes, and forests, and whatsoever the
singularities, within every of the same. And because not only the Romans and
Saxons (that wear conquerours of this Realm) but also the Disciples of the
Apostle Philip, and the messengers of Pope Gregory (that were conuerters of the
people) arrived first in Kent: and for that the same by commodity of the
River of Thamise (the chief key of this Island) first opens it self, The
author determined to have written this treatise, in latin.
and to the end also that such guests and strangers as shall vouchesafe to
visit this our Britain, may at their first entry find such courtesy and
intertainment, as from henceforth they cease, either with Horace to call us,
Hospitibus feros, or with others, Feroces in Aduenas, I will be their
Zenagogus, or guide, and first show them our country of Kent, the inhabitants
whereof, Caesar himself in his Commentaries, confesses to be of al others the
most full of humanity and gentleness.

Kent therefore, Situation of Kent.
lying in the Southeast Region of this Realm, has on the North the River of
Thamise, on the East the Sea, on the South the Sea and Sussex, and on the West
Sussex and Survey. It extends in length, from VVicombe in the frontiers of
Surrey, to Dele at the Sea side, fyfty miles: And reaches in breadth from
Sandhirst (near Robertsbridge in the edge of Sussex) to the Northeast point
of the I Will of Greane, almost thirty miles, and so has in circuit. 150. miles,
or therabout.

It is called by Caesar, and other ancient writers, Kent, why so named.
Cancium, and Cancia in latin, which name (as I make conjecture) was framed
out of Cainc, a word that (in the language of the Britains, whom Caesar at
his arrival found inhabiting there) signifies, bowghes, or woods, and was
imposed, by reason that this Country, both at that time, and also long after,
was in manner wholly ouergrowne with wood, as it shall hereafter in fyt place
more plainly appear.

The Air in Kent, The Air. The Soil.
by reason that the Country is on sundry parts bordered with water, is
somewhat thick: for which cause (as also for that it is situate nearest to
the Sun risinge and furthest from the North pole of any part of the realm)
it is temperate, not so cold by a great deal as Northumberlande, and yet in
manner as warm as Cornwall.

The Soil is for the most part bountiful, consisting indifferently of
arable, pasture, meadow and woodland, howbeit of these, wood occupies the
greatest portion even till this day, except it be toward the East, which
coast is more champaigne then the residue.

The Corn
It has Corn and Grain, common with other Shyres of the Realm: as Wheat,
Rye, Barley, and Oats, in good plenty, save only, that in the Wealdish, or
woody places, where of late days they used much Pomage, or Cider for want of
Barley, now that lack is more commonly supplied with Oats.

Neither wants Kent such sorts of pulce, as the rest of the Realm yields,
The Poulse
namely beans, peason, and tares, which some (reteining the sound of the
latin word Vicia) call vetches, and which Polydor supposed not to be found
in Ingland.

The Pasture.
The pasture and meadowe, is not only sufficient in proportion to the quantity
of the country it self for breeding, but is comparable in fertility also to
any other that is near it, in so much that it gayneth by feeding.

The woods fruits.
In fertile and fruitful woods and trees, this country is most floryshing
also, whether you respect the maste of oak, Beeche and Chesten for cattail: or
the fruit of aples, Pears, Cherries, and Ploumes for men: for besides great
store of oak and beeche, it has whole woods that bear Chestnutt, a mast (if
I may so call it, and not rather a fruit, whereof even delicate persons
disdain not to feed) not commonly seen in other countries: But as for
Ortchards of Aples, and Gardens of Cheries, and those of the most delicious
and exquisite kinds that can be, no part of the Realm (that I know) has
them, either in such quantity and number, or with such art and industry, set
and planted. So that the Kentish man, most truly of al other, may say with him
in Virgil, Sunt nobis mitia poma,
Castaneae molles. etc.


Touching domestical cattle, as horses, mares, oxen, The Cattle.
kine, and sheep, Kent differs not much from others: only this it
challenges as singular, that it brings forth the largest of stature in each
kind of them: The like whereof also Polydore (in his history) confesses of
the Kentish poultrie.

Parkes of fallow Dear, and games of gray Conyes, Dear and Conyes.
it maynteyneth many, the one for pleasure, and the other for profit, as it may
well appear by this, that within memory almost the one half of the first
sort be disparked, and the number of warreyns continues, if it do not
increase daily.

As for red Dear, and black Conyes, it nourishes them not, as having no
great walks of wast ground for the one, and not tarying the time to raise the
gain by the other: for, black conyes are kept partly for their skins, which
have their season in Winter: and Kent by the nearness to London, has so
quick market of young Rabbets, that it kills this game chiefly in Summer.

There is no Mineral, No mines.
or other profit dug out of the belly of the earth here, save only that in
certain places they have Mines of Iron, quarreys of pauing stone, and pits of
fat Marle.

The Sea, and fresh waters, The fish.
yield good and wholesome fishes competently, but yet neither so much in
quantity, nor such in variety, as some other coasts of the Realm do
afoorde. And here let us for a season leave the Sea and the Soil, and cast our
eyes upon the men.

The people of this country, The people
consists chieflly (as in other countries also) of the Gentry, and the
yeomanrie, of which the first be for the most part, (...), governors, and the
other altogether (...), governed: Socage, and Knights, service.
whose possessions also were at the first distinguished, by the names of knight
fee, and Gauelkinde: that former being propre to the warrior, and this latter
to the husbandman. But as nothing is more inconstant, the^ the estate that we
have in lands and living (if at the least I may call that an estate which
never stands) Even so, long since these tenures have been so indifferently
mixed and confounded, in the hands of each sort, yt there is not now any note
of difference to be gathered by them. The gentlemen The Gentlemen.
be not here (throughout) of so ancient stocks as else where, especially in
the parts nearer to London, from which city (as it were from a certain
rich and wealthy seedplot) Courtiers, Lawyers, and Merchants be continually
translated, and do become new plants amongst them. Yet be their revenues
greater then any where else: which thing grows not so much by the quantity
of their possession, or by the fertility of their soil, as by the benefit of
the situation of the country it self, which has all that good neighborhood,
that Marc. Cato, and other old authors in husbandry require to a well placed
graunge, that is to say, the Sea, the River, a populous city, and a well
traded highway, by the commodities whereof, the superfluous fruits of the
ground be dearly sold, and consequently the land may yield a greater rent.
These gentlemen be also (for the most part) acquainted with good letters, and
especially trained in the knowledge of the laws: They use to manure some large
portion of their own territories, as well for the maintenance of their
families, as also for their better increase in wealth. So that they be well
employed, both in the public service, and in their own particular, and do use
hanking, hunting, and other disports, rather for their recreation, then for an
occupation or pastime.

The yeome^
The yeomanrie, or commmon people (for so they be called of the Saxon word gemen
which signifies common) is no where more free, and ioily, then in this shyre:
for besides that they them selves say in a claim (made by them in the time of
King Edward the first) that the co^munaltie of Kent was never vanquished by
the Conqueror, but yielded it self by composition, And besides that Geruasius
affirms, that the forward in all battles belongs to them (by a certain
preeminence) in right of their manhood, It is agreed by all men, that there
were never any bondme^ (or villains, as the law calls the^) in Kent. Neither
be they here so much bounden to the gentry by Copyhold, or custumarie
tenures, as the inhabitants of the western countries of the Realm be, nor at
all indau^gered by the feeble hold of tenant right, (which is but a descent of
a tenancie at will) as the common people in the Northren parts be: for Copyhold
tenure is rare in Kent, and tenant right not heard of at al: But in place of
these, the custom of Gauelkind preuayling every where, in manner every man is
a freeholder, and has some part of his own to live upon. And in this their
estate, they please them selves, and joy exceedingly, in so much, as a man may
find sundry yeome^ (although otherwise for wealth comparable with many of the
gentle sort) that will not yet for all that change their condition, nor desire
to be apparayled with the titles of Gentry. Neither is this any cause of
disdain, or of alienation of ye good minds of the one sort from the other: for
no where else in all this realm, is the common people more willingly governed.
To be short, they be most commonly civil, just, and bountiful, so that the
estate of the old franklyns and yeomen of England, either yet lives in Kent,
or else it is quite dead and departed out of ye realm for altogether.

As touching the artificers The Artificers.
of this shire, they be either such as labor in the arts that be handmaidens
to husbandry, or else workers in stone, Iron, and woodfuel, or else makers of
colored woolle^ clothes: in which last feat they excel, as from whom is
drawn both sufficient stoare to furnishe the wear of the best sort of our
own nation at home, and great plenty also to be tra^sported to other foreign
countries abroad. Thus much I had summarily to say, of the condition of the
country, and country men, Now therefore (God assisting mine enterprise) I
will go in hand with the history.

The first in habitation of England.
We read in the first book of Moses, that after such time as the order of
nature was destroyed by the general floude, and repaired again by the mercy of
almighty God, the whole earth was ouerspred in process of time, by the
propagation of mankind that came of the loins of Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. By
which authority, we are thoroughly certified, that all the nations of the
world, must of necessity derive their Pedegrees from the cuntrie of Chaldee
(or some place nighe unto it) where the Arc of Noah rested:

The error of those, which say, that the Brytons wear Indigenae.
And therefore, I will not here either doubt, or debate to and fro, as Caesar,
Cornel. tacit. Polydore, and others do, whether the first inhabitants of this
Island were ( Aliunde aduecti, and aduenae) that is, translated and brought out
of some other country to dwell here, or no: Or yet affirm, as the same Caesar
does, that some, or (as Diodor. Siculus writes) that all the Britanes wear
indigenae, the natural borne people of that country, and that ab origin,
even from the first beginning: for to take the one way of these, or the other,
would but lead us to distrust the infallible Scriptures of God concerning the
creation and propagation of mankind, and to trust the wretched vanity of
opinion that the Gentiles had, and namely the Atheniens, who, the better to
advance their antiquity, were wont to vaunt, That they only (forsooth) of all the Grecians were (...), that is to say, Satiui, and indigenae terrae parentis,
The very natural seeds, stocks, and ymps, springing out of their good mother ye
same earth where they dwelt, and not brought from elsewhere. We read likewise
in the same book of Moses, yt the Isles of the Gentiles were divided into their
Kingdoms and nations, by such as descended of the children of Iapheth,
whereupon, as the Italians in their histories derive themselves from Gomer the
first son of Iapheth: the Spaniardes from Tubal his fifte Son: and the
Germans from Thuysco (whom as they say, Moses calls Ascenas) the eldest
son of Gomer: Even so, the late learned, and yet best trauayled in the
histories of our country, rejecting the fond dreams of doting Monks and
fabling Frears, do collect out of Herodotus, Berosus, and others the most grave
and ancient authors, that one Samothes, the sixth son of Iapheth, (whom
Caesar in his commentaries calls Dis, and Moses names Mesech) did about 250.
years after the general inundation of the world) take upon him the first
dominion of these countries in Europe, which are now known by the names of
France and Britain, and the inhabitants thereof of long time called Celtae,
or rather (...) of the Verb (...) for their special skill in ryding. That is
to say Ryders: and to Ride.


Of this man's name (say they) the first inhabiters of England wear called
Samothaei, An. mundi. 2219.
by the space of 300. years, or more: About which time Albion Mareoticus (the
son of Neptune, or rather Nepthuim, as Moses writes it, and descended of the
race of Cham,) invaded the I Will, conquered the inhabitants, mixed them with his
own people, and called them all after his own name Albionees, and the
country it self Albion.

Six hundredth and eight years (or theraboutes) after this also, An. ante
Christum 1142.
Brutus Iuhus (as all our common historiens have it) entered this Island with
324. ships, laden with the remains of Troy, and he likewise, both subdued all
the former peoples that he found here to his own obedience, and also altered
their name after his own calling: So that from thenceforth they were named
Britains, the terms of Samothees, and Albionees being quite and clean
abolished. Kent, the first inhabited part of England.
Now, out of these things thus alleged, I might (as me thinks) draw
probable conjecture, that Kent which we have in hand, was the first inhabited
part of all this our Island.

For if it be true, that master Bale in his Centuries confesses, namely, that
Samothes began his dominion over this Realm almost. 150. years after such
time as he first arrived in that part of France which is called Celtique and
had planted his people there, what can be more likely, then that he came out of
France first into Kent? seeing that part (of all others) was most near unto
him, and only of all the Island might be discerned out of the country where he
was. And the self same reason Caesar uses, to prove, that the borderers on
the South Sea side of this land were Aduenae, and brought out of France,
although he was persuaded, that the dwellers within the middle parts of the
Country were (Indigenae,) as we have already touched. But I will proceed in
the history.

Four Kings in Kent.
Howsoever that be therefore, Caesar himself witnesses, that at the time of
his arrival in this Island, the people were by one common name called
Britains: And that Kent was then divided into four petite Kingdoms, which
were governed by Carnillus, Taximagul, Cingetorix, and Segonax: who, having
severally subject to their Dominions certain Cities with the territories
adjoining unto them (after the manner of the Dukedomes, or Estates of Italy,
at this day) extended their bounds (as it may be gathered) over the whole
countries of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey, at the least. This kind of Regalitie,
But one King in Kent.
Kent retained not many years after, because the Britain Kings, succeeding
Caesar's conquest, and yielding tribute to ye Romans, reduced not only these
parts, but in manner the whole Realm also, into one entier Monarchy.. So
that in course of time, and under the reign of King Vortiger, Kent was ruled
by a Lieutenant,, or Viceroy, called Guorongus, as William of Malmesbury
witnesses. But it was not long, before these Britains were so weakened, partly
by intestine dissentio^ amongst themselves, and partly by incursions of their
neighbors the Scots, and Picts, that (the periode of this their estate also
drawing on) Vortiger their King was compelled to inuit for aid the Saxons,
Iutes, and Angles, three sorts of the Germane nation: who, in stead of doing
that which they came for, and of delivering the Britains from their former
oppression, joined with their enemies ( Thessala fide, as the adage is) and
brought upon them a more grievous calamity and conquest, subduing the people,
suppressing relligion, and departing (in manner) the whole land amongst them
selves. So that now Kent recovered the title of a several Kingdom again,
although not al one, and the very same in limittes with the former four, yet
nothing inferior in power, estimation, or compass.

Of which this newly revived regiment, Hengist the chief leader of the
Germans became the first author and patron. For he, finding him self placed
by King Vortiger for his own habitation at Thanet in this Shire, and seeing a
great part of his power bestowed in Garrison against the Scotts under Ohtha
his Brother, and Ebusa his Son in the North Country, and perceiving
moreover, that he was arrived out of a most barren Country into this
plentiful Island (with the commodities whereof he was inestimablie delighted) he
abandoned al care of return to his native soil, and determined to make here a
seat for him self and his posterity. For helps whereunto, although he had on
the one side, his own prowess, the manhood of his warlike nation, their number,
and necessity: and on the other side, the effeminate cowardice and
voluptuousnes of King Vortiger, the weakness of the Britains themselves, and
the advantage of the Scotts and Pictes their ancient enemies, so that he
might with plain force have brought his purpose to pass: yet he chose rather
to atchieue his desire by fair means, and color of amity, a way, though not
so hasty as the former, yet more speedy then that, or any other. Espying
therefore, that king Vortiger was much delighted in women's company, and
knowing well, that Sine Cerere and Libero, friget Venus, he had him to a solemn
Banquet, and after that he had (according to the manner of Germany yet
continuing) well plied him with pots, he let slip before him a fair
gentlewoman, his own daughter, called Roxena, or Rowen, which being instructed
before handhow to behave her self, most amiablie presented him with a goblet of
wine, saying in her own language, The first wasseling cup.
aes Hail Hlaford cynyng; wessail Lord King, that is to say, be merry Lord
King: with which her daliance, the King was so delighted, that he not only
vouchesafed to pledge her, but desired also to perfourm it in the right manner
of her own country. And therefore he answered (as he was taught) unto her
again, drinc Haeile; drink merely. Which when she had done, himself took
the cup, and pledged her so heartily, that from thenceforth he could never be
in rest, until he had obtained her to wife, The issue of an ungodly marriage.
little weighing, either how deeply he had endaungered his conscience in
matching him self with a heathen wooman, or how greatly he had hazarded his
Crown by joining hands with so mighty a foreign Nation.

At the time of this marriage, Hengist (laboring by all means to bring in his
own Country men) begged of the King the territories of Kent, Essex, Midlesex,
and Suffolk, (then known by other names) pretending in word, that he would,
in consideration thereof, keep out Aurel. Ambrose, (a competitor of the crown)
whose arriual King Vortiger much feared, But meaning in deed, to make thereby
a key to let into the Realm multitudes of Germans, for furtherance of his
ambitious desire and purpose: which thing in process of time he brought to
pass, not only creating himself and his posterity Kings of a large quarter,
but also thereby showing the way and entry, how others of his nation might
follow, and do the like.

And thus Kent, being once again (as I said) reduced into a Kingdom,
continued in that estate, by the space of three hundredth three score and eight
years, or thereabouts, in the hands of fifteen successors, as the most
credible authors do report: Some others add, Edbert, and Alric, and so make
seventeen in all, whose names do follow.

1. Hengist, the first Germane. The Kings of Kent.
2. Oesc. 3. Occa. 4. Hermenric: or Ermenric. 5. Ethelbert, the first
christened. 6. Eadbald. 7. Erconbert, the first that commanded the observation
of Lent, in this shire. 8. Egbert. 9. Lothar. 10. Eadric.
After his death, Nidred and Wibbard usurped, by the space of seven years, and
therefore are not registered in the Catalogue of the lawful Kings.

11. Wightred, he built Saint Martines at Dover. 12. Edbert, added by some.
13. Ethelbert. 14. Alric, added also, by some. 15. Eadbert Pren, or Edelbert
Pren. 16. Cuthred. 17. Baldred.
Now, although it might here seem convenient, before I passed any further, to
disclose such memorable things, as have chanced during the reigns of al
these forenamed Kings: yet for as much as my purpose specially is to write a
Topographie, or description of places, and no Chronographie, or story of
times, (although I must now and then use both, since the one can not fully be
performed without enterlacing the other.) and for that also I shall have just
occasion hereafter in the particulars of this Shyre, to disclose many of the
same, I will at this present, and that by way of digression only, make report
of one or two occurrents that happened under Ethelbert, and Eadric, two Kings
of this country.

Ethelbert, the King of Kent.
This Ethelbert, besides that he mightily enlarged the bounds of his own
Kingdom, extending the same even to the river of Humber, was also the first
King (amongst the Saxons, inhabiting this land) that promoted the kingdom of
Christ, as to whom it pleased almighty God to break the bread of his holy
word and gospel, through the ministry and preaching of Augustine the Moncke,
that was sent from Rome by Pope Gregory surnamed the great: amongst the Saxons
I said, least any man should think, that either the faith of Christ, was not
hear at all, or not so purely preached, before the coming of that Augustine.
Beda him self (being a Saxon) that the Britons embraced the religion of Christ
within this Island, many hundredth years before Gregory's time: whether in purer
sort then he sent it hither, or no, let them judge that know, that he was
called (worthily) Pater Caeremoniarum, and that may yet see in Beda, and
others, what tru^pery crept into the church of God in his time and by his
permission, Eadric, the King of Kent.
Eadric the other King succeeded in Kent, after Lotharius, who, because he
rather reigned by lust, then ruled by law, incurred the hatred of his people,
and was invaded by Ceadwalla (King of Westsex) and Mull his brother: which
entering the country, and finding no resistance, herryed it from the one end to
the other: and not thus contented, Ceadwalla, in revenge of his brother Muls
death, (whom the country people had cruelly slain in a house, that he had
taken for his succor) entered this country the second time, and sleying the
people, spoiled it without all pity. And yet not satisfied with all this, he
suffered the quarrel to descend to Ina his successor, who ceased not to
unquiet the people of this Shyre, till they agreed to pay him 30000. Marks in
gold, for his desired amends.

These be the matters that I had to note in ye reigns of these two Kings: as
for the rest, I pass them over to their fit titles, as things rather
perteining to some peculiar places, then incident to the body of the whole
Shire, and will now prosecute the residue.

Baldred, that stands last in the table of the Kings, Kent was united by King
Egbert (who last of all changed the name of the people, and called them
Englishmen) unto the Westsaxon Kingdom, First name of Englishmen.
which in the end became Lady and maistres of all the rest of the kingdoms
also: and it was from thenceforth wholly governed after the Westsaxon law, as in
the Map of the tripartite laws of this Realm has appeared, until such
time as King Alfred first divided the whole Realm into particular Shires, upon
this occasion following.

Beginning of Shires.
The Danes, both in his time, and before, had flocked by sea to the coasts of
this land in great numbers, some times wasting and spoiling with sword, and
fire, wheresoever they might arrive: and sometimes taking with them great
booties to their Ships without doing any further harm: which thing (continuing
for many years together) caused the husbandmen to abandon their tillage, and
gave occasion and hardiness to evil disposed persons to fall to the like
pillage, and robbery: The which, the better to cloak their mischief withal,
feigned them selves to be Danishe Pirates, and would some time come on land in
one part, and some time in an other, driving great spoils (as the Danes had
done) to their ships before them. Alfred therefore, that had merueilously
traueiled in repulsing the barbarous Danes, espying this outrage, and thinking
it no less the part of a politic Prince, to root out the noisome subject,
then to hold out the foreign enemy, by advice of his counsel, and by the
example of Moses (which followed the counsel of Ietro, his father in law)
divided the whole Realm into certain parts, or Sections (being two and thirty
in number, as I guess) which of the Saxon word Scyran, signifiyng to cut, he
termed shires, or (as we yet speak) shares, and portions: and appointed over
every one shyre, an Earl, or Alderman (or both) to whom he committed the
government and rule of the same.

These shyres he also brake into smaller parts, whereof some were called Lathes,
Lathes.
of the word gelathian, which is, to assemble together: others, hundreds,
Hundreds.
because they contained jurisdiction over an hundredth pledges: and others,
Tithings, Tythings.
so named, because there were in each of them to the number of ten persons,
whereof each one was surety and pledge for others good abearing. He ordained
furthermore, that every man should procure him self to be received into some
Tithing, and that if any were found of so small credit, that his neighbors
would not become pledge for him, he should forthwith be committed to prison,
least he might do harm abroad.

By this device it came to pass, that good subjects (the travailing Bees of
the Realm) resorted safely to their la^ors again, and the evil and idle
Droanes were driven clean out of the hyue of the common wealth: so that in
short time, the whole Realm tasted of the sweet honey of this blessed peace,
and tranquillity.

Some shadow I do confess, of this King Alfredes politic institution,
remains even til this day in those courts which we call Leetes, where these
pledges be yet named franci plegij, of ye word freoborgh, which is a free
pledge; But if the very Image it self were amongst us, who sees not what
benefit would ensue thereby, as well toward the suppression of busy thieves,
as for the correction of idle vagabounds, which be the very seed of robbers
and thieves. But leaving this matter to such as bear the sword, I will plye
my pen, and go forward.

Thus much therefore I thought good, now at the first to open, the more at
large, because it may serve generally for all Shyres, and shall hereafter
deliver me from often repetition of one thing. Where, by the way, (least I
might seem to have forgotten the Shire that I have presently in hand) it is to
be noted, that that which in the west country was at that time, (and yet is)
called, a Tithing, Bosholder, and Tithingman.
is in Kent termed a Borow, of the Saxon word, borh, which signifies a
Pledge, or a surety: and the chief of these pledges, which the Westernmen
call a Tithingman, they of Kent name a Borsholder, of the Saxon words borHes
ealdor, that is to say, the most Ancient, or elder of the Pledges, which
thing being understood, the matter will come all to one end, and I may go
forward.

Shyre of Kent, and all the residue of the Shyres of this Realm, were found,
when William the Duke of Normandy invaded this Realm: Kent keeps her old
customs.
at whose hands the cominaltie of Kent, obtained with great honor, the
continuation of their ancient vsages, notwithstanding that the whole Realm
besides suffered alteration and change.

For proof whereof, I will call to witness Thomas Spot, sometimes a Moncke
and Chronicler of saint Augustines at Canterbury, who, if he shall seem to
weak to give sufficient authority to the tale, because he only (of all the
Storiers that I have seen) reports it, Yet, forasmuch as I my self first
published that note out of his history, and for that the matter it self also
is neither incredible, nor unlikely, (the rather because this Shyre, even unto
this day, enjoys the custom of give all kyn descent, Gauelkyn.
dower of the moytie, freedom of birth, and sundry other vsages much
different from other countries, I neither well may, ne will at all stick, now
eftsoons to rehearse it.

Duke William the Conqueror had overthrown King Harold in the field, at
Battle in Sussex, and had received the Londoners to mercy, he marched with his
army toward the Castle of Dover, thinking thereby to have brought in subjection
this country of Kent also. But Stigande, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Egelsine the Abbat of saint Augustines, perceauing the danger, assembled the
country men together, and laid before them the intolerable pride of the
Normanes that invaded them, and their own miserable condition, if they should
yield unto them. By which means, they so enraged the common people, that they
ran forth with to weapon, and meeting at Swanscombe, Meeting (...) Swanescombe.
elected the Archbishop and the Abbat for their captains: This done, each man
got him a green boughe in his hand, and bare it over his head, in such
sort, as when the Duke approached, he was much amassed therewith, thinking at
the first, that it had been some miraculous wood, that moved toward him: But
they as soon as he came within hearing, cast away their boughs from them,
and at the sound of a trumpet bewraied their weapons, and withal dispatched
toward him a messenger, which spoke unto him in this manner. The commons of
Kent (most noble Duke) are ready to offer thee, either peace, or war, at
thine own choice, and election: peace with their faithful obedience, if thou will permit them to enjoy their ancient liberties: war, and that most
deadly, if thou deny it them.

Now when the Duke heard this, and considered that the danger of denial was
great, and that the thing desired was but small, he forthwith, more wisely then
willingly, yealded to their request: And by this mean both he received Dover
Castle, and the Country to obedience, and they only of all England, (as shall
hereafter appear (obtained for ever their accustomed privileges.

And thus then has it appeared (so shortly, as I could) what has been the
estate and government of this country, from the arrival of Julius Caesar,
(the first Roman that conquered this Realm) even to this present day. Now
therefore, I will set before the Readers eye in Table, a plain particular of
the whole shyre, wherein, to the end, that under one labor double commodity
may be reaped, I will not only divide it into the several Lathes, hundreds,
towns, and borowes, But also set over against each town and place, such
sums of money, (as by report of the record of the. 13. year of her
Majesty's reign) was levied in the name of a Tenth and Fiftene, upon every of
the same: which being done, I will haste me to the description of such places,
as either faithful information by word, or credible history in writing, has
hitherto ministered me.

The Lathe of S. Augustines.
Hundredth of Wingham.
Borowe of Wingham. lxvij s^. j. d. Borwe of Rollinge. lxvij. s^. j. d. Borowe
of Nouington. lxvij. s^. j. d. Borowe of Godestone. lxvij. s^. i. d. Borowe of
Den. lxvij. s^. j. d. Borowe of Twytham. xxxiij. s^. ix. d. Borowe of
Wimlingswold. xxxiij. s^. ix. d. Borowe of Kelington. xxxiij. s^. vij. d.
Borowe of Gythorne. xxvj. s^. i. d. The parish of Ash, with the Borow of
Wyderton. xxiij. l. xij. s^. iij. d. Sum. xlvj. l. xiiij. s^. x. d.
H^ndreth of Preston.
Town of Preston. v. l. ix. s^. x. d. Town of of Elmestone. l. s^. Sum. vij.
l. xix. s^. x. d.
Hundredth of Ringeslowe.
Town of Wood. iiij. l. vij. s^. viij. d. Town of Monketon. iij. l. Town of
Mynster. xv. l. Town of S. Laurence. xvij. l. xiij. s^. iiji. d. Town of S.
Peter. xv. l. xvij. s^. Town of S. John. xxiij. l. xij. s^. Town of S. Gyles.
xv. s^. Town of S. Nicholas. x. l. vij. s^. Town of All Saints. iiij. l.
vi. s^. iiij. d. Town of Byrchingstone. viij. l. xv. s^. iij. d. Sum. Ciij. l.
xiij. s^. vij. d.
Hundredth of Downha^ford.
The Lathe of S. Augustines.
Town of Staple. iiij. l. vij. s^. Town of Adesham. iiij. l. ix. s^. Town of
Wykham. vij. l. xiiij..s^.x. d. Town of Litleborne. vij. l. x. iiij. s^. Town
of Well. vj. l. xix. s^. vj. d. Sum. xxxj. l. iiij. s^. iiij, d.
Hundredth of Estrye.
Town of Chillenden. xviij. s^. Town of Berston. vij. s^. ij. d. Town of
Nouington. xx. s^. Town of Tyluestone. vj. l. vj. s^. iiij. d. Town of
Wodnesborowe. xv. l. x. s^. x. d. Town of Estrye. xiiij. l. xj. s^. x. d.
Town of Waldershare. xij. s^. Sum. xxxix. l. vj. s^. ij. d.
Hundredth of Kingha^ford.
Borowe of Dorme. xxv. s^. Borowe of Kingstone. iij. l. viij. d. Borowe of
Outemeston. xxij. s^. iiij. d. Borowe of Berham. xlij. s^. iiij. d. Borowe of
Bereton. xxiij. s^. iiij. d. Borowe of Sheluing. xxviij. s^. vj. d. Borowe of
Brethe. xxiij. s^. iiij. d. Sum. xj. l. v. s^. vj. d.
Hundredth of Petham.
Town of Petham. vij. l. xij. s^. vij. d. Town of Chartham. viij. s^. x. d.
ob. Town of Waltham. iiij. l. ij. s^. v. d. Sum. xij. l. iij. s^. x. d. ob.
Hundredth of Bewsbrough.
Town of Colred. xxxix. s^. Town of Shebertswold. lviij. s^. Town of
Popeshal. l. s^. Town of S. Margaret. iij. l. Town of Oxney. xxvj. s^. vij.
d. ob. Town of Westclif. xxxj. s^. Town of Guston. xxxiiij. s^. Town of
Beawfield. xxxix. s^: Town of Charlton. xlvij. s^. Town of Hougham. iiij. l.
Town of Bucland. xxviij. s^. Town of Reuer. xl. s^. Town of Ewell. lxvj. s^.
Town of Leden. xxiiij. s^. q. Town of Smalhead. xiij. s^. iiij. d. Town of
Westlangden. xx. s^. Sum. xxxij. l. xv. s^. xj. d. ob. q.
Hundredth of Cornilo.
Borowe of Finglesham. xxxix. s^. Borowe of Sholdon. xl. s^. Borowe of Marten.
xxx. s^. Borowe of Eastlangdon. xij. s^. Borowe of Asheley. xl. s^. Borowe of
Sutton. xxiij. s^. v. d. ob. Borowe of Mongeham Magna. xl. s^. Borowe of
Rippley. xvij. s^. Borowe of Norborne. xxiij. s^. Borowe of Deal. xiij. l.
xix. s^. Borowe of Walmer. iiij. l. v. s^. viij. d. Borow of Mongeham Parua.
xvij. s^. Town of Ringwolde. viij. l. x. d. Sum. xl. l. vj. s^. xj. d. ob.
Hundredth of Blengate.
Town of Sturey. xij. l. xiiij. s^. Town of Chistelet, xij. l. xiiij. s^.
Town of Reculuer. xij. l. xiiij. s^. Town of Herne. xij. l. xv. s^. Sum. l.
l. xvij. s^.
Hundredth of Westgate.
Borowe of Westgate. ix. l. xix. s^. ij. d. ob. Borowe of Harbaldowne. iiij. l.
Borowe of Hakington. iiij. l. vj. s^. Borowe of Cokering. iij. l. xiiij. s^.
Borowe of Tunforde. xxxv. s^. Borowe of Rusheborne. xxviij. s^. x. d. Borowe of
Harwiche. lvij. s^, j. d. Sum. xxviij. l. j. d. ob.
Hundredth of Whitstaple.
Town of Bleane. vij. l. xj. s^. ix. d. Town of Whitstaple. vj. l. xv. s^.
Town of Natington. xj. s^. iiij. d. ob. q. Sum. xiiij. l. xviij. s^. j. d. ob.
q.
Hundredth of Bregge.
Town of Patriksborne. iij. l. xvj. s^. Town of Bekesborne. iij. l. xviij.
s^. Town of Bregge. xv. s^. Town of Blackmanbury. xxxiij. s^. Town of little
Harden. xxviij. s^. Town of Natindon. xxviij. s^. Town of great Harden. xxix.
s^. Sum. xiiij. l. ij. s^,
Town of Sesalter. iij. l. vj. s^. viij. d.

Sum of this whole Lathe of S. Augustines. CCCCxxxvj. l. xv. s^.

The Lathe of Shepvvay.
Hundredth of S. Martine.
The town of Newchurche. xx. s^. iij. d. The town of S. Mary's. xlix. s^. The
town of Hope. xij. l. vij. s^. x. d. ob. The town of S. Martine. xiiij. s^.
ij d. The town of S. Clement. l. s^. iiij. d. ob. The town of Iuechurche.
lxviij. s^. j. d. The town of Medley. iiij. s^. ij. d. Sum. xxij. l. xiij. s^.
xj. d.
Hundredth of Langport.
The town of S. Nicholas. xvj. s^. The town of Lyd. ix. l. ij. s^. iiij. d.
The town of Rompney. xiij. s^. iiij. d. The town of Hope. xxix. s^. Sum. xij.
l. viij. d.
Hundredth of Alowsbredge
The town of Snargate. lvij. s^. xj. d. The town of Brenset. iiij. l. ij. d.
The town of Brokeland. lxxvij. s^. The town of Fayrefeld xliiij. s^. ix. d.
The town of Snaue. xxxij. s^. vj. d. ob. The town of Iuechurche. xxxj. s^.
iiij. d. The town of Newchurche. vij. s^. i. d. ob. Sum. xvj. l. x. s^. x. d.
Hundredth of Byrcholte Franchesse.
The town of Aldington. iiij. l. x. s^. ob. The town of Mersham. viij. s^. x.
d. Sum. iiij. l. xviij. s^. x. d. ob.
Hundredth of Newchurch.
The town of Bylsington. liij. s^. viij. d. The town of Newchurche. xxxiij.
s^. ii. d. The town of Roking. l. s^. vj. d. The town of Snaue. viij. s^.
iiij. d. The town of S. Marie. xxxiiij. s^. iiij. d. Sum. ix. l.
Hundredth of Stowting.
The town of Elmested. lxxij. s^. ix. d. The town of Scelling. xix. s^. ij.
d. The town of Waltham. xxj. s^. vij. d. The town of Stowting. xxx. s^. xj. d
The town of Horton. liiij. s^. viij. d. ob. The town of Stanford. xxvj. s^.
x. d. ob. Sum. xj. l. vj. s^.
Hundredth of Louingborough.
The town of Eleham. xvj. l. xij. d. The town of Acryse. vij. s^. viij. d.
The town of Hardresse. xxix. s^. iiij. d. The town of Stelling. xxx. s^. j.
d. ob. The town of Lyminge. ix. l. xv. s^. viij. d. The town of Paddlesworth.
xviij. s^. iij. d. ob. Sum. xxx. l. ij. s^. j. d.
Hundredth of Street.
Town of Limeane. lxxv. s^. j. d. Town of Aldington. xxiij. s^. vij. d. ob.
Town of Sellinge. vj. l. xj. s^. ix. d. Town of Bonington. xij. s^. ix. d.
Town of Herste. xvij. s^. vj. d. ob. Town of Westinghanger. xvj. s^. xj. d.
ob. q Sum. xiij. l. xvij. s^. viij. d. ob. q
Hundredth of Oxeney.
Town of Wyttresham. lvj. s^. j. d. Town of Stone. lxxviij. s^. iiij. d.
Town of Ebbene. xij. s^. vj. d. Sum. vij. l. vj. s^. xj. d.
Hundredth of Heane.
Town of Saltwood. vj. l. vij. s^. viij. d. Town of Lymeane. v. s^. j. d.
Town of Postling. iiij. l. x. s^. xj. d. Sum. xj. l. iij. s^. viij. d.
Hundredth of Hame.
Town of Warehorne. lij. s^. v. d. Town of Shaddockherst. v. s^. ii. d. Town
of Roking. xxix. s^. Town of Snaue. x. s^. ij. d. Town of Orlaston. ix. s^.
ij. d. Sum. Cv. s^. xj. d.
Hundredth of Worth.
Town of Dymchurche. lxj. s^. x. d. Town of Bormershe. iiij. l. viij. s^.
iiij. d. Town of Newchurche. vj. s^. ij. d. ob. Town of Estbredge. xl. s^. j.
d. Town of Blackmanstone. xij. s^. Town of Westheathe. xxiij. s^. ij. d. q.
Town of Lymen. xxix. s^. iij. d. ob. Town of Aldingweke, and Organsweke.
xxij. s^. v. d. Sum. xiiij. l. iij. s^. iiij. d. q.
Hundredth of Folkestone.
Town of Lyden. xxxij. s^. j. d. ob. Town of Swyngfeld. Cvj. s^. ix. d. Town
of Akkam. xiij. l. xvij. s^. Town of Folkestone. ix. l. v. s^. v. d. ob. Town
of Hawking. xxv. s^. vj. d. Town of Acryse. xix. s^. iiij. d. Town of
Newington. viij. l. xiiij. s^. iiij. d. ob. Town of Cheriton. iiij. l. ij. s^.
iij. d. Sum. xlv. l. ij. s^. ix. d. ob.
Sum of this whole Lath of Shepway. CCiij. l. xij. s^. ix. d. ob. q.

The Lathe of Scray, or Shervvinhope.
Hundredth of Charte.
Ashtisforde. iij. l. ix. s^. Charte. iiij. l. xvij. s^. iiij. d. Betrisden.
iij. l. ij, s^. iij. d. Hothefielde. xl. s^. viij. d. ob. Sum. xiij. l. ix. s^.
ij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Longbridge.
Willesbroughe. liij. s^. vj. d. Kenington. iij. l. x. s^. vj. d. Seuington.
xviij. s^. vij. d. q. Kingsnothe. xxxj. s^. vj. d. Marsham. xij. s^. x. d. ob.
Hynxsell. xiij. s^. vj. d. ob. Ashetisforde. lij. s^. q. Sum. xij. l. xij. s^.
vj. d. ob.
Hundredth of Byrcholte.
Westbraborne. xxxj. s^. v. d. Hastingleyghe. xxj. s^. vj. d. ob. Bircholte.
xx. s^. iiij. d. ob. Eastbraborne. xix. s^. viij. d. ob. Sum. iiij. l. xiij.
s^. ob.
Hundredth of Boughton under Bleane.
Graueney. v. l. viij. s^. iiij. d. Harnehill. iiij. l. xiiij. s^. x. d.
Sellyng. ix. l. Boughton. ix. l. v. s^. vij. d. ob. q Sum.xxviij. l. viij. s^.
ix. d. ob. q.
Hundredth of Teneham.
Teneham. ix. l. ij. s^. ij. d. The Lathe of Scray, or Sherwinhope.
Linstede. ix. l. ix. s^. iiij. d. Eastchurche and Stonepit. xxiij. s^. iiij.
d. Hedcorne. xix. s^. Dodington. vj. l. x. s^. ij. d. Iwade. xj. s^. Sum.xxvij.
l. xv. s^.
Hundredth of Calehill.
Nashe. xx. s^. ij. d. Field. xxxiij. s^. viij. d. Hayslathe. xxxvj. s^. x. d.
Sandpit. xxvij. s^. vj. d. Charte. xl. s^. x. d. Wells. xviij. s^. Charing.
xlvj. s^. vj. d. Sandhill. xxvj. s^. vj. d. Acton. xvij. s^. x. d. Eastlenham.
xxxv. s^. viij. d. Stanforde. xl. s^. iiij. d. Pluckley. iij. l. Edisley. xxxv.
s^. Halingarse. xlv. s^. iiij. d. Se^n^r. xliiij. s^. ij. d. Halmeste. l. s^.
viij. d. Saint John's. vij. s^. vj. d. Grenehill. xiij. s^. iiij. d. Sum. xxix.
l. xix. s^. x. d.
Hundredth of Feuersham.
Stone. xxxviiij.s^. Preston. v.l. viij.s^. xj.d. Stallisfield. xlj.s^.
Luddenham. iij.l. vj.s^. viij.d Ore. x.s^. Hearty. xxij.s^. xj.d. Dauington.
iij.l. ij.s^. viij.d. Ospringe. iij.l. ij.s^. v.d. Feuersham. ix.l. xxij.d. ob.
Godneston. xxix.s^. viij.d. Selling. xxxviij.s^. j.d. Sheldwiche. iij.l.
vij.s^. v.d. Throwly. v.l. xvij.s^. viij.d. Badlesmere. xxxij.s^. ij.d.
Leueland. vj.s^. x.d. Neuenham. xlj.s^. v.d. Norton. xxx.s^. Boresfield.
xiij.s^. iiij.d. Boughton Malherb. xj.s^. viij.d. Eseling. iij.l. j.s^. j.d.
Sum. lij.l. iij.s^. ix. d. ob.
Hundredth of Tenterdene.
Tenterdene. xij. l. vij.s^. j.d. Ebnye. xxxvij.s^. x.d. Sum. xiiii.l. iiij.s^.
xj.d.
Hundredth of Roluinden.
Roluinden. iij.l. xj.s^. x.d. Benyndene. lviij.s^ viij.d. Sum. vj.l. x.s^. vj.
Hundredth of Barckley.
Bedyndene. v.l. Benyndene. xxxix.s^. Haldene. vj.s^. Sucardene. xv.s^. ij.d.
ob. q. Hedcorne. xij.s^. Fryttendene. vij.s^. viij.d. Cranebrooke. iij.s^. Sum.
ix.l.ij.s^.ix.d. ob.q.
Hundredth of Blackborne.
Appledore. xlv.s^.v.d.q. Kenardington. xl.s^.x.d. Woodchurch. v.l. xvj.s^. ob.
Warehorne. xvj.s^.ij.d. Shadockesherst. viij.s^. Haldene. iij.l. vj.s^. x.d.
Betrisdene. xvij.s^. Sum. xv.l.x.s^. iij.d. ob.q.
Hundredth of Branfield.
Hawkherst. iij.l. xviij.s^. iiij.d. Cranebrooke. vj.s^. viij.d. Sum. iiij.l.
v.s^.
Hundredth of Cranebrooke.
Biddendene. iij.s^. vj.d. Cranebrooke. v.l. xvj.s^. viij.d. Frittendene.
xxxv.s^. v.d. Stapleherst. xxviij.s^. Hedcorne. x.s^.x.d. Benyndene.
xxx.s^.x.d. Gowdherst. xxiij.s^. vj.d. Sum. xij.l. viij.s^. ix.d.
Hundredth of Selbrite^dene.
Newendene. viij.s^. Sandherst. xxxv.s^. x.d. Hawkherst. v.s^. viij.d. ob.
Benyndene. xxj.s^. ij.d. Sum. iij.l. x.s^. viij.d. ob.
Hundredth of Mardene.
Gowdherst. xxxviij. s^. iiij. d. Stapleherst. xvj. s^. ix. d. Marden. xix, s^.
viij. d. Sum. iij. l. xiiij. s^. viij. d.
Newendene. xxiiij. s^. xj. d. ^^.

The Balywike of Kay, in the Hundred of Mylton.
Hundredth of Mylton.
Tongue. xliij. s^. ix. d. Rodmersham. xix. s^. vj. d. ob. Kingsdowne. vj. s^.
vj. d. Borden. viij. s^. vj. d. Tunstall. iij. l. xiij. s^. iiij. d. Bredgar.
ix. s^. Morston. xxvj. s^. Sum. ix. l. vj. s^. vij. d. ob
The Balywike of Shepey, in the Hundred of Mylton.
Hundredth of Mylton.
Mynster. xj. l. ix. d. Eastchurche..xj. l. xiij. s^. x. d. ob. Wardon. iij. l.
vj. s^. iiij. d. Lesdon. iiij. l. xvij. s^. ix. d. Sum.xxx. l. xviij. s^. viij.
d. ob.
The Balywike of West, in the Hundred of Mylton.
Hundredth of Mylton.
Raynham. ix. l. xij. s^. vj. d. ob. Vpchurche. vj. l. x. s^. x. d. Hartlyp.
iij. l. iiij. s^. iiij. d. Newenten. iiij. l. iiij. s^. iiij. d. Halstone. xvj.
s^. Stokebury. xx. s^. v. d. Sum. xv. l. xvj. s^. j. d. ob.
The Balywike of Kay, in the Hundred of Mylton.
Hundredth of Mylton.
Sedingborne. vj. l. vij. s^. ij. d Bapchilde. iiij. l. ob. Tongue. xlvij. s^.
ij. d. Rodmersham. lv. s^. v. d. ob. Bredgar. ix. s^. vj. d. Tunstall, viij.
s^. vj. d. Morston. vij. s^. viij. d. Elmesley. xxvij. s^. x. d. Mylstede.
xxxj. s^. viij. d. Kingsdowne. xxj. s^. ob. Sum.xx. l. xvj. s^. ob.
The Balywike of Borden, in the Hundred of Mylton.
Hundredth of Mylton.
Mylton. vij. l. x. s^. vij. d. ob. Stokebury. xx. s^. Bredgar. iij. l. xv. s^.
iiij. d. Bycnore. xiij. d. Borden. iiij. l. x. s^. xj. d. Sedingborne Parua.
viij. s^. vj. d Tunstall. xv. s^. viij. d. Newington. xlj. s^. ix. d. Bobbing.
liij. s^. v. d. Halstowe. xlij. s^. iiij. d. Iwade. xxviij. s^. ix. d.
Sum.xxvj. l. viij. s^. iiij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Felberoughe
Cartham. Cxv. s^. iiij. d. Godmersham. Cix. s^. Chiltham. x. l. ij. s^. ix. d.
Sum.xxj. l. vij. s^. j. d.
Hundredth of Wye.
Bewbredge. vj. l. viij. s^. iiij. d. Tremworthe. lj. s^. Socombe. iiij. l. vj.
s^. iij. d. ob. Gotley. xiiij. s^. ix. d. Bempston. x. s^. vj. d. Wilmyngton.
x. s^. vij. d. Deane. x. s^. ij. d. ob. Shotenden. xix. s^. iij. d. Hellyinge.
v. s^. ob. Eastwell. lv. s^. iij. d. ob. Town. xxxviij. s^. ix. d. ob.
Cockliscombe. xlvj. s^. iij. d. Brompforde. xliiij. s^. ix. d. Tokingham
nothing, because it is in decay. Sum.xxvj. l. xij. d. ob.
The town of Osprenge. v. l. ij. s^. ij. d.

The Hundredth of Marden. vij. l. vj. s^. x. d.

Sum of this whole Lathe of Scray. CCCCxij. l. xvij. s^. x. d. ob. q.

The Lathe of Aylesforde.
Hundredth of Chetham.
The town of Chetham. viij. l. x. s^.
Hundredth of Gillingham, and Greane.
Gillingham and Greane. xv. l. ix. d. ob.
Hundredth of Eythorde.
Berstede. xvi j s^. iiij. d. Vlcombe. lix. s^. Otham. xx. s^. vj. d.
Wormesell. xxiij. s^. viij. d. Thorneham. xlj. s^. iiij. d. Hedcorne. xiiij.
s^. Charte. xxxv. s^. j. d. Boughton Maleherbe. xviij. s^. Boughton Mouchelsey.
xliiii s^. iiij. d. Holingborne. iiij. l. xiij. s^. iiij. d. East Sutton. xxix.
s^. iiij. d. Frenstede. x. s^. Leneham. vj. l. vij. s^. Harryetsham. lxiiij.
s^. Otterinden. xij. s^. ij. d. Sutto^ valance. xlv. s^. xj. d. ob. q Leedes.
xlvj. s^. viij. d. Bromefeld. iiij. s^. vj. d. Stokebery. xxxvj. s^. Langley.
xv. s^. iiij. d. Wychelynge. iiij. s^. xj. d. Aldington. xxv. s^. viij. d.
Bycknore. x. s^. iiij. d. Sum xxxix. l. xviiij. s^. v. d. ob. q.
Hundredth of Maydstone.
The Late of Aylesford.
Maydestone. xix. l. ix. s^. ij. d. Loose. xxxiiij. s^. iiij. d. Lynton and
Crookherst. l. s^. viij. d Westre. xliiij. s^. ij. d. Stone. lxxviij. s^. ij.
d. East Farleyghe. xlv. s^. j. d. ob. Detlinge. liij. s^. iiij. d. Boxley.
iiij. l. iij. s^. iiij. d. Sum.xxxviij. l. xviij. s^. iij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Chamell.
Chalk. lix. s^. Hallinge. xij. s^. Shorn. iiij. l. xvj. s^. iiij. d
Cowlinge. xxxix. s^. viij. d. Higham. iiij. l. xj. s^. iiii. d. Denton. xi. s^.
vi. d. Merston. viii. s^. i. d. ob. Frendsbury. iiii. l. xi. s^. i. d. ob.
Cookistone. lii. s^. ii. d. Cobham. Cvi. s^. viii. d. Strode. iiii. l. iii. s^.
vii. d. Clyffe. vi. l. xiii. s^. x. d. Stoke. xvii. s^. x. d. ob. Sum.xl. l.
iii. s^. ii. d. ob.
The town of Mallinge.
iiij. l. ix. s^. viij. d
Hundredth of Twyford.
Huntington. xv. s^. Yaldinge. lxxvij. s^. iij. d. East Peckham. lxviij. s^. j.
d. Netlest^d. vij. s^. vi. d. Watlinbury. vij. s^. ob. West Farley. vij. s^.
iiij. d. Testan. iiij. s^. vj. d. Marden. viij. s^ Brenchesley. iiij. s^.
Tudeley. xvij. s^. Sum.x. l. xv. s^. viij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Litlefeld.
Mereworth. xxiij. s^. iiij. d. East Peckham. xliij. s^. vij. d. West Peckham.
xxvij. s^. iiij. d Of the Baronie of Hadlow. xxiiij. s^. viij. d. Sum.v. l.
xiij. s^. xj. d.
The half Hundredth of Westbarnsted.

Westbarnested. xl. s^. j. d. ob.

Hundredth of Brenchesley.
Brenchesley. lxxiij. s^. iiij. d. Horsmondene. Cxj. s^. iij. d. Hotbysbroughe.
xlviij. s^. xj. d. Bayham. xxiiij. s^. vj. d. ob. Lamberherst. xviij. s^. iiij.
d. Beanecroche. ix. s^. ij. d. Taperegge. ix. s^. ij. d. Sum.xiij. l. xiiij.
s^. viij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Wachelingstone.
Borden. liiij. s^. ij. d. Spelherst. xxx. s^. ij. d. Stoningley in
Pepingley.xxxvj. s^. ix. d. Sheyborne Ruschall. xlij. s^. ix. d. q. Tudeley.
xxxiij. s^. x. d. ob. Asherste. ij. s^. Sum.ix. l. xix. s^. viij. d. ob. q.
The Lowy of Tunbrigge
Southe..iij. l. xiiij. s^. ij. d. Hilden. iiij. l. v. s^. Hadlowe. iiij. l. x.
s^. x. d. Tunbrigge. xliij. ^. s^. x. d. ob. Sum. xiiij. l. xiij. s^. x. d. ob.
Hundredth of Wrotham.
Wrotham. x. l. iij. s^. j. d. ob. Stansted. liij. s^. iiij. d. Itcham. lxv.
s^. iij. d. ob. Shibborne. xxiiij. s^. x. d. Sum. xvij. l. vj. s^. vij. d. Sum.
xvij. l. vj. s^. vij. d.
Hundredth of Larkefeld.
Byrlinge. lx^. s^. vj. d. ob. Pedelsworthe. xxiij. s^. ij. d. ob. q. Layborne.
xvj. s^. xj. d. S. Leonarde. xvj. s^. ij. d. ob. q. Ryashe. xxvj. s^. vij. d.
ob. q. Addington. xix. s^. j. d. ob. q. Offam. xiij. s^. ix. d. Trottysclyffe.
xvij. s^. vij. d. q. Snothelande. liiij. s^. ix. d. ob. Woldham, with the
Parish of S. Margaret. xxviij. s^. x. d. ob. Allington. x. s^. ij. d. Dytton.
v. s^. vij. d. Estemallinge. vii. l. ij. s^. ob. Borham. xliij. s^. ob.
Acleford. Cxv. s^. v. d. ob. q. Rugmerhyll. xx. s^. iiij. d. Horswondene.
xxiiij. s^. vij. d. ob. q. Huntington. vij. s^. ij. d. ob. q. Sum. xxxij. l.
vj. s^. iij. d. ob.
Hundredth of Hoo.
The town of S. Warburge. ix. l. ij. s^. viij. d. The town of S. Marie. iiij.
l. xiiij. s^. iiij. d. The town of All Saints. Cvj. s^. iii. d. The town of
Stoke. xxiii. s^. vj. d. ob. Halsto. lvij. s^. x. d. ob. West Peckham. xviij.
s^. vj. d. ob. Cobham. xxix. s^. vij. d. ob. Sum. xxv. l. xij. s^. x. d.
Hundredth of Toltingtrow.
Mepeham. vj. l. Luddesdon. xl. s^. Yelefeld. xlij. s^. viij. d. Gore. lxiiij.
s^. vij. d. Grauesend. l. s^. vj. d. Torn. xliiij. s^. vj. d. Mylton. l. s^.
vj. d. Sum. xx. l. xij. s^. ix. d.
Sum of this whole Lathe of Aylesford. CCC. l. xvj. s^. xi. d. ob.

The Lathe of Sutton at Hone.
Hundredth of Rokesley.
The town of Rokesley. xix. s^. x. d. Bexley. vj. l. xij. d. North Craye. xx.
s^. Orpington. iiij. l. xiij. s^. x. d. Fotyscraye. xvij. s^. v. d.
Chellesfeld. lxvj. s^. viij. d. Farneburghe. xlv. s^. iiij. d. Codeham. lxij.
s^. ij. d. West Wickham. xxxvij. s^. iiij. d. S. Marie Craye. ls^. j. d. Down.
lij. s^. iiij. d. Hese. xxiij. s^. viij. d. Keston. xij. s^. iiij. d. Heuer and
Lingell. xviij. s^. iij. d. Nokeholte. xv. s^. Pollescraye. xlviij. s^. viij.
d. Chesilhurst. xlv. s^. iiij. d. Sum. xxxvij. l. ix. s^. iij. d.
Hundredth of Axston.
Town of Southfleete. iiij. l. xj. s^. vj. d. ob. The Lathe of Sutton at Hone.
Sutton. Cxj. s^. vj. d. ob. Fawkeham. xxix. s^. ij. d. ob. Longefeld. xxiij.
s^. vj. d. Harteley. xxx. s^. vij. d. Ash. lxxix. s^. ij. d. ob. Rydley. xvij.
s^. Kingesdowne. xlj. s^. iij. d. Maplescombe. xvj. s^. viij. d. Farmingeham.
v. s^. v. d. ob. Stone. lxxiij. s^. ix. d. ob. Swanescomb. lxj. s^. ob.
Darrent. xxxviij. s^. ij. d. ob. Horton. iiij. l. ix. s^. vj. ob. Eynesforde.
xxxvij. s^. xj. d. Lullingstone. xliiij. s^. ij. d. ob. Sum. xxxix. l. x. s^.
viij. d.
Hundredth of Coddeshethe.
The town of Shorham. lxxviij. s^. Halsted. xiiij. s^. iiij. d. Otteford xxij.
s^. ij. d. Woodland. vij. s^. viij. d. Sundrishe. x. s^. viij. d. Seuenocke.
iiij. l. xv. s^. Kemsynge. xxix. s^. x. d. Seal. lix. s^. Cheueninge. xxxix.
s^. viij. d. Leighe. xiij. s^. Spelherst. v. s^. Sum. xviij. l. xiiij. s^.
iiij. d.
Hundredth of Somerdene.
The town of Cheuening. xvj. s^. iiij. d. Spelherste. xxij. d. Coueden. ix.
s^. iiij. d. Leighe. vj. s^. Penseherste. v. s^. vj. d. Heuer, with the Borowe
of Tunbridge. vj. s^. Sum. xlv. s^.
Hundredth of Westram.
Town of Etonbridge. xxiiij. s^. Westram. xlj. s^. ij. d. Coueden. xij. s^.
Brasted vpland. xiij. s^. iiij. d. Sum. iiij. l. x. s^. vj. d.
Hundredth of Bromley and Beckenham.
Town of Bromley. viij. l. Beckenham. Cxix. s^. vj. d. Sum. xiij. l. xix. s^.
vj. d.
The town of Brasted. xxvij. s^. v. d. ob.

Hundredth of Blackheath.
Town of Lewesham. x. l ij. s^. ij. d. Lee. lj. s^. x. d. Ketbrooke. xxviij.
s^. vij. d. Eltham. vij. l. xvj. s^. Chesylherst and Notingham. xliij. s^.
viij. d. Westgrenewich. lv. s^. x. d. Charleton. xlvij. s^. vij. d. Wolwyche.
xlj. s^. x. d. Eastgrenewiche. vij. l. iij. s^. ij. d. Sum. xxxviij. l. x. s^.
viij. d.
Hundredth of Little and Lesnes.
Town of Erythe. xiiij. l. iiij. s^. iij. d. Craford. vj. l. xvj. s^.
Plumsted. vij. l. xix. s^. Sum. xxviij. l. xix. s^. iij. d.
The town of Dertford. xiiij. l. iij. s^. vij. d.

Sum of this whole Lathe of Sutton at Hone. Clxxxxix. l. xv. s^. iij. d.

Fraunchiles.
Of the Duchy. Of the Archbishop. Of the Bishop of Rochester. Of the Deane of
Canterbury. Of Otforde. Of Wye. Of Asheford. Of Wrotham. Of Elfham. Of Osprenge.
Knights fees in old time, 254. and Di. whereof.27. belonged to the
Archbishop, eight to the Bishop of Rochester, and the rest to the King.

Forrestes and Parkes.
South Frythe, for North Frythe.3. parkes. Otforde, two. Knoll. Gromebridge.
Panthyrst, disparked. Penshirst. Brasted dis. Henden dis. Heuer dis. Bropam
dis. Wrotham dis. Ightam dis. Cage dis. Postern dis. Sutton dis. Langley dis.
Cooling. Byrling. Cobham. Alington dis. Merewood dis. Grenewiche. Eltham. 3.
Ashowre. Southparke. Lullingstone. Calehyl. Leedes. S. Augustines. Bedgebury.
Westenhanger. Halden. Haniswell. Hungershall. Lie dis. Folkston dis. Shorland.
Stonehyrst, dis. Stowting. Saltwood. Posting. At Ashford. Sissingherst.
Glassenbury. Oxenhoth.2. dis.
Hills of name.
Shooters hill Red hill. Gads hill. Cockshoot hill. Shorn hill. Northdownes.
Boxley hill. Boughton hill. Byrling hill. River hill. Raynam down. Myll hill.
Baram down. South downs.
Ryuers.
Thamis. Rauenshorne. Cray. Darent. Medwey. Rother. Lymen. Bewl. Genlade.
Wantsume. Stowre.
Bridges at
Depeford upon Ravens. Lewsham upon Ravens. Crayforde, upon Cray. Eato^ bridge
upon Medwey. Tu^bridge. 5 upon Medwey. Bra^tbridge upon Medwey. Twyford upon
Medwey. Yalding. upon Medwey. Teston upon Medwey. Farley upon Medwey. Maydstone
upon Medwey. Ailesford upon Medwey. Rochester upon Medwey. Shorham upon Dare^t.
Ainsford upon Dare^t. Farningha^ upon Dare^t. Dartford upon Dare^t. Chaford.
Lamberhirst. Bewl. Hetcorne. Newendene. Ashford. Canterbury.
Cities.
Canterbury. Rochester.
Markets, upon.
Tuesday, at Wrotham.
Wednisday, at Douor. Sandwiche. Canterbury. Grauesend. S. Mary Cray.
Thursday, at Maydstone.
Friday, at Sandwyche. Canterbury. Rochester. Tunbridge.
Saturday, at Rumney. Hythe. Dover. Sandwyche. Feuersham. Mylton. Asheford.
Cranebrooke. Lenham. Mallyng. Sennock. Dartford.

Fayres at
Ashford. 27. July, being S. Ruffines day. Bromley. 1. February, being S.
Bridgets day: and the.25. of July, being Saint James day. Brastede, on Thursday
in Rogation week. Charte the great. 25. March, being the Anunciation of the
blessed virgin Marie. Charing. 23. April, being S. Georges day. 13. October
being S Edwards day. 18. October. being S. Lukes day. Caunterbury, the tuesday in
Whitsou week. 27. July, being the seven fleepers day. 29. Sept. being S.
Michaels day: and. 29. December. being S. Thomas Beckets day. Cranbrook 29. May,
being S. Corones day: and. 24. June, being Midsomer day. Chilham. 25. July,
being S. James day. Charlton. 18. October. being S. Lukes day. Clyffe. 17.
September, being S. Lamberts day. Dover. 25. July, being S. James day. 24.
August, being S. Bartilmews day: and. 11. Nouemb. being S. Martines day.
Feuersham. 14. February being S. Valentines day: and. 1. August, being Lammas
day. Folkstone. 27. June, being S. Crescents day. Grauesend. 25. January, being
S. Paul's day: and 13. October, being S. Edwards day. Hertesham. 24. June,
being Midsomer day. Hedcorne. 28. June, being S. Leos day. Hide. 17. Nouemb.
being S. Hughes day. Lenham. 27. May, being S. Beedes day: and. 21. September,
being S. Mathews day. Lydde, 11. July: being S. Benets day. Maidstone. 1. May,
being Phillip and Jacobs day: 9. June, being S. Edmundes day: 6. October, being
S. Faithes day. and. 2. Fe^ being the Purification, or Candlemas day.
Meteworth. 10. August, being S. Laurence day. Malling. 21. September being S.
Mathews day. 1. August, being Lammas day. 6. November, being S. Lennards day.
S. Margarets near Dartford. 20. Iul. being S. Margarets day. Northfleete, the
Tuesday in Easter week. Otford. 24. August, being S. Bartilmews day. Pluckley.
5. December. being S. Nycholas even. Rochester. 19. May, being S. Dunstanes day:
and. 30. November being S. Andrews day. Romney. 1. August, being Lammas day.
Reculuer. 7. September. being the Nativity of the blessed virgin Marie.
S^ttingborne. 21. Sept. being S. Mathews day. Strowde. 10. August, being S.
Laurences day. Sandwiche. 23. Nouam. being S. Clements day. Sandhyrst. 7.
December. being the even of the Conception. Sennock. 6. December. being S. Nycholas
day: and 29. June, being S. Peter's day. Tunbridge, Ashwednesday: 24. June,
being Midsomer day. and. 18. October. being S. Lukes day. Tenterdene. 26. April,
being S. Cletes day. Wye. 13. March, being S. Theodores day. Wrotham. 23.
April, being S. Georges day.
Boroughes.
Canterbury. Rochester. Maydstone, and the ports towns.
Castles at,
Canterbury. Rochester. Dover, and the Castle at the Key. Leedes. Tunbridge.
Mylton. Grauesend. 2. Quynborow. Cooling. Sandowne. Dele. Walmer. Saltwood.
Alington. Shorham. Ainsford. Tongue. Layborne. Vpnore.
Honorable houses, belonging to the Prince, at
Grenewiche. Eltham. Dartford. Otford. Knoll. S. Augustines. Dover castle.
Dele castle.
To the Archbishop
Canterbury. Wingham. Forde.
To the Bishop of Rocchester.
Broomley. Rochester. Halling.
To men of honor,
Berling Cobham. Cooling. Penshyrst. Shorland.
Houses of poor people, with provision of living, at
Grenewiche. Orpington. Lullingstone. Shorhant. Senuock. Rochester. Great
Chart. Canterbury. Sandwiche. Dover.
Houses of poor people, without provision.
Dartford. Whitdiche. Chestnut wood.
Religious houses, that sometime were, and their yearly values.
Wingham. 84 li. by year. Mynster. Wye College. 93. li. Horton Priory. 95.
li. Bilsington Priory. 81. li. Newendene. Folkstone. 41. li. Douor Pryor. 170.
li. Meason dieu. Hospital there. 59. li. Bradsoll Abbay of S. Radigundes. 98.
li. Westlangdon. 56. li. Boxley. 204. li. Leedes Pryory. 362. li. Combwell. 80.
li. Feuersham. 200. li. Aninton Pryory there. Maydstone col. 159. li. Shepey.
129. li. Motenden. 60. li. Christ's Church. In Canterbury. S. Augustines. In
Canterbury. s. Sepulcres. 29. li. In Canterbury. S. Gregory's. In Canterbury.
S. Tho. hos. 23. li. In Canterbury. S. James hos. 32. li. In Canterbury. S.
Nicholas hosp. 109. li. In Canterbury. S. Mary's without Cant. Rochester
pryorie. 486. li. Cobham col. 28. li. Strood. 52. li. Malling Abbay. 218. li.
Higham pryorie. Tunbridge pryory. Ailcfford. Dartford. 380. Grenewiche. Meason
dieu, at Osprenge. Lesnes Ab.
Schools, at
Canterbury. Rochester. Sandwiche. Cranbrooke. Great Charte. Bydendene.
Tunbridge. Maydstone. Sennock.
The names of such of the Nobility, and Gentry, as the Heralds recorded, in
their visitation. 1574. To the which I have added such as I called to mind,
and have set a star before each of them, that they may be known from the rest.
A.
* Sir Christopher Allen. * Asheley. * Richard Agall. William Acher.
Christopher Abdy. Richard Austyn. * Robart Alcock. James Austyn.
B.
Sir Richard Baker. Nicholas Barham, Serieant at the law. * Edward Boys. *
Boughton. * John Barnes. * Humfrey Bridges. * Bonham. Ralfe Bosseuile. Robert
Byng. Danyell Bettenham. Thomas Brent. John Boys. Frauncis Bourne. Henry
Brochull. John Barham. * James Barham. William Brown. John Barowe. Nicholas
Beer. Thomas Blechenden. William Bedingfeld. Michaell Berifford. * Jerome
Bret. * Bam. * Nicholas Ballard.
C.
* Sir William Cobham, Lord Cobha^, and wardein of the five Ports. Sir Henry
Crispe. Sir Thomas Cotton. * Sir Rowland Clarke. * Sir Alexander Colpeper. Sir
Henry Cobham, George Catlyn. * Barthram Calthrop. * Chowne. William Cromer.
George Clifford. Humfrey Clarke. William Clarke. Robert Colwell. William
Cheyney. William Claybrook. William Crispe. William Cayser. * Justinian
Champneys. * Giles Crow. * Thomas Colpeper. * Cranwell. * Crumpton. * Carrell.
* John Cobham. Cuttes.
D.
* Sir William Damsel. * Thomas Darrell. * Robert Deane. * Dalyson. Richard
Deering. Delahay. James Dalton. * George Darrel. John Delapynd. Gaius Dixon.
William Drayner. * Digges. * Thomas Duke.
E.
Daniell Euering. Vincent Engham. Ralfe Edolf. Fraunces Eglesfield.
F.
Sir Thomas Fane. Thomas Fane. George Fogge. * Henry Fane. Thomas Fyneux.
Symond Fifeld. Thomas Farby. Alexander Fisher. Thomas Fluyd. Robert Fylmer.
John Franklyn. Moyle Fynche. * Thomas Fisher. * Ralfe Fynche.
G.
* The Lady Golding. Sir Thomas Guldeford. Edmund Gay. George Goldwell. Thomas
Greek. William Gybs. Henry Gylman. Thomas Godden, * Richard Garthe. * Barnabe
Gooche. * Norton Green.
H.
Sir George Howard. * Sir Perceuall Heart. Sir James Hales. William Hamon.
Richard Hardes. Roger Herleckenden. * Christopher Harflete. * Honywood. * John
Heyton. Thomas Honywood. Henry Haddes. John Harper. Martyn Herleckenden. *
Edward Hales. * Richard Heron. Ralf Hayman. Abacuk Harman. Thomas Hamon.
William Holmden. * George Heart.
I.
* Sir Humfry Iylbert. John Iden. William Isley. Paul Ihonson. * Martyn James.
K.
Sir Thomas Kempe. * Richard Knatchbull.
L.
* William Louelace, Serieant at the Law. * Thomas Louelace. John Lennard.
Richard Lone. Anthony Light. Thomas Lewson. William Lewknor. Lee. * William
Lambade.
M.
* Roger Manwood, Justice of the common place. George Multon. Edward Monings.
John Moyle. William Midleton. Walter Meyny. Anthony Meyny. William Mount. *
Edward Martyn. Moore.
N.
Sir Henry Neuill, Lord Aburgeuenny. * Alexander Neuill. Valentine Norton. *
Thomas Neuill. * Thomas Neuill.
O.
Henry Oxenden. John Orwell.
P.
* Thomas Potter. * Pain. William Partridge. Ciriac Petit. Henry Petit.
William Petit. William Pordage. Richard Parkar. * James Peckam. * John Pet. *
Palmer.
R.
* Sir John Ryuers. * Thomas Randall. Walter Roberts. * John Roberts. William
Roper. Robert Rudstone. Richard Rogers. Robert Rychers. William Raynes.
S.
* Sir Henry Sidney. Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord
President of Wales. Sir Warham Seintleger. Sir Thomas Scot. Anthony Sands.
John and Edw. Sibyll. Vincent S. Nicholas. John Sidley. Christopher Samson.
William Swanne. William Swanne. Thomas Stoughton. * Charles Scot. * Frauncis
Sandbache. * Reynold Scot. * Summers. * Frauncis Shakerley. * William Sydney.
T.
John Tuftone. Thomas Tourney. Roger Twisden. Morice Tichebourne. John Twyne.
Thomas Tuttesham. William Tylghman. * James Tebolde. John Tebolde. * Robert
Thomas. * Frauncis Thynn. * Richard Tomeyo.
W.
Sir Thomas Walsingha^. Thomas Wootton. * Thomas Watton. * Thomas Whetenhall. *
Ralfe Weldon. * George Wyat. * Thomas Wale. Thomas Willoughby. Frauncis
Wilford. John Wybarne. Richard Waller. John Wylkyns. Thomas Waren. William
Weston. Dauy Wylkyns. Robert Walker. * Edward Wyat. * Robert Wyseman.
The names of the Kentish writers, drawn (for the most part) out of the
Centuries of Master John Bale.
Androgeus, Comes. Ethelbertus, Rex. Lotharius, Rex. Eadricus, Rex. Wightredus,
Rex. Heddius Stephanus. Tobias Cantianus. Neotus Aldulphius. Serlo. Fridegodus.
Haimo. Folchardus. Obsernus. Eadmerus. Aernulphus. Elmerus. Odo Cantianus.
Alexander Cantuariensis. Eadmundus Gryme. Radulfus Roffensis. Richardus Pluto.
Richardus Douerensis. Sampson Durouermus. Radulfus Maidston. Geruasius
Dorobernensis. Solitarius Presbyter. Nigellus Wireker. Alexander, Theologus.
Simon Stokius. Ioannes Cantianus. Haimo de Feuersham. Thomas Spottus. Simon
Mepham. Petrus de Ikham. Guilielmus Pagham. Ioannes Tanetos. Thomas Chillenden.
Guilielmus Starnfield. Thomas Pontius. Simon de Feuersham. Martinus de Clyuo.
Thomas de Stureia. Reginaldus Cantuariensis. Radulphus Strodus. Thinredus
Douerius. Guilielmus Thorn. Richardus Maidston. Guilielmus Gillingham. Ioannes
Wrotham. Ioannes Oldcastle, Dominus Cobham. Ioannes Langdene. Guilielmus White.
Guilielmus Beckley. Ioannes Capgraue. Guilielmus Stapilhart. Ioannes Fisher.
Ioannes Frithe. Simon Fish. Thomas Wiat, Senior. Leonardus Digs. Ioannes
Ponetus. Richardus Turnerus.
Elizabetha, Regina. Hitherto (almost altogether) out of Master Bale: to the
which, these may be added, that have written since.
Ioannes Colpeper. Thomas Digs. Thomas Harman. Edouardus Deering. Thomas
Potter. Reginaldus Scot. Alexander Neuille. Georgius Heart. Guilielmus Darrel.
Thomas Twyne.
Hitherto of Kent in particularitie, and by way of Table: Whereof some part is
drawn out of credible Records: part is spoken of mine own knowledge, and part
is fetched from other men by information. For the first forte I hold my self
sufficiently warranted: but in the other twain, if either by want of memory I
have not taken all, or by too much credulity have mistaken any, I pray pardon
for it, and desire the Reader either to correct, or supply it, by his own
discretion and judgment. Now a few words of the Welshe History, and then to
the division of the Shyre and Country it self.

A short counsel, as touching the Bryttishe history.
ALbeit that I am justly occasioned (before I make mine entry) to speak
largely, for confirmation of the credit of our Bryttishe or Welshe history,
(the faith whereof is by William Petite, and Polidore Virgile called into
question) for as much, as I shall be enforced to use it as a ground work of my
whole frame and building: yet for that I mind not in any part of this my
labor, to handle with many words, matters in controversy, (being otherwise
sufficiently charged with things more incident to my purpose, and no less fit
to be known.) And because also that matter has already found more learned
and diligent patrones, I will with few words pass it over, contenting my
self, if I shall have added to other men's heaps, one small proof or twain,
which by chance I gleaned after them, and referring such as desire more
abundant testimonies, to the reading of John Leland, and Sir John ap Rese, two
learned men, that have plentifully written therein.

The state of the matter is this, whether Geffrey of Monmouthe Geffray of
Monmouth
be the author of the Bryttish story (as William Newborow, and Polydore
charge him) or the translatour thereof only out of the Bryttishe, as him self
in his book professes. Whereof must needs ensue, That if the work be his
own, it has no more credit, then he him self (being the author) could
bring unto it: But if he did only translate that, which Walter the Archdeacon
of Oxforde brought out of Norma^die, and delivered unto him, Then does not ye
estimation depend upon Geffray, but upon some other (wh^^soeuer he were) that
first wrate it.

Now, that it may appear unto you, that he was only the interpreter of that
which came out of Normandy, I will call to witness, Henry the Archdeacon of
Huntington, who lived in the time of king Henry the first, and was somewhat
before William Petites days, who (as him self confesses) was borne in the
beginning of the reign of king Stephan, about which time Geffray of Monmouthe
was on live also.

This Henry (besides a learned history of the realm) wrate three several
treatises which I have seen: One entitled, De miraculis Angliae: An other,
De serie Regu^ potentissimorum: And the third, De origin Regum Brytannorum.
In this latter, he says plainly. That at such time as he trauayled toward
Rome, he found (in an ancient Library of the Abbay of Bec) an old book,
entitled likewise, De origin Regum Brytannoru^, the which beginning at the
arrival of Brute, ended with the acts of Cadwalader, and agreed thoroughout
(as by collatio^ I collected) with this our Bryttishe history, which I doubt
whether Henry of Huntington had ever seen. Now therefore, if this were an
old book in his time, it could not be new in the days of Petite, that
succeeded him: And if the argument were written before in the Bryttish tongue,
it is very probable, that he was not the first author, but only the translator
thereof in Latin. For further likelyhoode whereof, I my self have an ancient
Bryttish, or Welshe copy, which I reserve for show, and do reverence for the
antiquity, little doubting, but that it was written before the days of William
Petite, who, as he was the first, So upon the matter reckon I him the only
man, that ever impugned the Bryttishe history. For as touching Polydore
Polydore.
(though he were a man singularly well learned) yet since he was of our own
time, and no longer since, his forces must of necessity be thought to be bent,
rather against the verity, then against the antiquity of that writing.
Wherein if he shall seek to discredit the whole work, for that in some parts
it contains matter, not only unlikely, but incredible also: then shall he
both deprive this Nation of all manner of knowledge of their first beginning,
and open the way for us also to call into question the origin, and antiquities
of Spain, France, Germany, yea and of Italy his own country: in which,
that which Liuie reports of Romulus and Remus, Numa and Aegeria, is as far
removed from all suspicion of truth, as any thing, whatsoever ye Galfride
writes, either of Brute, Merlin, or King Arthur himself.

Seeing therefore, that even as corn has his chafe, and metal his dross,
so can there harldly any writer of the ancient history of any nation be
found out that has not his propre vanities mixed with sincere verity: the
part of a wise Reader shall be, not to reject the one for doubt of the other, but
rather with the fire and fan, of judgment and discretion, to try and sift
them a sunder. And as my purpose is for mine own part, to use the commodity
thereof, so often, as it shall like me: so my counsel shall be, that other men
will, both in this and other, observe this one rule, That they neither reject
without reason, nor receive without discretion, and judgment.

Thus much in my way, for assertion of the Bryttish history I thought good to
say once for all, to the end that from hencefoorthe (whatsoever occasion of
debate shall be offered, concerning either the verity or antiquity of the same)
I neither trouble my self, nor tarry my Reader, with any further defense, or
Apology.

The Bishops See, and Diocese, of Canterbury.
HE that shall advisedly consider the plot of this Shyre, may find three
diverse (and those not unfit) ways, to divide it: One, by breaking the whole
into the East and West Kent: The order of this description.
An other, by parting it, (as Watling streate leads,) into North, and Southe
Kent: And a third, by seuering it into the two distinct Dioceses of Canterbury,
and Rochester. Of these three, I have determined to choose the last, both
because that kind of division has as certain limits, as any of the former,
and for that, it seems to me the most convenient seuerance, being wrought
both by bound of place, and of jurisdiction also. And because the Sea of
Canterbury, is not only the more worthy of the twain, but also the
Metropolitan, and chief of the whole realm: I have thought good, in the
first place, to show the beginning and increase of that Bishopric, and
afterward to prosecute the description and history of the principal parts
belonging to the same.

It is to be seen, in the Brittishe history, and others, that at such time
as King Lucius (the first christened Prince of this land) had renounced the
damnable darkness of Paganism, Flamines turned into Bishops.
and embrased the glorious light of the Gospel of God, he changed the
Archeflamines of London, York, and Caerleon, into so many Archebishops: and
the Flamines, of other inferior places, into inferior Bishops, through out
his whole realm. Howbeit, this matter is not so clear, but that it is
encountered by William Petit, which (in the Proheme of his history) affirms
boldly, that the Britons which professed Christian religion within this Island,
before ye coming of Augustine, were contented with Bishops only, and that
Augustine himself was the very first, that ever had the Archbishops Palle
amongst us. As touching Bishops it is evident by Beda him self, that both
before, and in Augustines time, Wales alone had seven at the lest: but as for
Archebishops (although for my own opinion I think with William, the rather
for yt I suppose, yt the simplicity of ye Britain clergy, was not as the^
enamoured with the vain titles of the Roman arrogance) yet to the end that the
reader may be thereby the more justly occasioned, to make inquisition of the
truth in that point, it shall not be greatly out of his way, to send him by
Siluester Giraldus, Canbrensis, a man (considering ye age (excellently well
learned, and which lived about ye same time with William Petit, or William of
Newborow) as some call him. This man, in a book which he entitled, Itinerariu^
Walliae, sets forth most plainly the Archbishops, yt in old time were at
Caerleon, their translation from thence to Saint David's, their transmigration
from Saint David's over the Sea into Normandy, and the whole Catalogue of their
succession in each of those places. But here, some man, thinking me more
mindful to direct others, the^ careful to keep mine own wai, will happily ask
me, what pertineth it (I pray you to Canterbury, whether there have been
Archbishops at London, York, and Carleon, or no? London spoiled of the
Archebishopricke.
yes (no doubt) it makes greatly to our treatise of Canterbury: for, not only
ye forenamed British history, Matthew of Westminster, and William of
Malmesbury do show manifestly, that Augustine by great injury spoiled London of
this dignity of ye Archbishops chair, bestowing ye same upon Canterbury: but
ye Epistle of Pope Gregory himself also, (which is to be read in ye
Ecclesiastical story of Beda) co^uinceth him of manifest presumption and
arroga^cie, in yt he sticked not to prefer his own fantasy and liking before
ye Pope his masters institution and commandment. For Pope Gregory appointed
two Archbishops, ye one at London the other at York, whereof either should
have under him 12. inferior Bishops, and whereof neither should be subject to
other: only for Augustines honor) he willed, that they all should be under
him during his life. But Augustine not so contented, both remained resident
during al his life at Canterbury, and before he died consecrated Laurence
Archbishop there, least, either by his own death, or want of another fit man
to fill the place, the chair might happily be carried to London, as Gregory
the Pope had appointed.

Matthew of Westminster says, that Merlin had prophesied, Dignitas Londoniae
adornabit Dorobriniam. William Malmesbury writes, that he did it, Sedulitate
Regis hospitis, (meaning King Ethelbert) and ch^ritate ciuium captus: But I
think verily, that he meant thereby to leave a glorious monument of his
swelling pride and vanity: whereunto I am the rather led, by the observation
of his stately behavior used toward the Bryttish Bishops, and some other of
his acts, that savor greatly of vaineglory, ambition, and insolence.
Whatsoever the cause were that moved him thus to apparel Canterbury with the
Archbishop of Londons Palle, at Canterbury has it continued ever sithence,
saving that at one time, Offa the King of Mercia (or middle England) partly of a
disposition to honor his own country, and partly of a just displeasure
conceived against Lambright (or Ianbright, as some copies have it, the
thirteenth Archbishop,) for matter of treason, translated the honor of the Sea, either wholly, or partly, to Lichefield: But there it remained not long,
for after the death of King Offa, Kenulsus his successor restored Ethelard to
his place at Canterbury again.

The increase of the Archebishopricke,
The whole Province of this Bishopric of Canterbury, was at the first divided
by Theodorus (the seuenthe Bishop) into five Diocese only: howbeit in process
of time it grew to twenty and one, besides it self, leaving to York (which
by the first institution, should have had as many as it) but Durham,
Conttentio^ for the Primacie.
Carleil, and Chester only. And whereas by the same ordinance of Gregory,
neither of these Archebishoppes ought to be inferior to other, save only in
respect of the prioritie of their consecration, Lanfranc (thinking it good
reason that he should make a conquest of the English Clergy, since his
master King William had vanquished the whole nation) conte^ded at Windsore
with Thomas Norman (Archebishoppe of York) for the primacie, Hugo the Popes
Legate recovered it from him: so that ever since, the one is called Totius
Angliae primas, and the other, Angliae primas, without any further addition. Of
which judgment (one forsooth) has yielded this great reason: that even as
the Kentish people, by an ancient prerogative of manhood do challenge the
first front in each battle, from the inhabitants of other countries: So the
Archbishop of their shyre, ought by good congruence to be preferred before the
rest of the Bishops of the whole Realm. Moreover, whereas before time, The
Archebishoppes place in the general counsel.
the place of this Archbishop in the general Counsel, was to sit next to the
Bishop of saint Ruffines, Anselmus (the Successor of this Lanfranc) for
recompense of the good service that he had done, in ruffling against Priests
wives, and resisting the King for the inuestiture of clerks) was by Pope
Vrbane endowed with this accession Popes right foot, who then said withal,
Includamus hunc in orb nostro, tanquam alterius orbis Papam.

And thus the Archebishops of Canterbury, by the fraud of Augustine, by the
power of Lanfranc, and by the industry of Anselme, were much exalted: but how
much that was to the grievous displeasure, and pining envy, of the Archbyshops
of York, you shall perceive by that which follows.

King Henry the first, kept (upon a time) a stately Christmas at Windsore,
Wrestling for the primacie.
where (the manner of our kings then being at certain solemn times to wear
their crowns) Thurstine of York (having his cross borne up before him)
offered to set the crown upon the kings head: But William of Canterbury
withstoode it stoutly, and so prevailed by the favor of the king, and the
help of the standers by, that Thurstine was not only disappointed of his
purpose, but he (and his cross also) thrust clean out of the doors.

William of York (the next in succession after Thurstine, both in the Sea and
Quarrel) perceiving that the force of his predecessor prevailed nothing,
attempted by his own humble means (first made to the king, and after to the
Pope) to win the coronation of king Henry Theobald the next Archbishop of
Canterbury: But when he had received repulse in that sort of suite also, and
found no way left to make auengement upon his enemy, he returned home al
wroth, and (mixing poison in the chalice, at his Mass) wreaked the anger upon
himself.

Synod, assembled at Westminster, in the time of king Henry the second, before
Cardinal Hugo, (Pope Alexanders Legate) between Richard and Roger, then
Archbishops of these two Sees upon occasion, that Roger of York coming of
purpose (as it should seem) first to the assembly, had taken up the place on
the right hand of the Cardinal, which when Richard of Canterbury had espied,
he refused to sit down in the second room, complaining greatly of this
prejudice done to his See: whereupon, after sundry replies of speech, the
weaker in disputation (after the manner of shrewd schole boys in London
streats) descended from hot words, to hasty blows, in which encounter, the
Archbishop of Canterbury (through the multitude of his meiney) obtained the
better: So that he not only plucked the other out of his place, and (trampling
upon his body with his his feet) al to rent and tare his Casule, Chimer, and
Rochet, but also disturbed the holy Synod therwithal, in such wise that the
Cardinal for fear, betook him to his feet, the company departed their
business undone, and the Bishops themselves moved suite at Rome, for the
finishing of their controversy. By these, and such other successes, on the one
side, the Bishops of Canterbury following, took such courage, that from
thencefoorth, they would not permit the Bishops of York to bear up the
cross, either in their presence, or province: And on the other side, the
Bishops of York conceived such grief of heart, disdain, and offense, that
from time to time, they spared no occasion to attempt both the one and the
other.

Parleament, holden at London, in the reign of King Henry the third, Boniface
(Archbishop of Canterbury) interdicted the Londoners, because they had suffered
the Bishop of York to bear up his cross whiles he was in the city. And much
to do there was (within a few years after) between Robert Kylwarby of
Canterbury, and Walter Giffard of York, because he of York advanced his
cross, as he passed through Kent toward the general Counsel.

Peckam (Archebyshop of Canterbury) and William Winkewane, The end of the
strife for the supremacy.
and John de Roma (Archbyshops of York) in the days of King Edward the
first. At the length, the matter being yet once more set on foot between
Simon Islepe (the Archbishop of this country) and his adversary (the
incumbent of York for that time) King Edward the third, in whose reign that
variance was reuined, resumed the matter into his own hand, and made a final
composition between them, the which he published under his broad seal to
this effect: first, that each of them should freely, and without empeachement
of the other, bear up his cross in the others Province, but yet so, that he
of York and his successors for ever, in sign of subjection, should within
two months after their inthronization, either bring, or send, to Canterbury,
the Image of an Archbishop bearing a cross, or some other Jewel wrought in
fine gold, to the value of forty pounds, and offer it openly there upon
Saint Thomas Beckets shryne: then, that in all Synodes of the clergy, and
assemblies where the King should happen to be present, he of Canterbury should
have the right hand, and the other the left: finally, that in broad streets,
and high ways, their crossebearers should go together, but that in narrow
lanes, and in the entries of doors and gates, the crossier of Canterbury
should go before, and the other follow, and come behind.

So that (as you see) the Bishops of Canterbury evermore preuayling by favor
and obstinacy, they of York were driven in the end, to give over in the plain
field, for very despair, wanhope, and weariness.

But hear by the way, I would feign, for my learning, know of these godly
Fathers, or rather (since themselves can not now make answer) of some of their
ungodly favorers, whether this their Helena, this cross (for the bearing
whereof they contended so long, and so bitterly, that a man might doubt with
the Poet, Peceat vter Cruce dignius) whether (I say) it were exalted, as the
sign of that Cross whereon Christ triumphed over the Devil, or else but for a
flagge and antsigne of their own pride, whereby they sought to triumph and
insult the one over the other? And again, if it were Christ's cross, then why
they did forbid it to be advanced, at any time, by any person, or in any
place? Or if it were but their own, then why they did, and yet do, command
us simple souls, not only with great humility, but with divine honor also,
to prostrate our selves, and to adore it? I am sure they may be ashamed to
affirm it to be the one, and I think they will be ashamed to confess it to be
the other. I will cease therefore to urge it any further, and will prosecute the
Catalogue of the Archebishoppes of this See, since the arriual of Augustine. In
the which, the first seven, be of that number which Pope Gregory sent hither
out of Italy: The next twenty three, and Stigande, were Saxons: all the
residue, Normanes and Englishmen. And because there is some variance as
touching the times of their continuance and sitting, I purpose to show (under
one view) the opinion of two sundry authors, so far forth as they have
spoken thereof, that is to say, William of Malmesbury, and an ancient
Chronicler of Couentrie, (whose name I have not hitherto learned) and in the
residue to follow our own late and received writers.

The beginnings of their gouernements, after the Annals of Canterbury. The
years of their Continuance in government, after the opinion of An. Do. Will.
Malm. Chro. Couen. 599. Augustine, whom our Louanistes call, ye English
Apostle. 16. 16. 612. Laurence. 5. 5. 617. Mellite. 5. 5. 624. Iustus. 3. 9.
626. Honorius. 26. 20. 653. Deusdedit, or Deodat the first Saxon. 10. 9.
Wighard, which dyed at Rome before his consecration. 668. Theodore a Grecian
borne, and the last of those that came out of Italy. 22. 22. 691. Brightwald.
37. 38. 731. Tatwine. 3. 4. 737. Nothelinus, or Iocelin 5. 7. 741. Cuthbert ye
first that was buried in Christeschurche, and that obtained churchyards for
England. 17. 17. 759. Bregwine. 3. 3. 774. Lanbright, or Ianbright. in his time
the Sea was translated to Lichefield. 17. 17. 790. Aethelwardus, he recovered
the Sea to Canterbury again. 23. Wulfredus, or Wifred 28. 28. 830. Fegeldus,
or Swithredus. three months. 831. Celnothus, or Eilnothus. 41. 41. 890.
Etheredus, or Etheldredus. 18. 18. Pleimundus, one of the learned men, yt
instructed king Alfred. 34. 34. 925. Athelmus 12. 13. 947. Wulfhenius, or
Wulfhelmus. 13. 14. 956. Odo, or Odosegodus. 5. 20. 958. Elfsius, or Elfsinus,
or Elsinus, which dyed before his consecration, in his journey toward Rome,
in revenge (as they say) because he came in by Simonie, and sporned at the
Tumbe of his predecessor. Brithelmus, was elected: but king Edgar rejected him.
970. Dunstanus, the famous Iuggler. 26. 989. Ethelgarus. 1. 1. 991. Siricius,
by his advice King Etheldred gave to the Danes a great sum of money. 5. 5.
996. Alfricus. 1004. Aelfegus, he was slain by the Danes. 6. 6. 1012.
Liuingus, or Ethelstanus. 7. 7. Eilwardus. 1020. Egelnothus. 18. 18. 1038.
Eadsius, or Edsinus, who for siknes committed ye charge to Siwardus, the Abbat
of Abingdon, and after Bishop of Rochester which nevertheless vouchesafed
not to find him necessaries. 11. 11. 1050. Robertus Gemeticensis, the first
Norman, advanced by King Edward ye confessor. 12. 12. 1053. Stigandus, deposed
by the conqueror. 17. 17. 1072. Lanfrancus, in his time the Bishops Sees
were first removed from villages, to Cities. 19. 19: 1093. Anselmus, in his
time law was first made to divorce Priests from their wives. 16. 16. 1114.
Radulphus Roffensis, surnamed Nugax. 9. 1122. Willimus de Corueil, he crowned
Stephan, against his faith given to Maude the Empress. 15. 1138. Theobaldus,
he was endowed first, with the title of Legatus Natus, by Pope Innocent the
second. 23. 1162. Thomas Becket, the first Englisheman after the Conquest. 8.
Robertus, the Abbat of Bec was elected, but he refused it. 1173. Richardus, the
Pryor of Dover. 9. 1183. Baldwinus, the bishop of Worcester: he dyed in the
expedition, that king Richard the first made into Syria, and was before at
great contention with the Monks. 7. Reginaldus, he dyed before consecration.
1193. Hubertus. 13. 1205. Stephanus de Langton, the cause of the trouble of
king John. 21. 1228. Gualterus de Euesham, elected, but refused both by the
King and Pope, for ye insufficiency of learning. 1229. Richardus Magnus. 8.
1233. Johannes, the Subprior of Christ's church, was elected after the Pope had
refused one Ralph Neuel, but this John resigned, in whose place John Blund was
chosen, but that election also was repealed. 1234. Edmundus de Abingdon, the
one and twenty Bishop of Cant. that the Popes had canonized. He departed the
realm, and died for anger of a repulse 7. 1244. Bonifacius, uncle to Elenor,
the wife of Henry the third. 16. 1270. Willelmus de Chillenden, elected, but
he resigned to the Pope, who chose Kilwardby. 1272. Robertus Kilwardby, Friar
preacher. 6. 1278. Johannes Burnel, Bishop of Bathe elected, but the Pope
refused him, and appointed Friar Peckam. 1279. Johannes de Peckam a friar
Minor, born in Sussex. 13. 1292. Robertus de Winchelsey, a notable traitor to
the King, and true servant to the Pope. 19. Thomas de Cobham, elected, but
refused by the Pope, he was commonly called, Bonus Clericus. 1312. Walterus
Reignold. 14. 1328. Simon de Mepham. 5. Thus far out of the Story of
Couentrie. 1334. Ioha^nes de Stratford. 29. 1350. Johannes Offord, or Vfford.
Thomas Bradwardine, he erected the Black friars in London. 1350. Simon Islepe;
he founded Canterbury College in Oxford. 17. 1367. Simon Langham. 2. 1369.
Wilhelmus Witlesey. 5. 1375. Simon Sudbury. 6. 1381. Wilhelmus Courtenay. 15.
1396. Thomas Arundel attainted of treason, by Parleament, in the one and
twenty year of Richard the second. 18. Rogerus Walden, in the exile of
Arundel: but deposed: Then made Bishop of London, and again deposed, and dyed
in the seventh year of Henry the fourth. 1414. Henricus Chicheley, built
Alsoules, and S. John's College in Oxford, and the College of Higham. 29.
1443. Johannes Stafford. 8. 1452. Ioannes Kempe. 3. 1455. Thomas Bourchier. 33.
1486. Ioannes Moorton, builded much at Knol, and repaired Lambeth. 14. Thomas
Langton elected, but he dyed before consecration. 1500. Henricus Deane, or
Deny. ^. Willielmus Warham, builded Otforde house. 28. Thomas Cranmer, he was
burned for the truth. Reginaldus Poole. 3. Mathaeus Parker.

Thus have you the succession of seventy Archbishops, in the recital whereof,
I do (of purpose) spare to dispute the variance arising amongst writers, as
touching the continuance, and true times of their government, which
discrepance, grows partly, for the defaulte of the auctors themselves, not
observing the due account of years, and partly by the vnskil of such as have
untruly copied out their works: I willingly reserve also for other places,
sundry the hystories of their lives and doings, both because I think it
fruitless, to reconcile such manner of disagreements, and also, for that (as
I said before of the Kings) I deem it impertinent to my purpose, to speak
further of any thing, then the very place in hand, shall justly give me
occasion.

It follows therefore, that according to promise, The order of this
description of Kent.
I handle such particular places within this Diocese, as are mentioned in
history, in which treaty, I will observe this order. First to begin at
Tanet, and to peruse the East and Southe shores, til I come to the limits,
between this Shyre, and Sussex: then to ascend Northward, and to visits such
places, as lie along the bounds of this Diocese and Rochester, returning by the
mouth of Medwey to Tanet again, which is the whole circuit of this
Bishopric: and lastly, to describe such places, as lie in the body and
midest of the same.

Tanet, called in Brytish, Inis Rhuochym, of the Shore Rutupi: it is named of
some writers, in Latin (or rather Greek) Thanatos, in Saxon, tenet, in stead
of aenet.
No snakes in Tanet.
IVlius Solinus (in his description of England) says thus of Tanet: Thananatos
nullo serpitur angue, and asportata inde terra angues necat. There be no snakes
in Tanet (says he) and the earth that is brought from thence will kill them.
But whether he wrote this of any sure understanding that he had of the quality
of the soil, or only by conjecture at the word (...) which in Greek
signifies death, or killing, I wot not, and much less dare I determine,
because hitherto neither I my self have heard of any Region hereabout (only
Ireland excepted) which bears not both snakes and other venomous worms,
neither am I yet persuaded, that this place borrowed the name out of the Greek,
but rather took it of the propre language, of this our native country: For
aenet, in the Saxon, or old Engglishe tongue, sounds as much as, moysted,
or watered, which deriuation, how well it stands with the situation of
Tanet, being Peninsula, and watered (in manner) round about, I had rather
without reasoning, refer to every man's judgment, then by debate of many
words, either to trouble the reader, or to interrupt mine own order. Leaving
the name therefore, I will resort to the thing, and show you out of Beda, and
others, the content and stoarie of this I Will.

There lies (says Beda, speaking of the place, where King Ethelbert
entertained Augustine) in the East part of Kent, an Island, called Tanet,
containing (after the manner of the English account) six hundred families,
or Hides of land (as the Saxon book of Beda has) which be in deed after the
opinion of ancient writers, plough lands: It is divided from the continent,
or main land, by the river called Wantsume, which is about three furlongs
broad, and to be passed over in two places only: Hereunto if you add the
opinion of Polydore, the description will be the more evident. It conteyneth
(says he) about nine miles in length, and not much less in breadth, and it
was some time divorced from the continent, by a water, but now it is almost
united again. Thus much for the description.

As touching ye history, you may read in Geffray of Mo^mouth, that after such
time as the Brytons had deposed Vortiger their King, for that he brought in the
Saxons, which began soon after their entry to show themselves in deed,
such as they were in name, For (Seax) in their language signifies a sword, or
axe, or hatchet.
(not shieldes against the Pictes and Scots, but swords to shead the Brittan
blood) Vortimer his son (whom they places in his seat) so straightened the
Saxons in this I Will, (the which, as William of Malmesbury writes, Vortiger had
given them to inhabit, at their first Arrival) that for a color they sent
Vortiger to treat with him of peace, and in the mean while for fear,
conveyed them selves into their Ships, and Sailed homewarde again. The same
Author reports, that after this, Cador, (the Duke of Cornwall) by
commandment of King Arthur, chased the Saxons into Tanet, where he slew
Childric their leader, and received many of the residue to grace and mercy.

Howbeit the Saxons themselves, after that in process of time, they had gotten
the dominion over the Britons, enjoyed not the possession of Tanet in much
better quiet then the Britons had done before them. For in the days of King
Athulf, (the father of Alfred) the Danes fought in Tanet against Ealhere, (the
Duke, or captain Kent) and Huda, (the Duke of Surrey) and slaying them both
ouerthrewe their powers, and possessed the I Will. Tanet: and lastly Etheldred)
they herried, spoiled, and sacked it in such sort, that the religious persons
were constrained to abandon the place, for I find, that shortly after, King
Canutus gave the body of Mildred, and all the lands belonging to Mynster Abbay
(that the^ was in this I Will) to the Monks of saint Augustines at Canterbury.

But, for as much as good order requires, that I should tell you of the
foundation, before I speak of the fall, you shall hear out of William Thorn,
(one that made an appendix to the history of Thomas Spot, both Monks of Saint
Augustines) the occasion of the first fabulous beginning of this Abbay.

The occasion of the building of Minster Abbay.
Certain servant, or officers (says he) of Egbright (the third King of Kent
after Ethelbert) had done great injury to a noble woman (called Domneua, the
mother of Saint Mildred) in recompense of which wrongs the King made an
Herodian oath, and promised upon

The woman (instructed belike by some Menkishe counselour) begged of him so
much ground to build an Abbay upon, as a tame dear (yt she nourished) would
run over at a breathe: Hereto the King had consented forthwith, saving that
one Tymor (a counseler of his) standing by, blamed him of great
inconsideration, for that he would upon the uncertain course of a Dear,
depart to his certain loss, with any part of so good a soil, but the earth
(says William Thorn) immediately opened, and swalowed him alive, in memory
whereof, the place till his time, was called Tymor sleep. Well, the King and
this Gentlewoman proceeded in their bargain, the Hynde was put forth, and it
ran the quantity of forty and eight ploughlands, before it returned.

And thus Domneua (by the help of the King) builded at Mynster (within that
precinct) a Monastery of Nonnes, upon such like discretion, (you may be sure)
as Ramsey Abbay was pitched, even where a Bull by chance scraped with his
foot, and as Rome it self (for whose favor these follies be devised) was
edified, where the she Woulfe gave Romulus and Remus suck. For it was called
Roma, of Ruma, a pappe or dugge.


Over this Abbay, Mildred (of whom we spoke) the daughter of Marvel, (that
was son to Penda, King of middle England) became the Lady and Abbasse: who
because she was of noble lineage, and had gotten together Theodorus the seventh
Bishop) veiled for Nonnes, she easily obtained to be registered in our English
Calendar, and to be worshipped for a Saint, both at Tanet, while her body lay
there, and at S. Augustines, after that it was translated: And no marvel at
all, for if you will believe the author of the work called (Noua Legenda
Angliae) your self will easily vouchsafe her the honor.

This woman (says he) was so mightily defended with divine power, S. Mildred^
miracles.
that lying in a hot oue^ three hours together, she suffered not of the
flame: She was also endued with such godlyke virtue, that coming out of
France, the very stone whereon she first stepped at Ippedsflete in this Isle,
received the impression of her foot, and retained it for ever, having besides
this property, that whether so ever you removed the same, it would within
short time, and without help of man's hand, return to the former place
again: And finally, she was so diligently guarded with Gods Angel, attending
upon her, that when the devil (finding her at prayers) had put out the candel
that was before her, the Angel forthwith lighted it for her again.

And this (no doubt) was the cause, that the Religious persons of S.
Augustines, and of S. Gregory's at Canterbury, fell at great dissension for
her, each affirming, that after the spoil of Tanet, her bones were removed to
their Monastery: the one clayming by King Canutus, Lanfranc, who (as they
affirmed) at the dotation of their house, bestowed upon it (amongst other
things of great price) the translated relics of Mildred, and Edburgaes bodies.

Howsoever that were, they both made merchandise of her miracles, and the
Monks of S Augustines perceiving, that by the dissolution of the Monastery,
and the absence of the Saints, their town of Minster, Tanet was fallen to
decay, of very conscience, and for pities sake, by the mean of Hughe their
Abbat, procured at the hands of King Henry the first, the grant of a Market,
to be holden there, which I wot not whether it inioyeth to this day, or no.

Thus much of the Isle and Mynster Abbay. Now a word or two touching
Ippedsflete, whereof I spoke before, and of Stonor another place within the
Isle, and then I will leave Tanet, and proceed in my journey. This
Ippedsflete, Ippedsflete,
is the place where Hengist and Hors^ (the Saxon captains) came first on land,
and it is of diverse Chronicles diversely termed, some calling it Ippinesflete,
others Heoppinesflete, and others Wippedsflete, These of the last sort write,
that it took the name of one Wipped, (a noble man amongst the Saxons) who
only was slain on that part, when Aurel. Ambrose (the leader of the Britons)
lost twelve of his principal chiefteins in one conflict. In deed, the name
sounds, the place where Wipped, or Ipped swymmed, Wapflete in Essex, (the
rather for that Ralph Higde^ writes, that the Britons never invaded Kent,
after the battle at Craforde, which was before this overthrow that I last
spoke of.) Howbeit since the writer of our holy Legend lays it in Tanet, I am
contented to subscribe.

In this Isle lies Stonor, Stonor.
sometime a haven town also: for in the reign of William Rufus, there arose a
suite in law, between the Londoners, and the Abbat of S Augustines (then
owner of the place) as touching the right of the haven of Stonor, wherein by
the favorable Thomas Spot, their own Chronicler reports) prevailed, and the
Citizens had the overthrow. Not long after which time, they obtained of King
Henry the first, a fair to be holden yearly at this town, five days
together, before and S. Augustine.

Now would I forthwith lead you from the Isle of Tanet, to the ruins of
Richeborow, saving that the Goodwine is before mine eye, whereof I pray you
first hearken what I have to say.

The Goodwine, or Goodvvine Sands.
THere lived in the time of King Edward (commonly called the Confessor) a
noble man, Earl Godwine and his sons.
named Godwine, whose daughter Edgithe, the same King, by great instance of his
nobility, (being otherwise of him self disposed to have lived sole) took
unto his wife. By reason whereof, not only this Godwine him self (being at
the first but a Cowheards son, and afterward advanced to honor by King
Canutus, whose sister by fraud he obtained to wife) became of great power and
authority within this Realm (but his sons also being five in number) were
by the kings Goodwine was Earl of Kent, Sussex, Hamshire, Dorsetshire,
Devonshire, and Cornwall: His eldest son Swane, had Oxfordshire, Barkeshire
Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and Somerset: Harold, held Essex, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire: Tosti, had Northumberland: And
Gurte, and Leoswine, possessed other places. etc. But as it is hard in great
prosperity to keep due temperance, for, Superbia est vitium rebus solenne
secundis: So this man and his sons, being puffed up with the pride of the
Kings favor, their own power, policy, and possession, contemned all other,
and forgate them selves, abusing the simplicity of the King by evil counsel,
treading under foot the nobility by great disdain, and oppressing the common
people by insatiable rauine, extortion, and tirannie. So that immediately, and
at once, they pulled upon their heads, the heavy displeasure of the Prince,
the immortal hatred of the noble men, and the bitter execration and curse of
the common sort. Whereupon the king for a season banished them, the nobles
never after liked them, and the poor people not only railed upon them while
they lived, but also by devised tales (as the manner is) labored to make them
hateful to all posterity after their death. And amongst other things,
touching Godwyne him self, they feygned, that he was choked at Winchester (or
Windsore, as others say, for liers can not lightly agree) with a morsel of
bread, and that this his land in Kent sonke suddenly into the Sea. Neither were
these things continued in memory, by the mouths of the unlearned people only,
but committed to writing also, by the hands and pens of Monks, Frears, and
others of the learned sort. So that in course of time, the matter was past all
peradventure, and the things believed for undoubted verity.

But whatsoever has been heretofore thought of these matters, having now just
occasion offered me to treat of the thing, I will not spare, to speak that
which I have red in some credible writers, and which I do

Siluester Giraldus (in his Itinerarie of Wales) and many others, do write,
The cause of Goodwyn Sands
that about the end of the reign of King William Rufus, (or the beginning of
Henry the first) there was a sudden and mighty inundation of the Sea, by the
which a great part of Flaunders, and of the low countries thereabout, was
drenched, and lost, so that many of the inhabitants (being thereby expulsed
from their seats) came over into England, and made suite to the same King
Henry, for some place of dwelling within his dominion. The King pitying their
calamity, and seeing that they might be profitable to his Realm, by
instructing his people in the art of clothing, (wherein at that time they
chiefly excelled,) first placed them about Carlisle in the North country, and
afterward (upon cause) removed them to Rosse and Hauerford in Wales. Now at
the same time that this happened in Flaunders, the like harm was done in
sundry places, both of England, and Scotland, also, (as Hector Boethius, the
Scottishe hystoriographer, most plainly writes) affirming, that (amongst
other) this place, being sometime of the possession of the Earl Godwine, was
then first violently overwhelmed with a light sand, wherewith it, not only
remains covered ever since, but is become withal (Nauium gurges, and vorago)
a most dreadful gulf, and ship swalower.

This thing, as I cannot but marueil how it has escaped the penns of our own
country writers (the rather for that some of them living about that time) have
mention of that harm in the low country: so I stick not to accept it for
assured truth, considering either the auctority of the writer him self, being
a diligent and learned man, or the circumstances of the thing that he has
left written, being in it self both reasonable, and likely.

And thus I might well make an end, but because I have already taken occasion to
accuse the^ of forgerie, which affirm Godwine to have been choked at the
bourde, I trust it shall be no great offense, (though beside purpose, yet for
declaration of the truth) to rehearse shortly, what some credible storiers
have reported of that matter also. And to the end that the truth may appear
by collation of the diverse reports, I will first show what the common opinion
and tale of his death is, and then afterward what these other men write
concerning the same. The death of Earl Godwyne.
Ealred, the Abbat of Ryuauxe, (who took pains to pen the history of the
same King Edwardes whole life, and of whom all others (as I think) learned
this tale, says: that while the King and Godwyne sat at the table,
accompanied with others of the Nobility, it chanced the Cupbearer (as he
brought wine to the bourd) to slip with the one foot, and yet by good strength
of his other leg, to recover him self without falling, which thing the Earl
earnestly marking, said pleasantly, that There, one brother had well helped
another: mary (quoth the King) so might me mine, ne had thou been Earl
Godwine: casting in his dishe the murder of his brother Alfred, which was done
to death at Elie by the counsel of Godwine, as hereafter in fit place for it
shall appear. Hereat the Earl was sore moved, and thinking it more then time
to make his purgation, took a morsel of bread into his hand, and praying
(with great and vehement obtestation) that it might choke him, if he by any
means caused ye slaughter or conse^ted thereto, he put the bread into his
mouth, and was immediately strangled therewithal.

Some write, that this bread was before accursed by Wulstane, the holy Bishop
of Worcester, after a certain manner then used, and called Corsned, 1. Cursed
bread.
as in the table to ye Saxons laws is to be seen. But this Ealred affirms
that after the words spoken by the Earl, the King him self blessed the bread
with the sign of the cross: And therefore these men agree as well together, as
blessing and cursing be one like to another.

But letting that and them pass, hear (I beseech you) what Alfred of Beuerley
(a learned man, that lived in the time of King Henry the first, somewhat before
this Abbat Ealred) says, touching this matter. Godwinus graui morbo ex
improuiso percussus, ac Regi ad mensam Wyntoniae assidens, mutus in ipsa sede
declinauit, ac postea in camera^ Regis a filijs deportatus, moritur. Quidam
autem dicunt. etc. Godwine being suddenly stricke^ with a grievous disease, as he
sat at ye table with the King at Winchester, fell down from his stool, and was
carried by his sons into the Kings chamber, where he dyed: but some say that
he was choked etc. And to the same effect writes Marianus the Scot. Simeon
also, the Chaunter of Durham, which lived about the time of this Alfred, or
rather before him, treating of this matter, has these words.

Godwinus graui morbo percussus, in ipsa sede declinauit, and post horas
quinque moritur. Godwyne being taken with a grievous disease, dropped down from
the place where he sat, and dyed within five hours after.

Thus these men report another manner of his death, the one using no mention
at all of any accursed bread, and the other reciting it but as a tale. And for
the more plain detection of the deceit of this Abbat, he that will read the
second book of William Malmes. De Regibus, shall find, that the occasion, and
introduction of this matter (I mean, the slipping of the Kings Cupbearer, and
the speech that proceeded thereof, namely, that One brother had well helped
another) is word for word stolen from thence, for William (which lived
before Ealred) reports, that king Ethelstane, by persuasion of one that was
his cupbearer, had banished Eadwine his own brother, for suspicion of treason,
and had committed him to the Seas and winds in an old, shaken, and frail
vessel, without sail, oar, or companion, (save one Esquier only,) in which
exile he perished, and that afterward the King (understanding his brothers
innocence, and sorowing his own rashness) took occasion by sight of his
cupbearers foot slipping, to be avenged of the false accusation, even as it is
here told of King Edward. But Ealred, forsoothe, was so fully disposed to
magnify King Edward (because he so much magnified the Monkishe and single
life) that he sticked not at greater matters then this, affirming boldly that
the same King while he heard Mass at Westminster, The visions of Edward the
confessor.
saw between the Priests hands, Christ blessing him with his fingers: That
at another Mass he saw the seven sleapers at Ephesus, turn them selves on
the one side, after they had sleapt seventy years together on the other,
(which, Epimenides did sleep. 75 years.
seeing it was within five years of so many as Epimenides sleapt,) Ealred (in
my fancy) is worthy to have the second game at the whetstone.) Furthermore,
that S. John Baptist sent to King Edward, a King of Gold from Jerusalem,
which he him self had sometime before given to a poor man, that asked alms
of him in the name of S. John: And such other matters of like credit, 1.
Love, Ly. or game for the whetstone.
which both for the vanity of the things them selves, being meet to have
place in Philopseudes of Lucian, and for the desire that I have to keep order,
I will pretermit, and return to my purpose.

Richeborowe in Latin, Vrbs Rutupina: in Saxon (ReptacHester) the name being
forged (as I conjecture) either of the Bryttishe word (Rwyd) which signifies
a net, in token that it stood by fishing: or of (Rwydd) which signifies
speed, because from thence (as some think) is the most short and speedy
cut over the Seas.
Matthew (ye Monk of Westminster, and Author of the work called, Flores
Hystoriarum) takes the place which Beda, Ptolome, and others call Rutupi, to
be Sandwiche, and therefore he applies to the one whatsoever he finds of the
other: but because John Leland (a man generally acquainted with the antiquities
of the Realm) affirms in his work which he entitled (Syllabus in
Genethliacon Eaduerdi) Rutupi to have been, where Richeborowe now is (to which
opinion I rather incline) I think good to give them several titles, and to
speak of Richeborowe by it self, leaving to fit place (for Sandwiche also)
such matter, as of right belongs thereunto.

The whole shore of Kent therefore, that lies over against Dunkircke,
Calaice, and Boloigne, is of Caesar, Iuuenal, Lucan, Ptolome, Antoninus, and
others, called Rutupiae, or Rutupinum littus, and that place of England which
Beda takes to be nearest to the Morines (a people of Gallia Belgica, which at
this day comprehends, Picardie, Boloigne, Artoys, and some part of the low
countries) is of John Leland interpreted to be Richeborowe, not paste half a
mile distant from Sandwiche toward the East. The same man also, persuaded
partly by the view of the place it self, and partly by the authority of one
Gotcelinus, supposes, that Richeborow was of ancient time, Richeborow, was
sometime a City.
a City of some price, and that it had within it a Palaice, where King
Ethelbert received Augustine. As for the title of a City, I doubt not but that
if the ruins of the ancient walls yet extant, or the remenants of the Roman
coin often found there, did not at all enforce the likelyhoode, yet the
authority of Beda alone (which calls it plainly a city) would suffice: But
whether it were the Palaice of King Ethelbert, when he entertained Augustine,
he that shall advisedly read the first Chapter of Beda his first book of the
Ecclesiastical story, shall have just cause to doubt, for as much, as he
shows manifestly, yt the King came from his Palaice in the Continent (out of
Thanet) to Augustine: and Leland himself confesses, that Richeborow was then
within Thanet, although that since that time, the water has changed his
course, and shut it clean out of the Island.

Now, where some men (as I said) have taken it to be Sandwiche, I take them to
be greatly deceived. Sandwiche, is not Rutupi.


For Richeborowe (being corruptly so sounded, for Reptsborowe) has remaining
in it, the very roots (as I may speak it) of Reptachester: And Reptachester
(says Beda) and Rutupi Portus, are all one: So then (Chester) being turned to
(Borow) (which be in deed two words, but yet in manner of one signification
and effect) Rept, and Rich, have ome affinity the one with the other, but
neither Rich, Repta, nor Rutupi, can have with Sandwiche any manner of
similitude. Thus much of the name, and antiquity of this poor Town, which
was in time of the old Brytons, of great price, and the common Port or place
of arrival out of France, whereof we find no other note in latter history,
either because the same was long since (before the coming of the Saxons)
neglected, when as the Romans had lost their interest within this Realm: Or
else, for that soon after their arrival it decayed, by reason that the water
changed his course, and left it dry: So that now most aptly, that may be
said of this town, near to the Isle Thanet, which Virgil some time wrate of
Tened it self.

Dives opum, Priami dum regna manebant,
Nunc tantum sinus, and statio male fida carinis.
A wealthy land, while Priams state, and kingdom upright stoade,
But now a bay, and harbor bad, for ships to lie at road.
But now I will make toward Sandwiche, the first of the Ports (as my journey
lies) and by the way speak somewhat of the Five Ports, in general.

The Cinque Ports.
I Find in the book of the general survey of the realm, The antiquity of
the Ports.
which William the Conqueror caused to be made in the fourth year of his
reign, and to be called Domesday, because (as Matthew Parise says) it spared
no man (but judged all men indifferently, as the Lord in that great day will
do) that Dover, Sandwiche, and Rumney, were in the time of King Edward the
confessor, discharged almost of all manner of impositions and burdens (which
other towns did bear,) in consideration of such service to be done by them
upon the Sea, as in their special titles shall hereafter appear: whereupon,
although I might ground by reasonable conjecture, that the immunity of the
haue^ Towns (which we now call by a certain number, the Cinque Ports) might
take their beginning from the same Edward: yet for as much as I read in the
Chartre of King Edward, the first after the conquest (which is reported in our
book of Entries) A recital of the grauntes of sundry Kings to the Five
Ports, the same reaching no higher, then to William the Conqueror, I will
leave my conjecture, and lean to his Chartre: contenting my self to yield to
the conqueror, the thanks of other men's benefits, seeing those which were
benefited, were wisely contented (as the case then stood) to like better of
his confirmation or second gift, then of King Edwardes first grant and
endowment. And to the end that I may proceed in some manner of array, I will
first show, which Towns were (at the beginning) taken for the Five Ports, and
what others be now reputed in the same number: secondly, what service they
ought, and did in times passed, and lastly what privileges they have
therefore, and by what persons they have been governed.

Which be the Five Ports.
If I should judge by the commune, and rude verse, Dover, Sandwicus, Ry, Rum,
Frigmare ventus,

I might say, that Dover, Sandwiche, Rye, Rumney, and Winchelsey, (for that is,
Frigmare ventus) be the Five Ports: Again if I should be ruled by the Roll
which recites the Ports, that send Barons to the Parleament, I must then
add to these, Hastings, and Hyde, for they also have their Barons, as well as
the other: and so should I not only, not show which were the first Five, but
also (by addition of two others) increase both the number, and doubtfulnes.
Leaving the verse therefore, for ignorance of the author, and suspicion of his
authority, and forsaking the Roll (as not assured Henry Bracton, a man both
ancient, learned, and credible, which lived under King Henry the third, and
wrote (above three hundredth years since) learnedly of the laws of this Realm.

He (I say) in the third book of his work, and treatise of the Crown, taking
in hand to show the articles inquirable before the Justices in Eire, (or
Itinerant, as we called them, because they used to ride from place to place
throughout the Realm, for administration of justice) sets forth a special
form of writtes, to be directed severally to the Baylifes of Hastings,
Hithe, Rumney, Dover, and Sandwiche, commanding them, that they should cause
twenty and four of their Barons for so their Burgesses, ^^i^^ were ^^led
(...) ^lde (...).
or Townsmen, and the Ci^^^^ns of London likewise, were wont to be termed) to
appear before the Kings Justices at Shipwey in Kent, as they accustomed to
do, there to enquire of such points, as should be given them in charge.
Which done, he adds moreover, Contention, between Yarmouth, and the five
Ports.
that for so much as there was oftentimes contention between them of the Five
Ports, and the inhabitants of Yarmouth in Norfolk, and Donwiche in Suffolk,
there should be several writtes directed to them also, retournable before the
same Justices at the same day and place: reciting, that where the King had by
his former writtes sommoned the Plees of the Five Ports to be holden at
Shipwey, if any of the same towns, had cause to complain of any (being
within the liberties of the said Ports) he should be at Shipwey to propounde
against him, and there to receive according to law and justice.

Thus much I recite out of Bracton, partly to show that Shipwey was before
King Edward the firsts time, the place of assembly for the Plees of the Five
Ports, partly to notify the difference, and controversy that long since was
between these Ports, and those other towns: But purposely and chiefly to
prove, that Hastings, and Hithe, Dover, Rumney, and Sandwiche, were in Bractons
time, accounted the Five principal havens or Ports, which were endowed with
privilege.

Neither yet will I deny, but that soon after, Winchelsey and Rye might be
added to the number.

For I find in an old record, that King Henry the third took into his own
hands (for the better defense of the Realm) the towns of Winchelsey, and
Rye, which belonged before to the Monastery of Fescampe in Normandy, and
gave therefore in exchange, the Manor of Chiltham in Gloucester shyre, and
diverse other lands in Lincoln shyre: This he did, partly to conceal from the
Priors Aliens, the intelligence of the secret affairs of his Realm, and
partly because of a great disobedience and excess, that was committed by the
inhabitants of Winchelsey, against Prince Edward his eldest Son. And
therefore, although, I can easily be led to think, yt he submitted them for
their correction to the order, and governance of the Five Ports, yet I stand
doubtful whether he made them partners of their privileges, or no, Winchelsey
first builded.
for that had been a preferment, and no punishment: but I suspect rather, that
his Son King Edward the first, (by whose encouragement and aid, old
Winchelsey

By this therefore let it appear, that Hastings, Dover, Hithe, Rumney, and
Sandwiche, were the first Ports of privilege, which (because they were Five in
number) both at the first gave, and yet continue, to all the residue, the name
of Cinque Ports, although not only Winchelsey and Rye, be since that time,
incorporated with them as principals, but diverse other places also (for the
ease of their charge) be crept in as parts, lims, and members of the same. Now
therefore, somewhat shall be said, as touching the services that these Ports of
duty owe, and in deed have done, to the Princes: whereof the one (I mean with
what number of vessels, in what manner of furniture, and for how long season,
they ought to wait on the King at the Sea, upon their own charges) shall
partly appear by that which we shall presently say, and partly by that
which shall follow in Sandwiche, and Rumney: The other shall be made manifest by
examples, drawn out of good hystories: and both shall be testified by the
words of King Edward the first in his own Chartre.

The book of Domesday before remembered, charge Dover with 20. vessels at the
Sea, whereof each to be furnished with one and twenty men, for fifteen days
together: and says further, that Rumney and Sandwiche answered the like
service: But now whether this (like) ought to be understood of the like
altogether, both in respect of the number and service, or of the (like) in
respect of service, according to the proportion of their ability only, I may
not hereby take upon me to determine, For on the one side, if Rumney,
Sandwiche, and the residue, should likewise find twenty vessels a piece, then
(as you shall anon see) the five Ports were subject to a greater charge at
that time, then King Edward the first laid upon them: And on the other side, if
they were only chargeable after their proportion, then know I not how far to
burden them, seeing the Record of Domesday it self, binds them to no
certeintie. And therefore leaving this as I find it, I must elsewhere make
inquisition for more lightsome proof: And first I will have recourse to King
Edward the first his Chartre, in which I read, that At each time that the King
passes over the sea, the Ports ought to rigge up fifty and seven ships,
(whereof every one to have twenty armed soldiers) and to maintain them at
their own costs, by the space of fifteen days together.

And thus it stood with the Ports for their general charge, in the sixte
year of his reign, for then was this Chartre sealed: But as touching the
particular burden of each one, I have seen two diverse testimonies, of which
the first is a note in French (bearing the countenance of a Record) and is
entitled, to have been renewed in the two and twenty year of the Reign of
the same King, by Stephan Penchester, then Constable of Dover Castle, in which
the particular charge is set down in this manner.

The Port of Hastings ought to find three ships.

The lowie of Peuensey, one. Buluerhithe and Petit Iahn, one. Bekisborne in
Kent, seven. Grenche in Kent, two men and armor, with the ships of Hastings.
The town of Rye, five. To it was Tenterdene annexed, in the time of King
Henry the sixth. The town of Winchelsey, ten. The Port of Rumney, four.
Lydde, seven. The Port of Hythe, five. The Port of Dover, nineteen. The town
of Folkstone, seven. The town of Feuersham, seven. The Port of Sandwiche, with
Stonor, Fordwich, Dale. etc. five.
These Ships they ought to find upon forty days summons, armed and arrayed
at their own charge, and in each of them twenty men, besides the Master of
of the Mariners: all which they shall likewise maynteine five days together
at their own costs, giving to the Master six pence by the day, to the
Constable vj. pence, and to each other Mariner iij. d. And after those five
days ended, the King shall defray the wages.

The other is a Latin Custumall of the town of Hyde, the which although it
pretend not so great antiquity as the first, yet seems it to me to importe
as much, or more likelyhode and credit: It stands, thus.

These be the Five Ports of our sovereign Lord the King having liberties,
which other Ports have not: Hasting, Romenal, Hethe, Dover, Sandwiche, the
chief Towns. The services due by the same.

Hasting shall find.21. ships, in every ship.21. men, and a Garcion, or Boy,
which is called a Gromet. To it perteine (as the members of one town) the
Seashore in Seford, Peuenshey, Hodeney, Winchelsey, Rye, Ihame, Bekesbourne,
Grenge, Northie, Bulwerhethe.

Romenal. 5. ships, In every ship.21. men, and a Garcion:

To it perteine, as members thereof, Promhell, Led, Eastwestone, Dengemareys,
old Rumney.

Hethe.5. ships, as Romenal before. To it pertains the Westhethe. Dover.21.
ships, as Hasting before. To it perteine, Folkstane, Feuersham, and Saint
Margerets, not concerning the land, but for the goods and cattailes.
Sandwich.5. ships, as Romenal, and Hethe before. To it perteine Fordwiche,
Reculuer, Serre, and Dele, not for the soil, but for the goods. Sum of the
Ships. 57. Sum of the men. 1187. and 57. Garcions.
This service, the Barons of the Five Ports do acknowledge to owe to the King,
upon summons yearly (if it happen) by the space of.15. days together, at
their own costs and charges, accounting that for the first day of the.15. in
which they shall spread their sails to go toward those parts that the King
intends: and to serve so long after.15. days, as the King will, at his own
pay, and wages.

Thus much out of these ancient notes, whereby your self may easily discern
the difference: but whether the one or the other, or (by reason of some latter
despe^sation) neither of these, have place at this day, I must refer to them
that be privy and of counsel with ye Ports: and so leaving this also
undecided, hold on the way, wherein I am entered.

The good service of the.5. ports.
This duty of attendance therefore (being devised for the honorable
transportation, and salfe conduct of the Kings own person over the narrow
Seas, the Ports have not only most diligently ever since that time performed,
but furthermore also, valiantly behaved them selves, against the enemy from
time to time, in sundry exploits by water, as occasion has been proffered, or
the necessity of the Realm required.

And amongst other feats not unworthy perpetual remembrance, after such time
as Jews (the French Dolphen) had entered the Realm to aid Stephan Langton
the Archbishop, and the Nobility in the life of King John, and had sent into
France for new supply of soldiers after his death, Hubert of Borough (then
Dover) following the opinion of Themistocles, Muris ligneis querendam salutem.
in the exposition of the Oracle of the wooden walls, by the aid of the Port
towns, armed forty tall ships, and meeting with eighty sail of Frenchmen
upon the high Seas, gave them a most courageous encounter, in which he took
some, sounke others, and discomfited the rest.

King Henry the third also, after that he came to riper age, had great
benefit by the service of the Cinque Ports: And King Edward the first in his
Chartre, makes their continual faithful service, (and especially their good
endeavor, then lately showed against the

Furthermore, about the midst of the reign of the same King, a hundredth sail
of the Navy of the Ports, fought at the Sea with a fleet of.200. Frenchmen,
all they took, and slew, and sounke so many of the Maryners, that France was
thereby (for a long season after) in manner destitute, both of Seamen and
shipping.

Finally, and to conclude this part, in the days of Henry the fourth, the
Navy of the Five Ports, under the conducte of one Henry Pay, surprysed one
hundredth and twenty French Ships, all laden with Salt, Iron, Oil, and no
worse Merchandise.

The privileges of these Ports, The privileges of the 5. Ports
being first granted by Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, and
then confirmed and increased by William Rufus, Henry the second, Richard the
first, Henry the third and king Edward the first, be very great, considering
either the honor and ease, or the freedom and exemption, that the
inhabitaunts have by reason of the same.

For they send Burgesses to the Parleament, which by an honorable name be
called Barons: They bear ye four staves of the Canapie over the Kings head at
the time of his coronation, and they dyne at the uppermost table in the great
hall, on his right hand: They themselves be exempted from all payments of
subsidy: And their Heirs freed from wardship of body, notwithstanding any
tenure. They be empleadable in their own Towns also, and not elsewhere: They
have amongst themselves in each Port, their particular place of justice, and
at Shipwey the general court of their assembly, where the Lord Warden takes
his oath at his first entry into the office, and where they ought (of right)
to hold all their general Plees also, although they sit now for the most
part at Dover: They have power (if justice be not done them) to take the
inhabitaunts of other Towns and Cities in Withernam: to govern Yarmouth: by
their Baylife for one season of the year, to do justice upon criminal
offenders: To hold Plee in Actions real and personal, to take Conusance by
fine, to enfranchise villains: and sondrie other things, which because they
be to long to be rehearsed at large, and lie not fitly in the way of my
purpose, I will omit, and descend to the Wardeins of the Ports, reciting in a
short Catalogue, the names of so many of them, as I have found to govern,
sithence the arrival of King William the Conqueror. And although it be no
doubt, but that the Ports were under the government of some, before the time
of the conquest also, yet because King William was the first (so far as I
have read) that made the office perpetual, and gave it the title which it now
bears (the name Wardein I mean, which came from Normandy and was not at
all known to the Saxons) I think best to begin at his time. Again, for
as much as the Constableship of the Castle of Dover, and this office, have been
always inseperably matched together, and for that I shall have fit place to
speak of that hereafter, when I shall come to Dover, I will respit the
rehersall of both their originalles til then: and here (in the mean season)
set down the race of the Wardeins by name only.

The names of the Wardeins of the Five Ports
John Fynes, created by William the Conqueror, Wardein of the Ports, and
Constable of Dover, by gift of inheritance. James Fines, his Son, which
dyed ot Folkston. John Fynes his Son. Walkelm, who delivered it to King
Stephan, and immediately after his death, abandoned the charge, and fled into
Normandy. Allen Fynes, restored by King Henry the second. James Fynes, his
Eldest Son. Matthew Clear (as it should seem by Mat. Par. and William Petite)
who imprisoned Godfrey, the Archbishop of York in Dover castle, as under that
title shall appear. William of Wrotham. Hubert of Burgh, the Earl of Kent, who
being deposed Bartram of Cryol succeeded. Richard Gray, appointed by the
Barons, that warred against King Henry the third, who was deprived of his
office by Hugh Bigot, because he let in the Popes legate by the Kings license,
and against the mind of the Nobles. Henry Braybrooke. Edward the first, in
the life of his father, who made Henry Cobham his deputy, whose Son and
Heir (called John) founded Cobham College. Roger Leyborne, in the time of King
Edward the first. Stephan Penchester, in the time of Edward the first. Sir
Robert Asheton. Hugh Spenser, the younger, in the time of Edward the second.
Edmund of Woodstock, the Earl of Kent. Reginald Cobham, in the time of Edward
the third. Bartholmew Burwhasse, or Burgehersh, one of the first companions of
the order of the Garter. John Beauchampe, the Earl of Warwike. Sir Robert
Herle, in the latter end of King Edward the third. Edmund the Earl of
Cambridge. Sir Simon Barley, whom Thomas of Woodstocke beheaded. Lord Henry
Cobham, the Son of Reginald Cobha^. Sir John Enros. Sir Thomas Beaumont.
Edward, the Duke of Aumarle and York, whom King Henry the fourth removed, and
substituted in place Sir Thomas Erpingham, for a season, but afterward, he gave
the office to. Prince Edward his Son, who when he was King in possession,
bestowed it upon Humfrey, the Duke of Gloucester. James Fines, Lord Say, whom
Jack Cade beheaded. Edmond, the Duke of Somerset. Humfrey, the Duke of
Buckingham. Simon Mountford, under King Henry the sixth. Richard Neuel, the
Earl of Warwike. William, the Earl of Arundel. Richard, the Duke of
Gloucester, called afterward King Richard the third. Sir William Scotte. Henry
the Duke of York. James Fines, the Lord Say. Henry in his Fathers life,
afterward the eight King of that name. Arthur Plantagenet, Vicount Lisle,
Bastard Son to King Edward the fourth. Sir Edward Poynings. Henry, the
young Earl of Richemond. Sir Edward Guldeford. George Boleyn, Vicount
Rocheford. Sir Thomas Cheynie, Treasurour of the household. Sir Wiliam Cobham,
Lord Cobham.
Thus much of the v. Ports, in general. Now of Sandwiche, the first of them in
the order of my journey, and then orderly of so many of the residue, as lie
within the Shyre that I have presently in hand.

Sandwiche is called in Latin, Sabulouicum, or Portus Rutupinus, in Saxon
Sondic, that is to say, the Sandy Town, because the coast therabout abounds
with Sand.
THis Town (as it appears by the report of Leland, and as it may seem also
by the name it self, being mere Saxon) began by the Saxons, after the fall of
poor Richeborowe, which was in price while the honor of the Britons stood
upright, and was either abated die the fury of the Saxons, when they won that
coast from them, or else came to ruin, by the alteration and vicissitude of the
Sea, which peradventure choked the haven thereof with light sand, as it has
since that time done this at Sandwiche also.

King Canutus gave (as some write) to Christ's church in Canterbury, Relics
of great price.
Saint Bartholmews arm (if happily it were not a chaungeling: for Kings and
great men were oftentimes after that sort deluded, though they in the mean
time bought such relics dearly, and thought that kind of gift most
princely) he gave also a rich Pall, a Crown of Gold, and this haven of
Sandwiche, together with the royalty of the water on each side, so far as
(a ship being on flote at the full Sea) a man might cast a short hatchet
out of the vessel unto the Bank.

The place it self grew in time to be well peopled, The ancient estate of
Sandwiche.
and of worthynesse to be one of those Ports, that found favor of privilege,
in consideration of their service at the Sea, for it appears by the book of
Domesday, that this was the estate of Sandwiche. It lay in a hundredth Dover
did: It was of the possessions of Christ's Church, as I have showed, and was
appointed for the apparel of the Monks of that house, to the which it
yealded forty thousand herrings besides certain money, and had in it three
hundredth and seven houses inhabited: And I find not, but that the Town
continued in the like plight, long after the Conquest, (being somewhat amended
also by the Staple, which King Edward the first for a season removed thither)
even until the time of King Henry the sixth, in whose days Peter Brice (the
Steward of Normandy) landed at Sandwiche, Sandwiche spoiled, and brent.
and with fire and sword, wasted the Town in manner to ashes, and slew the
inhabitants almost to the last man. Since which time, partly by the smarte of
that wound, but chiefly by the abundance of the light Sand (wherewith the
Sea has glutted the haven) it is declined to great decay, and were like to
fall to extreme ruin, were it not that now presently it is somewhat relieved
by the repair of such, as have abandoned their Country for the freedom of
their consciences, whose aboade how long it will be, the Lord only knows,
for whose cause they suffer banishment.

The schole at Sandwiche.
There was in this Town, before the general suppression, a house of
Carmelites, whereof I read none other good thing, save that it brought forth
one learned man, called William Becley, in the reign of King Henry the sixth.
But now lately (to repair the loss of that dissolution) Master Roger
Manwoode, a man borne in the Town, and advanced by virtue and good learning
to the degree of a Serieant at the Law, has for the increase of Godliness
and good letters, erected and endowed a fair Free School there, from whence
there is hope, that the common wealth shall reap more profit after a few
years: then it received commodity by the Carmelites, since the time of their
first foundation. This only is that which I had to say, either of the present,
or passed estate of this place: which done, I will proceed to the narration
of such other things, as long since happened thereaboutes, partly for the
illustration of the antiquity of the town, and partly for ye setting forth of
the commodity of ye haven, but chiefly for the observation of the order which
I have beegonne: which is, to pretermitte nothing (worthy note) that I find
in stoarie, concerning the place that I take in hand. But because that which I
have to say, depends altogether, (or for the greater part) upon the History
of the Danes, which many years together disquieted this land, it shall be
fit, as well for the better explication of the things presently in hand, as
also for the more easy understanding of other matters, that must hereafter
follow, to disclose (so compendiously as I may) the first beginning,
proceeding, and ending, of the Danishe affairs, wars, and troubles within
this Realm.

About the year after Christ, The whole history of the Danishe doings in
England.
three vessels of the North East Country men (whose ancestors had before,
within the compass of one hundrethe and forty years, sacked Rome in Italy
four several times, and whose offspring afterward won Normandy from the
French King) showed them selves upon the western shore of England, being
sent before hand (as it is supposed) to epsy the commodity of the havens, the
advantage of arriual, the wealth and force of the inhabitants, and to the end
to prepare the way for greater powers, then were appoin- to follow.

These had no sooner set some of their men on land, but the Reeue, or officer
or Beorhtricke, or Brictricke (then King of the West Saxons) had knowledge
thereof: who came unto them, and demanding the cause of their arriual) would
have carried them to the Kings presence, but they in their resistance slew
him, whereupon the people of the Country adjoining, addressed themselves to
revenge, and assembling in great numbers, beat them back to their ships, not
without the loss of some of their company.

And this was the first attempt, that ever the Danes (for so our hystories call
by one general name, the Danes Norwais, Gottes, Vandals, and others of that
part) made upon England: after which time, what horrible invasions, miseries,
calamities, and oppressions followed, shall appear anon.

Scotland, and within short space after that also, some other of them entered
Tynemouth Haven in the North part of England, and taking some small booties,
returned to their vessels.

Now by this experiment, they had gained sufficient knowledge of that, for
which they first came, and therefore thinking it fit time to assay further,
they rigged up a greater number of ships, armed more store of chosen soldiers,
entered the River of Thamise with five and thirty sail, landed in despite of
the people, fired, spoiled, herried, and prevailed so far, that Egbert (who
Monarchy over all England) was feign to come with all his power to the relief
and rescue.

But such was the will of God (for the punishment of Idolatry and
superstition, which then overwhelmed this Realm) that the Danes in stead of
being discomfited by the Kings repair, were merueilously encouraged by his
misfortune. For, after that they had once gotten the better in the field
against him, they were so embouldened thereby, that notwithstanding he
afterward, and some other valiant Princes following, by great prowess, abated
their fury in part, yet, adjoining themselves to the Britons (that then were
in great emnitie with the Saxons) and swarming hither out of their own
Country in such flightes, that the number of the slain was continually
supplied with great advantage, they never ceased to infeste the Realm, The
continuance of the Danes, in England
by the space of three hundredth years and more, during the reigns of fifteen
several Kings, till at the last, they had made Etheldred fly over into
Normandy, and leave them his Kingdom. During all which time, how mightily
their forces increased under Hinguar, Hubba, Halfden, Guthrum, Aulaf and
Hasten, (their Navy being risen from three ships, to three hundrethe and
fifty at the least) how pitiously the East, West, Southe, and North parts of
the Realm were wasted (the towns, Cities, religious houses, and Monasteries
of each quarter being consumed with flames) how miserably the common people
were afflictted, (men, women, and children on all sides going to wrack, by
their tempestuous fury) how marueilously the Kings were amassed, (the
arriualles of these their enemies, being no less sudaine, then violent) how
barbarously the monuments of good learning were defaced, (the same suffering
more by the immanitie of this one brutishe Nation, then by all the wars and
conquestes of the Pictes, and Scots, Romans, and Saxons) and finally, how
furiously fire, and sword, famine and pestilence, raged in every place, God
and men, Heaven and the elements conspiring (as it were) the fatal destruction
of the Realm, I may not here stand to prosecute particularly: but (leaving
each thing to fit place) I will proceed with King Etheldred, and so to my
purpose.

This man above all other, was so distressed by their continual invasions, that
since he wanted force to make his longer defense, he thought it best to give
money for their continual peace. And therefore charging his people with
importable tributes, he first gave them, at five several pays, 113000. l. and
afterward promised the^ 48000. yearly: hoping that (for as much as they seemed
by the manner of their war, rather to seek his coin, then his kingdom, to
rob, then to rule) at the least this way to have satisfied their hunger: but
like as the stone called, Syphinus, the more it is moisted, the harder it
waxes: so no gifts could quench the golden thirste of these greedy
raueners, but the more was brought to appease them, the more stony, and
inexorable they showed themselves, never ceassing (even against promises,
oaths, and hostages) to execute their accustomed cruelty.

The Danes, all slain in one night.
Hereupon King Etheldred, having now exhausted ye whole treasure of his Realm,
and therefore more unable, then ever he was, either by power, or prayer, to
help himself, or to relieve his subjects, determined by a fine policy (as he
thought) to deliver both the one and the other. For which purpose, by the advice of one Huna, (the general of his army) he wrote letters to each part
of the Realm, commanding, that upon S. Brices Martins night) the English men
should all at once set upon the Danes, Saint Martins drunke^ feast.
before they had disgested the surfaite of that drunken solemnity, and so
utterly kill and destroy them. This his commandment was received with such
liking, entertained with such secreacie, and executed with such speed and
celeritie, that the Danes were suddenly, and in a manner wholly, both men,
women, and children (like the Sons in Law of Danaus) oppressed at once in a
night: only a few escaped by Sea into Denmark, and there made complaint of
King Etheldreds boucherie.

For revenge whereof, Sweyn their King, both armed Sweyn the Dane.
first here at Sandwiche, and after in the North Country: the terror of
whose coming was such, that it caused the Country people on all sides, to
submit them selves unto him, in so much, that King Etheldred, seeing the
cause desperate, and him self destitute, fled over into Normandy with his
wife, and children, friends, and Canutus (the next King of the Danes) to
flight: and Edmund his Son also fought sundry great battles with him, yet
the Danes prevailed so mightily upon them, that three of them in succession,
(that is to say, Canutus, Haroldus, and Hardicanutus) reigned Kings here in
England almost by the space of thirty years together: so much to the
infamous oppression, slavery, and thraldom of the English Nation, that every
Dane was (for fear) called Lord Dane, and had at his commandment,
wheresoever he became, both man and wife, and whatsoever else he found in the
house. At the length, God, taking pity upon the people, took suddenly away
King Hardicanute: after whose death, the Nobility, and Commons of the Realm,
Edward: that the Danes were once again (and for ever) expulsed this Country,
in so much yt soon after, the name (Lord Dane) being before time a word of
great awe and honor, grew to a term, and bywoord of foul despite and
reproach, being turned (as it yet continues) to Lourdaine: besides, that ever
after, the common people in joy of that deliverance, have celebrated the
annual day of Hardicanutus death, with open pastime in the streates, calling
it, even till this our time, Hoctuesday, Hoctuesday.
in stead, (as I think) of Hucxtuesdaeg, that is to say, the skorning, or
mocking Tuesday.

And now thus much summarily being said, as concerning the truth of the
Danes being here, who ruled in this land almost thirty years, and raged
(without all rule) above three hundredth and fifty: I will return to
Sandwiche, disclosing therein such occurrents of the Danishe doings, as
perteine to my purpose.

Christ, Athelstane the Son of Ethelwulfe, and King of Kent (whom Mathewe of
Westminster takes, or rather mistaketh, for a Bishop) fought at the Sea before
Sandwiche, against a great Navy of the Danes, of which he took nine vessels,
and discomfited the residue.

Against another Fleet of the Danes which landed Sandwiche in the year one
thousand and six, King Etheldred made this provision: Provision of armor.
that every three hundredth and ten Hydes of Land (which Henry Huntingdon,
Mathewe Parise, and others, expound to be so many plowlands) should be charged
with the furniture of one ship, and every eight Hydes should find one jack
and sallet, for the defense of the Realm: By which mean, he made ready a
mighty navy to the Sea: But what through the injury of sudaine tempest, and
what Canutus also, after that he had received the the worse in a fight in
Lincolneshyre, which drew to his ships, that lay in the haven at Sandwiche,
and there most barbarously behaved himself, cutting of the hands and feet
of such as he had taken for hostage, and so departed al wroth, and
melancholic, into Denmark, to repair his army.

The same man, at his return hither took land, with his power at this town:
and so did Hardicanutus, his son after him.

Furthermore, in the days of King Edward the confessor, Danes, called Lochen,
and Irlinge, landed at Sandwiche, and laded their ships with rich spoil,
wherewith they crossed over the seas to Flaunders, and there made money of it.
At this place landed Jews the French Dolphine, that aided the English
Nobility against King John, as we shall hereafter have cause to show more at
large.

Finally, in the reign of King Richard the second, certain French ships
were taken at the Sea, whereof some were fraught with the frame of a timber
Castle (such another, I suppose, as William the Conqueror erected at
Hastings, so soon as he was arrived) which they also meant to have planted in
some place of this Realm, for our anoyaunce: but they failed of their purpose,
for the Engyne being taken from them, it was set up at this Town, and used to
our great safety, and their repulse.

Eastrye.
Having somewhat to say of Eastrye, I trust it shall be no great offense, to
turn our eye a little from the shore and talk of it, in our way to Deal.

It is the name of a Town, and Hundredth within the Last of Saint Augustines,
and has the addition of East, for difference sake, from Westrye (commonly
called Rye) nere to Winchelsey in Sussex. Mathewe of Westminster makes report
of a murder done at it, which because it tends Ercombert, the seventh King
of Kent, Egbert his Son succeeded in the kingdom, A Courtly Sycophant.
who caused to be virtuously brought up in his Palaice (which was then at this
Town) two young Noble men of his own kindred, (as some say,) or rather his own
Brethren, (as William of Malmesbury writethe) the one being called Ethelbert,
and the other Etheldred: these Gentlemen so prospered in good learning,
courtlike manners, and feats of actiuitie meet for men of their years and
parentage, that on the one side, they gave to all well disposed persons, and
lovers of virtue great expectation, that they would become at the length men
worthy of much estimation and honor: and on the other side, they drew upon
them, the fear, mislyking, and utter hatred, of the naughty, wicked, and
malicious sort. Of the which number there was one of the Kings own household,
called Thunner, who (as virtue never wants her enuiers) of a certain
diuelishe malice, repyning at their laudable increase, never ceased to ^lowe
into the Kings ear, most untrue acc^sations against them: And to the end that
he might ye rather provoke the King to displeasure, he persuaded him of great
danger toward his estate and person by them: and for as much as the common
people (who more commonly worship the Sun rising, then going down) had them
in great admiration and reverence, he desired the King, that either he would
send them out of the Realm, or be contented to wink at the matter if any his
friends, for the love of him, and suertie of his estate, should procure to
dispatche them.

The King, somewhat provoked by fear of his own peril, (though nothing
desirous of their destruction) eue^ as a little water thrown into the fire
increases the flame, so by a cold denial, gave courage to the attempt: and
therefore, Thunner espying fit time, slew the children, and buried their
bodies in the Kings Halle, under the clothe of his estate. But it was not long,
but there app^ared in the house, a bright shining pillar, replenishing each
corner with such terrible and fearful light, that the servants shriked at
the sight thereof, and by their noise awaked the King: who, as soon as he
saw it, was touched with the conscience of the murder, whereunto he had a
little before in heart consented, and calling in great haste for Thunner,
examined him straightly what was become of the children, and when he had
learned the truth, he became most sorrowful, and penitent therefore, charging
himself with the whole crime of their deaths, for that it lay wholly in him
to have saved their lives: Then sent he for Deodat, the Archbishop, and
desired to understand by him, what was best to be done for expiatio^ of the
fault: this good father (thinking to have procured some gain to his Church, by
veneration of ye dead bodies, if happily he might have gotten them thither)
persuaded the King to incoffen them, and to commit them to honorable burial
in Christeschurche at Canterbury: A right popish miracle.
but (says mine Author) when the hearse was ready, it would not be moved by
any force toward that Church: as truly (I think) as the cross of Waltham with
twelve Oxen and so many Kyne, could not be stirred any other way, but toward
the place appointed: or as the Image of Berecinthia, which the Romans had
brought out of Asia, could not be removed till the Vestal virgin Claudia had
set to her hand.

Hereupon the company assayed to convey it to Saint Augustines, but that all
in vain also: at the last, they agreed to lead it to the Monastery of
Watrine, and then (forsoothe) it passed as lightly (says he) as if nothing at
al had been within it. The obsequies there honorably performed, the King
gave the place where this vision appeared to his sister Ermenburga, who (having
a longing desire to become a veiled Nonne) had a little before abandoned her
housbands bed, and choosing out seventy other women for her company, erected
there a Monastery, to the name, and honor, of these two murdered Brethren.
William of Malmesbury adds moreover, that the King gave the whole Isle of
Thanet also to his Mother, to appease the wrath that she had conceived for the
loss of her Children.

Dele. Dela in Latin, after Leland: I conjecture that it took the name of the
Saxon word thille, which is a (plain flooer) or leuel, by reason that it
lies flat and leuel to the Sea.
THe Chronicles of Dover (as Leland reports, for I never saw them) have
mention, that Julius Caesar being repulsed from Dover, arrived at this place,
and arraied his army at Baramdowne: which thing how well it may stand with
Caesar's own report in his commentaries, I had rather leave to others to
decide, then take upon me to dispute: being well contented where certentie is
not evident, to allow of conjectures, not altogether vehement,

Only of this I am well assured, that King Henry the eight, having shaken of
the intolerable yoke of the Popish tyranny, King Henry the 8. fortifieth
his Realm.
and espying that the Emperor was offended, for the divorce of Queen
Katherine his wife, and that the French King had coupled the Dolphine his
Son to the Popes Niece, and married his daughter to the King of Scots, so that
he might more justly suspect them all, then safely trust any one: determined by
the aid of God to stand upon his own gardes and defense, and therefore with
all speed, and without sparing any cost, he builded Castles, platfourmes, and
blocke-houses, in all needful places of the Realm: And amongst other,
fearing least the ease, and advantage of descending on land at this part,
should give occasion and hardiness to the enemies to invade him, he erected
(near together) three fortifications, which might at all times keep and
beat the landing place, Sandowne and walmere
that is to say, Sandowne, Dele, and Wamere. This whole matter of Dele, John
Leland in Cygnea cantione, comprehends feately in these two verses.

Iactat Delanouas celebris arces,
Notus Caesareis locus Trophaeis.
Renowned Dele does vaunt it self,
with Turrets newly raisd:
For monuments of Caesar's host,
A place in stoarie praisd.
But what make I so long at Dele, since Dover (the impreignable Port, and
place so much renouned for antiquity) is not many miles of? I will haste me
thither therefore, and in the sight thereof unfold the singularities of the
place.

Dover, called in Latin, Dorus, Durus, Doueria, Dubris, and Dorubernia: In
Saxon Sofra. All which names be derived either of the Brittishe word (Dufir)
which signifies water, or of the word (Dufirha) which betokens high, or
steep: for the situation of the place, (being a high rock, hanging over the
water) might justly give occasion to name it after either.
THe treatise of this place, shall consist of three special members, that is
to say, the Town, the Castle, and the Religious buildings. The Town, was long
since somewhat estimable, howebeit that which it had (as I think) was both at
the first derived from the other two, and ever since also continually conserved
by them: But whether I hitte, or miss in that conjecture, certain it is, by
the testimony of the record in the Exchequer, commonly called Domesday book,
that the Town of Dover was of ability in the time of King Edward the
Confessor, to arm yearly 20. vessels to the Sea by the space of 15. days
together, each vessel having therein. 21. able men. For in consideration
thereof, the same King granted to the inhabitants of Dover, not only freedom
from payment of Tholl, and other privileges throughout the Realm, but also
pardoned them all manner of suite and service, to any his Courts whatsoever.
The Town it self was nevertheless Godwine, the Earl of Kent: for I read,
The town of Dover.
that it chanced Eustace, the Earl of Bolloine, (who had married Goda, the
Kings sister) to come over ye seas into England, of a desire that he had to
visit the King his Brother, and that whiles his herbenger demeaned him self
unwisely in taking up his lodgings at Dover, he fell at variance with the
Townsmen, and slew one of them: But Nocuit temeraria virtus. For that thing
so offended the rest of the inhabitants, that immediately they ran to weapon,
and killing eighteen of the Earls servants, they compelled him and all his
meiney to take their feet, and to seek redress at the Kings hands.

Godwine resists the King.
The King hearing the complaint, meant to make correction of the fault, but the
Townsmen also had complained themselves to Godwine, who determining
unadvisedly to defend his clients and servants, opposed himself violently
against the King his Liege Lord and Master. To be short the matter waxed
(within a while) so hot between them, that either side for maintenance of
their cause, arraied and conducted a great army into the field. Godwine
demanded of the King, that Eustace might be delivered unto him, the King
commanded Godwine (that arms laid aside) he would answer his disobedience
by order of the Law: and in the end, Godwine was banished the Realm by the
sentence of the King and Nobility, whereupon he and his Sons fled over the
Sea, and never ceased to unquiet the King, and spoil his subjects, til they
were reconciled to his favor, and restored to their ancient estate and
dignity.

This town, was so sore wasted with fire, soon after the coming in of King
William the Conqueror, that it was wholly (save only nine and twenty
dwelling Edward the first also, whiles two of the Popes Cardinales were here in
the treaty of an atonement, to be made between England and France the
Frenchemen landed at Dover in a right, and burned a great part of the town,
and some of the religious buildings. So that in those times, it was much
empayred by those misfortunes. But now in our memory, what by decay of the
haven (which King Henry the eight, to his great charge, but that all in
vain, sought to restore) and what by the overthrow of the religious houses,
and loss of Calaice, it is brought in manner to miserable nakedness and
decay: which thing were the less to be pitied, if it were not accompanied
with the ruin of the Castle it self, the decay whereof, is so much ye more
grievous, as the fame thereof is with our ancient stories (above al other) most
blasing and glorious. Dover Castle.
The Castle of Dover (says Lidgate and Rosse) was first builded by Julius
Caesar the Roman Emperor, in memory of whom, they of the Castle kept till
this day, certain vessels of old wine, and salt, which they affirm to be
the remain of such provision as he brought into it. As touching the which
(if they be natural, and not sophisticate) I suppose them more likely to have
been of that store, which Hubert de Burghe laid in there, of whom I shall
have cause to say more hereafter: But as concerning the building, because I
find not in Caesar his own Commentaries, mention of any fortification that he
made within the Realm: I think that the more credible report, which
ascribes the foundation to Aruiragus (a King of the Britons) of whom Iuuenal
the Poet has mention, saying to the Emperor Nero, in this wise, Regem aliquem
capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet Aruiragus, etc. Iuuenal in the end of his. 4. Satyr.

Some King thou shall a captain take,
or else from Bryttishe wayne
Shall Aruiragus tumble down.


And of whom others write, that he found such favor in the eye of Claudius
the Emperor, that he obtained his daughter to wife. But whosoever were the
author of this Castle, Mathewe Parise writes, that it was accounted in his
time (which was under the reign of King Henry the third) Clauis, and
Repagulum, totius Regni, the very lock and key of the whole Realm of England.
And truly it seems to me, by that which I have read of King William the
Conqueror, that he also thought no less of it: For at such time as Harold,
being in Normandy with him (whether of purpose, or against his will, I leave
as I find it, at large) made a corporal oath, to put him in possession of the
Crown, after the death of King Edward: It was one parcel of his oath, that
he should deliver unto him this castle, and the Well within it. The same King
had no sooner overthrown Harolde in the field, and reduced the Londoners to
obedience, but forthwith he marched with his army toward Dover, as to a
place of greatest importance, and speed in that journey, as is already
declared.

Not long after which time also (when he had Normandy, of purpose to commit
the order of that country to Robert his son, diverse of the shyre of Kent,
knowing right well, how much it might annoy him to lose Dover, conspired with
Eustace, the Earl of Boloine, for the recovery and surprise of the same. And
for the better atchieuing of their desire, it was agreed, that the Earl should
cross the seas, in a night by them appointed, at which time they would not
fail with all their force to meet him, and so (joining hands) soudainly
assail and enter it. They met accordingly, and marched by dark night toward
the Castle, well furnished with scaling ladders, but by reason that the watch
had discried them, they not only failed of that which they intended, but also
fell into that which they never feared: for the Soldiers within the Castle
(to whom Odo the Bishop of Borieux, and Hughe Mountfort, which then were with
the King in Normandy, had committed the charge thereof) kept them selves
close, and suffered the assaylants to approach the wall, and then, whiles they
disorderly attempted to scale it, they set wide open their gates, and made a
soudaine salie out of the piece, and set upon them with such fury, that they
compelled Eustace with a few others, to return to his Ship, the rest of
his company, being either slain by the sword, destroyed by fall from the
Clyffe, or devoured by the Sea.

The same King also, being worthily offended with the disobedience, avarice,
Odo, the Earl of Kent.
and ambition of Odo (his bastard brother, whom he had promoted to the
Bishopric of Borieux, and to the Earldome of Kent,) for that he had not only
by rauine and extortion, raked together great masses of Gold and treasure,
which he caused to be ground into fine powder, and (filling therewith diverse
pottes and crockes) had sounk them in the bottomes of Rivers, intending
therwithall to have purchased the Papacy of Rome: But also because he refused
to render unto him the County of Kent, and was suspected for aspiring to the
Crown of this Realm, consulted with Lanfranc (the Archbishop of Canterburye,
and a professed enemy to Odo) how he might (safely and without offense to
the Ecclesiastical estate, for that he was a Bishop) both conteyne that
treasure within the Realm, and also deteyne his person from going into Italy,
whether ward he both addressed him self with all speed, and gathered for
his train, great troops of valiant, and serviceable men out of every
quarter: Lanfranc counseled the King, to commit him to safe custody, and for
his defense armed him with this pretty shift: If it be laid to your charge
(quoth he) that you have laid violent hands upon a sacred Bishop, Say, that
you imprisoned, not the Bishop of Borieux, but the Earl of Kent. The King
liked well the conceit, and causing Odo to be apprehended, cast him into
prison, whence he was not delivered, during all the time of his reign. That
done, he made diligent inquisitio^ for the hourdes of gold, and by fear of
torture, caused the Bishops servants to bewray the whole treasure.

Fynes, the first Constable of Dover Castle, and the beginning of Castlegard.
Then also took he new order for the government of this Shyre, and because he
was persuaded, that nothing within the same was of more importance, then Dover
Castle, he seized it into his hands, forthwith fortified it, and chose out a
noble man, called John Fynes, (of whose prowess and fidelity he had made good
trial) and committing unto him, not only the custody thereof, but the
government of the rest of the Ports also, by gift of inheritance, he named
him Constable of Dover, and Wardein of the Cinque Ports. And to the end that
he should be of sufficient ability to bear the charge of the defense
thereof, he gave him to the number of six and fifty Knights fees of land
and possession, willing him, to communicate some parts of that gift, to such
other valiant and trusty persons, as he should best like of, for the more
sure conservation of that his most noble and precious piece.

He accordingly called unto him eight other worthy Knights, and imparting
liberally unto them, of that which he had received of the King, bound them by
tenure of their land received of the King, to maintain one hundredth and
twelve soldiers amongst them: which number he so divided by months of the
year, that five and twenty were continually to watch and ward within the
Castle, for their several stintes of time: and all the rest ready at
commandment, upon whatsoever necessity.

The names of these eight were, William of Albrance, Fulbert of Dover, William
Arsicke, Galfride Peuerell, William Maynemouth, Robert Porthe, Robert Creuequer
(called in the Latin Records, De crepito cord) that is, Cracked heart: And
Adam Fitz Williams. Each of al which, had their several charges, in sundry
towers, turrets, and bulworks of the castle, and were contented of their own
dispense, to maintain and repair the same, in token whereof, diverse of them
bear the names and titles of these new chosen Captains, even till this our
present time. And thus Dover being dispatched of a busy Bishop, fenced by the
Kings appointment, furnished, fraught, and planted with a most faithful
Constable, vigilant Captains, and diligent warders, gained and retained the
opinion and name of a most important, commodious, and necessary piece, not
only with the native Princes and Nobility of our own Realm, But also with
such foreigne Potentates, as had war and contention with us: in so much as
in sundry troubles ensuing, at sundry times afterward within this Realm, it
did plainly appear, that this Castle was the chief mark, whereat each man
directed his shot.

For King Stephan, Estimation of Dover Castle.
in the contention that arose between him and Maude the Empress, for the
title of the Crown, thought that no one thing stood him more in hand, then
to get the possession of Dover Castle, and therefore he never ceased to
solicit Walkelm (that the^ had the custody thereof) till he had obtained it.

Jews also, the French Dolphine, which by the instigatio^ Pope, and inuitating
of the Nobility, invaded King John, (upon such cause as shall hereafter
appear) having gained, partly by tenure, and partly by surrender of ye Barons,
that were of his faction, almost all the Castles and Holds, lying on the Southe
part of the Realm, could not yet think him self assured, unless he had
Dover also. For his Father Philipe, hearing that he had the possession of
sundry other strong places, and that he wanted Dover, Swear by Saint James
arm, (which was his accustomed oath) that he had not gained one foot in
England: and therefore, he made thither with all his power, and besieged it
straightly: But that noble Captain Hubert of Borroughe, Hubert of Brough, a
noble captain.
(of whom I lately spoke) which was in his time, Constable of the Castle,
Wardein of the Ports, Earl of Kent, and chief Justice of all England,
defended it with such courageous constancy, that it was both a comfort to
the English subject, and a wonder to the French enemy to behold it: in so
much, as I can not worthily impute the delivery of this Realm, from the
peril of foreign servitude (wherein it then stood) to any one thing so
much, as to the magnanimity of this man. Of whom also (by the way) I think
good to tell you this, that in his time of Constableship Dover, and by his
means, the service of Castlegarde there, which had contained (as I showed
before) from the time of William the Conqueroure, was with the assent of King
Henry the third, converted into a payment of money, the land being charged
with ten shillings for every Warder, that it was bound to find, and the
owners thereby discharged of their personal service, and attendaunce for ever:
At which time also, he caused the same King to release by his free Chartre,
the custom of Forage due to this Castle, and that done, him self instituted
new laws amongst the watchemen, and increased the number of the Warders. But
now to my purpose again.

Simon, the Earl of Leycester, and leader of the Barons war against King
Henry the third, even at the first wrested the Castle of Dover, out of the
Kings possession, and keeping the same during all his life, used to send
thither (as unto a place of most assurance) all such as he had taken
prisoners.

After his overthrow, Edward (then Prince, and afterward the first King of
that name) assailed it with all speed, and (by the aid of the prisoners
within, which had taken the great tower to his use) obtained it: There left
he prisoned, Guy the son of this Simon, but he escaped sone after, by
corruption of his

To make an end, the Nobility of that time were fully persuaded, that both
the safety and danger of the whole Realm, consisted in this one Castle: And
therefore (says Mathewe Parise) at such time as King Henry the third,
called over from beyond the Seas his own brother, Richard (then King of the
Romans) the Noble men (who had him in some Iealouzie) would not agree, that
he, or any of his, should once enter within this Castle. Not without good
cause therefore, has Dover by great preeminence, been reported the chief of
the Five Ports, assigned by laws of Parleament, as a special place for
passage and eschaunge, and by ancient tenure acknowledged for Lady and
Maistresse of many Manors: To it always some man of great apparaunce is
appointed as Captain and governor. To it sundry Gentlmen of the Shyre, pay
yet money for the ancient duty of their attendance and service: And to it
sinally, the country men in all times of trouble, have an especial eye and
regard.

Reparation of Dover Castle.
As concerning the mayntenaunce of this Castle in fortification, and building,
I find not much more in story, then I have already opened, which happens
the rather (as I think) for that many private persons within the Shyre of
Kent, were of long time, not only bound by their tenures of Castlegarde, to
be ready in person for the defense, but also stood charged in purse, with the
reparation of the same. Only I read in John Rosse, that King Edward the
fourth, to his great expense, (which others reckon to have been ten thousand
pounds) amended it throughout: Having therefore none other memorable thing
touching the Castle it self, I will leave it, and pass to the Religious
houses.

S. Martines in Dover.
Lucius the first christened King of the Britons, builded a Church within
Dover Castle, to the name and service of Christ, endowing it with the toll
or custom of the haven there. And Eabaldus (the son of Ethelbert, the first
christened King of the Saxons) erected a College within the walls of the same,
which Wyghtred (a successor of his) removed into the town, stored with two
and twenty Chanons, and dedicated it to the name of S Martine: This house, was
afterward new Henry the second (or rather by William Corbeil, the Archbishop
in his time,) stuffed by Theobalde his successor with Benedicte Monks, and
called the Pryorie of S. Martines, Contention between the R^ligious persons
for trifles.
though commonly afterward, it obtained the name of a new work at Dover.
Between this house and Christ's Church in Canterbury (to the which King
Henry the second had given it) there arose (as it chanced usually amongst
houses Dover, claymed to have interest in the choice of the Archbishop, which
the Pryor of Christ's Church would not agree unto: And on the other side, the
Pryor of Christ's Church pretended to have such a soueraintie over S.
Martines, that he would not only visit the house, but also admit Monks and
Nouices at his pleasure, which the other could not bear: So that they fell
to suing, provoking, and brawling (the ordinary and only means, by which
Monks used to try their controversies) and ceased not appealing, and
pleading at Rome, till they had both wearyed them selves, and wasted their
money. Howbeit, as it commonly falls out, that where respect of money and
reward guydeth the judgment and sentence, there the mighty prevail, and the
poor go to wrack: So the Monks of Canterbury, having to give more, and the
Pope and his ministers being ready to take al, poor Dover was oppressed, and
their Pryor in the end constrained to submission. And here, because I am fallen
into mention of controversy between ecclesiastical persons, of which sort
our hystories have plenty, I will touch in few words, the evil entreaty
that William Longchampe, the jolly Bishop of Elye, and Chaunceller of al
England, used toward Godfrey the Kings brother, and Bishop of York elect,
within this Pryorie.

King Richard the first, Longchamp the lusty bishop of Ely.
being persuaded by the Pope and his Clergy, to make an expedition for the
recovery of the holy land, partly for the performaunce of that which the
King his father had purposed to do in person, and partly for satisfaction of
his own vow, (which he made when he took the cross, as they called it, upon
him) set to port sail his Kingly rights, jurisdictions, and prerogatives, his
crown, lands, fermes, customs, and offices, and whatsoever he had beside, to
raise money withal: and so committing the whole government of his Realm, to
William the Bishop of Ely his Chancellor, he committed him self, and his
company to the wind and Seas.

This Prelate, having now by the Kings commission the power of a Viceroy, and
besides, the Popes gift, the authority of a Legate and Vicar, and
consequently, the exercise of both the swords, so ruled and reigned, over the
Clergy and Laity in the kings absence, that the one sort found him more then
a Pope, the other felt him more then a King, and they both endured him an
intolerable Tyrant: for he not only over ruled the Nobility, and outfaced the
Clergy, spoiling both the one and the other, of their livings and promotions,
for maintenance of his own riot, pomp, and excess: But also oppressed the
common people, devouring and consuming wheresoever he became, the victual of
the country, with the troops and trains of men and horses (being in number a
thousand or fifteen hundredth) that continually followed him. Amongst other his
practices, having gotten into his hands, the revenues of the Archebishopricke
of York (whereof Godfrey, the Kings brother was then elected Bishop, and busy
at Rome for to obtain his consecration) and fearing that by his return, he
might be defrauded of so sweet a morsel, he first labored earnestly to
hinder him in his suite at Rome, and when he saw no success of that attempt,
he determined to make him sure, when soever he should return home. And for
that purpose, he took order with one Clear, (then Sheriff of Kent, and
Constable of the castle of Dover, to whom he had given his sister in marriage)
that he should have a diligent eye to his arrival, and that so soon as the
Archbishop did set foot on land, he should strip him of all his ornaments,
and commit him to safe custody within the Castle. Which thing was done
accordingly: for the Archbishop was no sooner arrived, and entered the
Church, to offer to Saint Martine, sacrifice for his safe passage (as the
Gentiles that escaped shipwreck, were wont to do to Neptune:) But Clear and
his company came in upon him, and doing the Chancellours commandment,
violently haled him and his Chaplains to prison.

Hereat John (then the Kings brother, but afterward King) taking just offense,
and adjoining to him for revenge, the uttermost aid of the Bishops and Barons,
his friends and alies, raised a great power, and in short time so strengthened
the Chancellor, that he not only agreed to release Godfrey, but was feign him
self also (abandoning his late pomp and glory) to get him to Dover, and lie
with his brother Clear, as a poor, private, and despoyled person.

Howbeit, not thus able to endure long, the note of infamy and confusion,
whereinto he was fallen, he determined within him self to make an escape, and by
shift of the place, to shroud his shame, in some corner beyond the Seas: And
therefore, shaueing his face, and attyring him self like a woman, he took a
piece of linen under his arm, and a yard in his hand, minding by that
disguising, to have taken vessel amongst other passingers unknown, and so to
have gotten over: But he was not at the first, in all his authority, more
unlike a good man, the^ he was now in this poor apparel unlike an honest
woman: and therefore being at the very first discovered, he was by certain
rude fellows openly uncased, well boxed about the ears, and sent to the next
Justice, who conveyed him to John his great enemy. And thus was all the gaye
glory of this gallant brought to shame and confusion, his Pecockes feathers
pulled, his black feet bewraied, his fraud unfolded, his might abated, and
him self in the end suffered to sail over with sorrow and ignominy.
Religious houses in Dover.
Besides this Pryorie of S. Martines, (which was valued at a hundredth fourscore
and eight pounds by year) there was lately in Dover also an Hospital, rated
at fifty nine pounds: An other house of the same sort, called Domus Dei, (or
Maison Dieu) reputed worth one hundredth and twenty pounds: And long since a
house of Templers (as they call it) the which (together with all other of the
same kind throughout the Realm) was suppressed in the reign of King Edward
the second: The foundation of any of these, I have not hitherto found out,
and therefore can not deliver thereof any certainty at all: The order of the
Templers, when it began.
Only as touching this Temple, I dare affirm, that it was erected after the
time of Conquest, for as much as I am sure, that the order it self was
invented after that Godfrey, of Bolein, had won Jerusalem, which was after
the coming in of the Conqueror. To these also may be added for neighborhood
sake (if you will) the Monastery of S. Radegundes on the hill, two miles off,
valued at fourscore and eighteen pounds by year. And here, having perused
the Town, Castle, and religious buildings, I would make an end of Dover,
save that Mathewe Parise puts me in mind of one thing (not unworthy
rehearsal) that was done in this Temple: I mean, the sealing of that
submission, which King John made to Pandulphe (the Popes Legate) wherein he
yealded his Realm tributarie, and him self an obedienciarie, and vassal, to
the Bishop of Rome: And because this was almost the last act of the whole
Tragedy, and can not well be understood without some recourse to the former
parts and beginning, and for that some men (of late time) have taken great
hold of this matter, to advance the Popes authority withal, I will shortly
(after my manner) recount the thing as it was done, and leave the judgment to
the indifferent Reader.

After the death of Hubert (the Archbishop of Canterbury) the Monks of
Christ's Church agreed among The Pope and king John fall our for Stephan
Langton.
Reginald the Subpryor of their house. King John (having no notice of this
election, wherein no doubt he received great wrong, since they ought to have
of him their Conge deslier) recommended unto them, John Graye, the Bishop of
Norwiche, a man that for his wisdom and learning, he favored much. Some
part of the Monks, taking soudaine offense at Reginalde (for that he had
disclosed a secret out of their house) and being glad to satisfy the Kings
desire, elected this Graye for their Bishop also.

Hereof grew a great suite at Rome, between the more part of the Monks on the
one side, and the Suffraganes of Canterbury, and the less number of the Monks
on the other side.

The Pope (upon the hearing of the cause) at the first ratifieth the election
of John Graye: Howbeit afterward he refuses both the electes, and prefers
Stephan Langton, whom the Monks (because the matter was not before litigious
enough) elected also.

Now King John, hearing, that not only the election of Graye (contrary to the
Popes own former determination) was made frustrate, but that there was also
thruste into his place a man familiarly entertained by the French King (his
great enemy) disliked much of the choice, and forbad Stephan the elect, to
enter the Realm: The Pope again, who (as Mathewe Parise writes) sought
chiefly in this his choice, Virum strenuum, a stout man, that is (in plain
speech) a man that could exact of the Clergy, keep in awe the Laity, and
encounter the King and Nobility) seeing his champion thus rejected, begins
to startle for anger: first therefore, he moves the King by minacing letters
to admit Stephan, and (not so prevailing) he enterditeth him, and his whole
Realm: And finally, both provoke al Potentates to make open war upon him,
and also promises to the King of France, full and free remission of all his
sins, and the kingdom of England it self, to invade him: this done, he
solliciteth to rebellion the Bishops, nobility, and co^mo^s of the Realm,
loosing the^ (by the plenitude of his Apos- to like power) from al duty of
allegiaunce toward their Prince. By this means divine service ceased, the
King of France armed, the Bishops conspired, the nobility made defection, and
the common people wauered, uncertain to what part to incline: To be short,
King John was so pressed with suspicion and fear of domestical and foreign
enemies on al sides, that (notwithstanding he was of great and noble courage,
and seemed to have forces sufficient for resistance also, if he might have
trusted his soldiers) yet he was in the end compelled, to set his seal to a
Chartre of submissio^, whereby he acknowleged himself to hold the Crown of
England of the Popes Mitre, and promised to pay yearly for the same and for
Ireland, 1000. Marks, to ye holy father and his successors for ever: this
Chartre, because it was afterward with great insultation and triumph closed in
Gold, The Golden Bull.
was then commonly called, Aurea Bulla, the Bull of Gold.

Thus, omitting the residue of this story, no less tragical and troublesome,
then that which I have already recited: I report me to all indifferent men,
what cause Paulus Iouius, or any other popish parasite has (by color of
this Bull) to claim for the Pope, superiority and Dominion over the King of
this Realm, since John without the assent of the estates, (I mean his nobility
and commons) could not (in such a gift) either bind his successors, or
charge the kingdom.

And for plain declaration, that his submission proceaded not with their
consent, I read in a treatise of one Simon de Boraston (a Friar Preacher, in
the time of King Edward the third) the which he wrote concerning the Kings
right to the Crown of Ireland, that in the reign of Henry the third (which
next of all succeaded King John) there were sent from the King, the nobility
and the commons of England, these Noble men: Hughe Bigod, John Fitz Geffray,
William Cantlowe, Phillip Basset, and a Lawier named William Powicke, to the
general Counsel, then assembled at Lions in France, of purpose, and with
commission, to require that the said Bull, sealed by King John, might be
cancelled, for as much as it passed not by the assent of the Counsel of the
Realm: and the same Author writes, that the Pope for that time did put them
of, by color of more weighty affairs, which the Counsel had then in hand. I
know, that it may well be thought needless, to labor further in confuting a
little, so weightles: (for it is true, that Aristotle says, Stultum est,
absurdas opiniones accuratius refellere) It is but a folly, to labor over
curiously, in refelling of absurdities. And therefore I will here conclude the
treatise of Dover, and proceed particularly to the rest of the places that lie
on this shore.

Folkstone in Saxon, folcestane, Id est, Populi Lapis, or else, flostane,
which signifies a rock, or a flawe of stone.
Amongst the places lying on this shore Dover, follows Folkstone, S.
Eanswide and her miracles.
where Eanfled, or rather Eanswide, the daughter of Eadbalde, the son of
Ethelbert, and in order of succession, the sixte King of Kent, long since
erected a religious Pryorie of women, not in the place where S. Peter's Church
at Folkstone now stands, but Southe, from thence, where the Sea many years
ago has swalowed and eaten it. And yet, least you should think S. Peter's
Parish church to be void of reverence, I must let you know of Noua Legenda
Angliae, that before the Sea had devoured all, S. Eanswides relics were
translated thither: The author of that work reports many wonders of this
woman, as that she lengthened a beam of that building three foot, when the
Carpenters (missing in their measure) had made it so much too short: That she
haled and drew water, over the hills against nature: That she forbad certain
ravenous birds the country, which before did much harm there abouts: That
she restored the blind, cast out the Devil, and healed innumerable folks of
their infirmities. And therefore after her death, she was by the policy of
the Popish priests, and folly of the common people, honored for a Saint.

A popish policy.
And no maruail at all, for it was usual in Papistrie, not only to magnify
their Benefactours of all sorts, but to edify also (so many of them at the
least) as were of noble Parentage, knowing that thereby, triple commodity
ensued: the first, for as much as by that mean, they assured many great
personages unto them: secondly, they drew (by the awe of their example)
infinite numbers of the common people after them: And lastly, they adventured
the more bouldly (under those honorable, and glorious names and titles) to
publishe their pouishe and pelting miracles. And this surely was the cause that
Sexburge in Shepie, Mildred in Tanet, Etheldred at Elye, Edith at Wilton, and
sundry other simple women of Royal blood in each quarter, were canonized
Saints: for generally the Religious, of those times, were as thankful to
their Benefactors, as ever were the heathen nations to their first Kings and
founders: The one sort Sanctifying such, as did either build them houses, or
devise them orders: And the other Deifying such, as had made them Cities, or
prescribed them Laws and government.

This was it that made Saturn, Hercules, Romulus, and others more, to have
place (in common opinion) with the Gods above the stars, and this caused
Dunstane, Edgar, Ethel would, and others, first to be shryued here in earth,
and then to sit amongst the Saints in Heaven. But let me now leave their
policy, and return to the History. The Town of Folkestone was sore spoiled
Godwine and his Sons, Folkestone spoiled.
what time they harried that whole coast of Kent, for revenge of their
banishment, as we have often before remembered.

The Hundred The Hundred.
of Folkstone, contained in the time of King Edward the Confessor, a hundrethe
and twenty ploughe lands, it had in it five Parish Churches, it was valued
at a hundrethe and ten pounds, and belonged to the Earl Godwine before named.

The Manor The Manor.
was given to William Albranc (of whom, I made mention in Dover) with
condition, to find one and twenty warders toward the defense of that Castle,
and it grew in time to be the head of an honor or Baronie, as in the Records
of the Exchequer, remains as yet to be seen.

Saltwood.
THat Saltwood was long sithence an Honor also, it may appear by an ancient
writ, directed by King Henry the second from beyond the Seas, to King Henry
his Son, for the restitution of Thomas Becket ye Archbishop, to all such
goods, lands, and fees, as were taken from him, during the displeasure
between them: which writ both for show of the ancient form, and because
it contains the matter of history, I will not stick to exemplify, word for
word, as Mathewe Parise has recorded it. Sciatis, quod Thomas Cant.
Episcopus pace^ mecum fecit ad voluntatem meam, and ideo praecipio tibi, vt
ipse, and omnes sui, pacem habeant, and faciatis ei habere, and suis, omnes res
suas, been, in pace, and honorifice, sicut habuerunt tribus me^sibus, antequa^
exirent Angliae faciatisque venire cora^ vobis, de melioribus and
antiquioribus, militibus, de honor de Saltwood and eoru^ iurame^to faciatis
inquiri, quid ibi habetur de feodo Archiepiscopatus Cant. and quod recognitu^
fuerit esse de feodo ipsius, ipsi faciatis habere: valete. The Pontifical
iusice, of William Courtney the Archbishop
But if this Record of the Kings, suffice not to prove the honor of this
place, then here (I pray you) a word of the honorable (or rather the
Pontifical) dealing of William Courtney the Archbishop, who taking offense
that certain poor men, his Tenants, of the Manor of Wingham, had brought him
rent hay and littar to Canterbury, not openly in carts for his glory, as they
were accustomed, but closely in sackes upon their horses as their ability
would suffer, cited them to this his castle, of Saltwood, and there after that
he had showed himself (Adria iracundiorem) as hot as a toste with the matter,
he first bound them by oath to obey his own ordinance, and then enjoined them
for penance, that they should each one march leisurely after the procession,
bareheaded and barefooted, with a sack of hey or straw on his shoulder, open
at the mouth, so as the stuff might appear hanging out of the bag to all the
beholders. Now I beseech you, what was it else for this proud Prelate thus to
insult over simple men, for so small a fault, (or rather for no fault at all)
but Laureolam in Mustaceis querere, and no better. Thus much (at this present)
of the Place, for as touching the first matter, concerning Thomas, that shall
appear at large in Canterbury following. And therefore leaving on our right
hand, the stately parts of Sir Edward Poynings imperfect buylding at
Ostenhangar, Ostenhangar.
let us see what is to be said of Hyde.

Hyde, is written in Saxon Hythe, that is, the Haven: and called of Leland in
Latin, Portus Hithinus, in some Records, Hethe.
THe name of this place importing (as it should seem) by ye generality thereof
some note of worthiness, and the long continued privileges thereunto belonging
(it self being long since one of the five principal Ports) at the first led me
(and happily may hereafter move others also) to think that it had been of
more estimation in time past, then by any other thing now apparent may well be
coniectured: Howbeit, after that I had somewhat diligently searched the Saxon
antiquities, from whence (if from any at all) the beginning of the same is to
be derived, and had perused the book of Domesday, wherein almost nothing
(especially that might be profitable) was pretermitted, and yet found little,
or (in manner) nothing, concerning this Town committed to memory: I became of
this mind, that either ye place was at the first of little price, and for the
increase thereof endowed with Privileges, or (if it had been at any time
estimable) that it continued not long in ye plight.

And truly, whosoever shall consider, either the Universal vicissitude of the
Sea in all places, The Cause of the decay of Havens in Kent.
or the particular alteration, and change, that in times passed, and now
presently it works on the coasts of this Realm, he will easily assent, that
Towns bordering upon the Sea, and vpholded by the commodity thereof, may in
short time decline to great decay, and become (in manner) worth nothing at
all. For, as the water either flows, or forsakes the^, so must they of
necessity, either flourish, or fall: flowing (as it were) and ebbing with the
Sea it self. The necessity of which thing, is every where so inevitable,
that all the Popish ceremonies of espousing the Sea (which the Venetians
yearly use on Saint Marks day, by casting a Golden ring into the water)
cannot let, but that the Sea continually by little and little, withdraws it
self from their City, and threatens in time, utterly to forsake them.

Now therefore, as I cannot fully show, what Hide has been in times passed,
and must refer to each man's own eye to behold what it presently is: So yet,
will I not pretermitte to declare out of other men, such notes as I find,
concerning the same.

From this Town (says Henry Huntingdon) Earl Godwine, and his Sons in the
time of their exile, fetched away diverse vessels, lying at road, even as they
had at Rumney also, whereof we shall have place to speak more hereafter.
Before this Town (in the reign of King Edward the first) a great fleet of
French men showed themselves upon the Sea, of which one (being furnished with
two hundrethe Soldiers) set her men on land in the Haven, where they had no
sooner pitched their foot, but the Townsmen came upon the^ to the last man,
wherewith the residue were so afraid, that forthwith they hoysed up sail,
and made no further attempt. Hyde miserably scourged.
This Town also was grievously afflicted, in the beginning of the Reign of
King Henry the fourth, in so much as (besides the fury of the pestilence,
which raged all over) there were, in one day, two hundredth of the houses
consumed by flame, and five of their ships with one hundredth men, drowned at
the Sea: By which hurt the inhabitaunts were so wounded, that they began to
devise, how they might abandone the place, and build them a Town else where:
Whereupon they had resolved also, had not the King by his liberal Chartre
(which I have seen under his scale) released unto them, for five turns next
following (unless the greater necessity should in the mean time, compel him
to require it) their service of five ships, of one hundredth men, and of v.
garsons, which they ought of duty, and at their own charge without the
help of any other member, to find him, by the space of fifteen days
together.

Finally, The shortest passage between England and France.
from this Town to Boloigne (which is taken to be the same, that Caesar
calls Gessoriacum) is the shortest cut over the Sea, between England and
France, as some hold opinion: Others think that to be the shortest passage,
which is from Dover to Calaice: But if there be any man, that prefers not
have before his good speed, let him (by mine advise) prove a third way, I
mean from Dover to Withsand: for if Edmund Badhenham, the penner of the
Chronicles of Rochester, lie not shamefully, (which thing you know how far
it is from a Monk) then at such time as King Henry the second, and Jews the
French King, were after long war reconciled to amity, Jews came over to
visit King Henry, and in his return homeward saluted saint Thomas of
Canterbury, made a princely offer at his tumbe, Thomas Becket grau^teth a
petition after his death.
and (because he was very fearful of the water) asked of saint Thomas, and
obtained, that neither he in that passage, nor any other from thenceforth, that
crossed the Seas between Dover and Withsand, should suffer any manner of loss
or shipwreck. But of this Saint (saving your reverence) we shall have fit
place to speak more largely hereafter, and therefore let us now leave the
Sea, and look toward Shipwey.

Shipwey, or Shipweyham, in the Records: commonly, Shipwey Cross.
Between Hyde and Westhanger, lies Shipwey, the place that was of ancient
time honested with the Plees and assemblies of the Five Ports: although at this
day, neither by good building extant, it be much glorious, nor by any common
meeting, greatly frequented.

I remember, that I have read in a book of Privileges of the Five Ports, that
certain principal points, concerning the Port towns, be determinable at
Shipwey only: And likely it is, that the withdrawing of the trial of causes
from thence to Dover Castle, has brought decay and obscurity upon the place.

Of this place, the whole Last of Shipwey, (containing twelve Hundrethes) at
the first took, and yet continues the name: At this place, Prince Edward, the
Son to King Henry the third, exacted of the Barons of the v. Ports their
oath of fidelity to his Father, against the mainteiners of the Barons war:
And at this place only our Limenarcha, or Lord Wardein of the Ports, Lord
Wardein of the Ports.
receaueth his oathe, at his first entry into the office.

Whether this were at any time a Harborow for ships, Shipwey, sometime a Hau^n
town.
(as the Etymology of the name gives likelihoode of conjecture) or no, I dare
neither affirm nor deny, having neither read, nor seen, that may lead me to
the one, or the other: only I remember, that Robert Talbot (a man of our time,
and which made a Commentary upon the Itinerarie of Antoninus Augustus) is of
the opinion, that is was called Shipwey, because it lay in the way to the
Haven, where the ships were wont to ride: And that haven takes he to be the
same, which of Ptolome is caled (...), Nouus Portus: of Antoninus, Limanis,
The Haue^ Limene, and the Town Lymne.
of our Chroniclers Limene Mouth, and interpreted by Leland to betoken, the
mouth of the river of Rother, which now in our time opens into the Sea at
Rye, but before at Winchelsey.

His conjecture is grounded, partly (as you see) upon the Etymology of the
name, partly upon the consideration of some antiquities that be near to the
place, and partly also upon the report of the country people, who hold fast
ye same opinion, which they have by tradition received from their Elders.

In deed, the name, both in Greek, and old English, which followethe the
Greek, that is to say, Limen and Limene Mouth, does signify a Haven, whereof
the Town of Lymne adjoining, and the whole Deanrie, or limit of the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in which it stands (for that also is called
Lymne) by likelyhoode took the name. This Haven (says he) stood at the
first, under a high Rock in the Parish of Lymne, under the which there was
situate a strong Castle for the defense of the Port, the ruins of which
buylding be yet apparent to the eye. There is extant also, a fair paued
cawsey, some miles of length, leading from Canterbury toward the same Port:
and they of the Town enjoy the Privileges of the Five Ports, and do reserve
a brazen Horn, and a Mace, as ensigns of Castle Guard, and administration of
Justice, in old time exercised there. Finally they affirm, that (the water
forsaking them by little and little) decay and solitude came at the length upon
the place.

For, whereas at the first, ships were accustomed to discharge at Lymne, the
Sea afterward (either hindered by the sands, or not helped by the fresh
water) shortened his fludde, and caused the Merchaunts to unlade at Westhithe:
Neither did it yet ascend so high any long season, but by continual
decreasings, withdrew it self, and at the length compelled them to lay their
wares on land at this Hithe, which now stands in deed, but yet without any
great benefit of the Sea, for as much as at this day, the water flows not to
the Town by half a mile and more. These conjectures, and reports, be
reasonable, but yet, as I am sure that they be utterly at variaunce with that
opinion, which Leland would plant of the present course of the River of
Rother (as we will show in Newendene, when, we shall come to the place) so
am I in doubt also, what means may be found, to reconcile them with the
relations of Asserus Meneuensis, The River Limen, now Rother.
Henry Huntingdon, and our old Saxon Chronicles, al which seem to affirm,
that Apledore Apledore.
stood upon the water Lymen, which if it be so, then I see not (the places
considered) how this Town of Lymne could ever be situated upon the same River.

Their words in effect, be these. In the year, after Christ, 893. the great
army of the Danes, left the East part of France, and came to Boloigne, and
from thence with. 250. vessels sailed into the mouth of the River Lymen, in
Kent, which flows from the great wood that is called Andred: Thence they
towed up their boats four miles into that wood from the mouth of the River,
where they found a Castle half built, and a few Country men in it, all
which together with the Village, they destroyed, and fortified at a place
called Apultree. By which it may in deed at the first face seem, that the
River Lymen led from Apledore to the Sea, and came not by Lymne: but yet that I
may say somewhat for Talbot, these words do not necessarily enforce so much,
for that they be not, that they towed their ships up to Apledore, but four
miles to the wood, and builded at Apledore, which they might well do,
although they had come in at Hithe. To the which sense also the words of
Asserus Meneuensis (which lived in that very time) do give somewhat the more
place and liberty, when he says. They towed up their ships, four miles into
the wood, where they threw down a certain Castle (half built, in which a
few Churles of ye Country were placed) and the Town also, and they raised an
other stronger in a place called Apledore: For these words (an other in a place
stronger called Apledore) seem to importe, that Apledore was not the Town
four miles within the Rivers mouth, which they pulled down, but some other:
Which, as for the distance it might happily be Lymne yt we have in hand: so
because there is no apparent memorial of any such course of the River, I will
not affirm it to have been the same, but refer the decision of the whole
controversy, to the learned and inquisitiue reader, that will bestow his
labor to try, and trace out the very truth.

Courtopstrete, commonly: but truly Court at Street.
THe enemy of mankind, and Prince of darkness, Satan the Devil,
perceiving that the glorious and bright shining beams of Gods holy truth and
gladsome Gospel, had pierced the mistie thick clouds of ignorance, and
showed (not only to the people of Germany, but to the inhatants of this
Islande also) the true way of their deliverance, from damnable error,
idolatry, and Popish superstition: And fearing, that if he did not now
bestir him busily, he was in peril to lose infinite numbers of his subjects,
and consequently, no small part of that his spiritual kingdom, practiced
most carefully in all places, with Monks, Friars, Priests, Nonnes, and the
whole rablement of his Religious army, for the holding of simple souls in
wonted obedience, and the upholding of his usurped Empire in the accustomed
glory, opinion, and reverence. And for this purpose (amongst sundry fleightes,
set to show in sundry places, about the latter end and declination of that his
reign) one was wrought by the Holy maid of Kent, in a Chapel at this town,
in devise as malicious, in deed as mischeuous, and in discovery as notorious,
as any other whatsoever.

But because the midst, and end of this Pageant, is yet fresh in the knowledge
of many on living, and manifested to al men in books abroad: And for that the
beginning thereof is known to very few, and likely in time to be hid from
all, if it be not by some way or other continued in mind: I will labor only
to bewray the same, and in such sort, as the mainteiners thereof them selves
have committed it to writing.

For not long since, it chanced me to see a little Pamphlet, containing four
and twenty leaves, penned I wot not by what doltishe dreamer, printed by
Robert Redman, Entitled: A marvelous work of late done at Court of Street
in Kent, and published (as it pretends) to the devout people of that time for
their spiritual consolation: in which I found the very first beginning, to
have been as follows.

About the time of Easter, in the seuenteenthe year of Henry the eight, it
happened a certain maiden named Elizabethe Barton, The holy Maid of Kent.
then servant to one Thomas Kob, of the Parish of Aldington, twelve miles
distant from Canterbury, to be touched with a great infirmity in her body,
which did ascend at diverse times up into her throat, and swelled greatly:
during the time whereof, she seemed to be in grievous pain, in so much as a
man would have thought, that she had suffered the panges of death it self,
until the disease descended, and fell down into the body again.

Thus she continued by fittes, the space of seven months, and more, and at
the last, in the Month of November (at which time also a young Child of her
Masters lay desperately sick in a cradle by her) she being vexed with the
former disease, asked (with great pangs and groaning) whether the Child were
yet departed this life, or not: And when the women that attended upon them
both in their sickness, answered no, she replied that it should anon:
which word was no sooner uttered, but the child fetched a great sighe, and
withal the soul departed out of the body.

This her divination and foretelling, was the first matter, that moved her
hearers to admiration: But after this, in sundry of her fits following,
although she seemed to the beholders to lie as still as a dead body (not
moving any part at all) as well in the traunces themselves, as after the pangs
passed also, she told plainly of diverse things done at the Church, and other
places where she was not present, which nevertheless she seemed (by signs
proceeding from her) most lively to behold (as it were) with her eye: She
told also, of heaven, hell, and purgatory, and of the joys, and sorrows,
that sundry departed souls had, and suffered there: She spoke frankly against
the corruption of manners and evil life: She exhorted repair to the Church,
hearing of Mass, confession to Priests, prayer to our Lady and Saints, and
to be short, made in all points, confession and confirmation of the Popish
Creed and Catechism, and that so devoutly and discretely (in the opinion of
mine author) that he thought it not possible for her to speak in that manner.

But amongst other things, this one was ever much in her mouth, that She
would go home, and that she had been at home, whereas (to the understanding
of the standers by) she had never been from home, nor from the place where she
lay: whereupon being (in a time of another trance) demanded where That home
was, she answered, Where she saw and heard the joys of heaven, where S.
Michael wayed souls, where Saint Peter carried the keys, and where she her
self had the company of our Lady at Court of Street, and had heartily besought
her to heal her disease, who also had commanded her, to offer unto her a
Taper in her Chapel there, and to declare boldly to all Christian people,
that our Lady of Court of Street, had received her from the very point of
death: and that her pleasure was, that it should be rong for a miracle.

Which words when her Master heard, he said, that there were no Belles at
that Chapel, whereunto the Maiden answered nothing, but the voice that spoke
in her proceeded, saying, Our blessed Lady will show more miracles there shortly,
for if any depart this life soudainly, or by mischance, in deadly sin, if he
be vowed to our Lady heartely, he shall be restored to life again, to receive
shrift, and housell, and after to depart this world with Gods blessing.
Besides this, she told them what meat the Heremite of that Chapel of our
Lady at Court of Street had to his supper, and many other things concerning
him, whereat they maruailed greatly.

And from that time forward, she resolved with her self, to go to Court of
Street, and there to pray and offer to our Lady, which also she did
accordingly: And was there delayde of her cure for a certain season, but yet
(in the mean time) put in assured hope of recovery. During which mean
while, the fame of this marvelous Maiden was so spread abroad, that it came
to the ears of Warham the Archbishop of Canterbury, who directed thither
Doctor Bocking, Master Hadleighe, and Barnes, three Monks of Christ's Church
in Canterbury, father Jews, and his fellow, two obseruants, his Official of
Canterbury, and the Parson of Aldington, with commission to examine the matter,
and to infourme him of the truth.

These men opposed her of the chief points of the Popish belief, and
finding her sound therein, not only waded no further in the discovery of the
fraud, but gave it great countenance, and joined with her in setting forth of
the same: So that at her next voyage to our Lady of Court of Street, she
entered the Chapel with Aue Regina Caelorum, in pricksong, accompanied with
these Commissioners, many Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen of the best
degree, and three thousand persons besides, of the common sort of people.

There fell she eftsoon into a marvelous passion before the Image of our
Lady, much like a body diseased of the falling Evil, in the which she
uttered, sundry metricall and ryming speeches, tending to the worship of our
Lady of Court of Street (whose Chapel there, she wished to be better
maintained, and to be furnished with a daily singing Priest) tending also to
her own bestowing in some Religious house, for such (said she) was our
Ladies pleasure, and to the advancement of the credit, of such feyned
miracles, as mine author reports. This done and understood to the
Archbishop, she was by him appointed to S. Sepulcres, a house of Nonnes in
Canterbury, where she labored sundry times of her disease, and continued her
wonted working of wondrous miracles, resorting often (by way of trau^ce only)
to our Lady of Court of Street, who also ceased not to show her self mighty
in operation there, lighting candels without fire, moystning women's breasts
that before were dry and wanted milk, restoring all sorts of sick to
perfect health, reducing the dead to life again, and finally doing all good,
to al such as were measured and vowed (as the manner was) unto her at Court of
Street.

Thus Elizabeth Barton was advanced from the condition of a base servant, to
the estate of a glorious Nonne. The Heremite of Court of Street was enriched by
daily offering, S. Sepulchers got the possession of a Holy Maiden, God was
blasphemed, the holy Virgin his mother mishonoured, the silly people were
miserably mocked, The Bishops, Priests, and Monks, in the mean time with
closed eyes wincking, and the Devil and his lymmes, with open mouth laughing
at it.

And thus the matter stood sundry years together, until at length, the
question was moved about King Henry's marriage, at which time this holy Maiden
(not containing her self within her former bounds of hypocrisy) stepped into
this matter also, and feyned that she understood by revelation, that if the
King proceeded to the divorce, he should not be King of this Realm one month
after: Whereupon, her doings were once again examined (not by men given over
to believe illusions, but by such as had the prudent power of proving
spirits) and in the end her dissimulation was deciphered, her Popish
comforters were bewrayed, the deceived people were well satisfied, these
dangerous deceivers were worthily executed, and the Devil their Master was
quite and clean confounded.

The circumstances of all which doing, I do of purpose omit (knowing that it
is in the statute of.25. Chap. 12.
year of King Henry the eight, and each where else, in manner, to be read,
and thinking my self to have performed promise, in that I have disclosed the
first attemptes) and will now therefore make toward Rumney.

Bylsington.
AFter the deceasse of King Edward the third, and against the day of the
Coronation of King Richard the second which succeeded him, John the King of
Castile and Lions, Duke of Lancaster, and Earl both of Leycester and Linolne,
clayming in the right of his Earldome of Leyce^er, to be high Seneschall (or
Steward) at that solem^itie, and thereby to have the authority of hearing and
determining of the claims, of al such as by their tenure pretended to have any
office or fee at the Kings inthronization, amongst other suites received a
petition, exhibited by Richard then Earl of Arundale and Surrey, in which
the same Earl claimed the office of chief Butler, and recognized him self
ready to perform the same. Butler the Coronatio^.
Whereupon, forthwith one Edmund Staplegate, exhibited another petition, and
likewise made his claim to this effect. That whereas he, the said Edmund
held of the King in chief, the Manor of Bylsington in Kent, by the service to
be his Butler at the Coronation, as plainly appeared in the book of Fees and
Sericancies in the Exchequer: And whereas also by reason of that tenure, the
late King Edward the third had both seized the lands of that petitioner (for
so much as he was in his minority, at the time of the death of Edmund
Staplegate his father) and had also committed the custody of his body to one
Iefferay Chawsier (to who^ he paid. 104. l. for the same) he now proffered to
do that service, and prayed to be admitted to the office thereof, with alowance
of the fees that belonged thereunto.

These claims and the replies also, both of the Earl, and of Staplegate,
being heard and considered, It was then order (partly for the shortness of
the time, which would not permit a full examination of the matter, and partly
because that on the Earls side it was proved, that his ancestors had been in
possession of that office, after the alienation of the Manor of Bylsington,
whereas on the other part it appeared not, that the ancestors of Staplegate
had ever executed the same) that (for the present Coronation) the Earl should
be received, and the right of Staplegate, and all others should be
nevertheless to them saved. Thus much of the Manor of Bylsington, (which
lies here on the right hand) I thought meet to impart with you, to occupy us
withal in our way to Rumney: Pryorie at Bylsington.
for as touching the Pryorie that there was, although I suppose it to have
begone by the liberality of some of the Earls of Arundale, yet can I assure
you of nothing touching it, save only of the yearly value, which you shall
find in the Particular of this shyre, amongst the rest of the suppressed
houses.

Rumney, called in Saxon, Rumen ea; that is to say, The large watrie place, or
Marishe: It is written in the Records corruptly, Rumenal, and Romual.
THE participation of like Privilege, might well have moved me to have placed
the Ports together, but the purpose of mine order already taken, calls me
another way, and byndeth me to prosecute them, as they lie in order of my
journey.

There be in Kent therefore, two towns of this name, the Old and the New
Rumney, as touching the latter whereof I mind not to speak, having not
hitherto found either in Record or History, any thing pertaining thereunto:
but that little which I have to say, must be of old Rumney, which was long
since a principal Port, and gives cause of name to the new town, as it self
first took it, of the large level, and territory of Marishe ground that is
adjoining.

This Town (says the Record of Domesday) was of the possession of one Robert
Rumney, and holden of Odo (then Bishop of Borieux, Earl of Kent, and brother
to King William the Conqueror) in the which the same Robert had thirteen
Burgesses, who for their service at the Sea, were acquitted of all exactions,
and custome^ of charge, except fellonie, breach of the peace, and
forstalling. It was sometime a good, sure, and commodious Haven, where many
vessels used to lie at Road: For Henry (the Archedeacon Huntingdon) makes
report, that at such time as Godwine (Earl of Kent) and his Sons were
exiled the Realm (upon such cause of displeasure, as has already appeared
in Dover) they armed vessels to the Sea, and sought by disturbing the quiet of
the people, to compel the King to their reuocation: And therefore, (among
sundry other harms that they did on the Coast of this Shyre) they entered the
haven at Rumney, and lead away all such ships, as they found in the Harborow.

Thomas Becket Thomas Becket.
(the Archbishop) having by froward Henry the second to indignation against
him, and fearing to abide the trial of ordinary Justice at home, determined
to appeal to the Popes favor at Rome, for which purpose he secretly took
boat at Rumney, minding to have escaped over: but he was driven back by a
contrary wind, and so compelled to land against his will. The understanding
of which matter, The Popes authority was abolished in England, in the time of
King Henry the second.
so exasperated the King against him, that forthwith he seized his goods, and
gave commandment by his writ to the Sheriffs of all coasts, to make
arrest of al such, as for any cause provoked to the Pope. He caused also his
subjects (from twenty years of age upward) through out the whole Realm, to
renounce by oath, all wonted obedience to the Sea of Rome, and solicited
earnestly the Emperor Frederic, and Jews the French King, to have joined
with him in deposing Pope Alexander, for that he so commonly received
runnegates, and such as rebelled against their lawful Princes.

But such was either the enimitie of Jews the French King, against King
Henry the second, or his dull sight in discerning the profit of the whole
Christian common weal, that he refused to assist the other twain, by means
whereof, both Frederic the Emperor, was afterward compelled to yield him to
the Pope, and King Henry the second glad (withal submission) to reconcile
himself to the Archebishops favor.

Rumney Marshe Rumney Mar^he.
is famous throughout the Realm, as well for the fertility and quantity of
the soil and level, as also for the ancient and wholesome ordinances there
used, for the preservation and maintenance of ye banks, and walls, against
the rage of the Sea.

It contains (as by due computation it may appear) 24000. Acres: For the
taxation of Rumney Marshe only (not accompting Walland Marshe, Guilford
Marshe. etc. amounts to 50. pounds, after the rate of one half penny the
Acre) and it is at this day governed by certain laws, made by one Henry
Bathe, a Justice and Commissioner for that purpose in the time of King Henry
the third. Of which his statutes, experience in time has begotten such
allowance, and liking, that it was afterward not only ordered, that all the
low grounds between Tanet in Kent, and Pemsey in Sussex, should be guided by
the same: But they are also now become a pattern, and exemplar to all the like
places of the whole Realm, to be governed by. The place is not much
inhabited, because it is Hyeme malus, Aestate molestus, Nunquam bonus, Evil in
Winter, grievous in Summer, and never good. As Hesiodus (ye old Poet) sometime
said of the Country where his Father dwelt. And therefore, very reasonable is
their conceit, The three steps of Kent.
which do imagine, that Kent has three steps, or degrees, of which the
first (say they) offers Wealth without health, the second gives both
Wealth and health, and the third afoordeth health only, and no Wealth. For,
if a man, minding to pass through Kent toward London, should arrive, and make
his first step on land in Rumney Marshe, he shall rather find good grass
under foot, then wholesome Air above the head: again, if he step over the
Hills, and come into the Weald, he shall have at once the commodities, both
Caeli, and Soli, of the Air, and the Earth: But if he leave that, and climb
the next step of hills, that are between him, and London, he shall have
wood, and corn, for his wealth, and (toward the increase of his health) if
he seek, he shall find, Famem in agro lapidoso, a good stomach in the stony
field. No marvel it is therefore, if Rumney Marshe be not thick peopled,
seeing most men be yet still of Porcius Cato his mind, who held them stark
mad, that would dwell in an unwholesome Air, were the soil never so good and
fertile. And this thing being well understood to the estates of the Realm,
they used in Parleamentes, to allure men hither, by exemption from payment of
Subsidies, and such like charges, wherewith the inhabitants of other places be
burdened.

Neshe, called in Saxon (Nesse) which signifies a Nebbe, or nose of the
land, extended into the Sea.
THis Cape lies in Walland Marshe. Southe from Rumney, and is of the number of
those places, that Earl Godwine aflicted in the time of his banishment: from
hence he passed toward London, and there (by the help of his confederates)
showed such an assembly, that the Bishops, and Noble men (for very fear)
became suitors to the King for his peace, and in the end procured it.

Before this Neshe, lies a flat into the Sea, threatening great danger to
unadvised Sailors.

And now having thus viewed such places a long the Sea shore, as ancient
Hystories have put me in remembrance of: I might readely take occasion, both
to recommend unto you, the vigilant study of our Ancestors, in providing for
the defense of the Sea Coasts, and withal show you a President or two of
theirs, containing the assesse of such particular Watch and Ward, as they
used there in the Reign of King Edward the third, in whose time also it was
first ordered, that Beacons in this Country should have their pitche pots, and
that they should be no longer made of woodstackes or piles, as they be yet in
Wilshire, and elsewhere. But because those assesses were not permanent, and
always alike (as not growing by reason of any tenure) but arbitrable from time
to time, at the discretion of such, as it liked the Prince to set over the
Country in time, of wars, And for that also we at this day ( God be thanked
therefore) have besides the like watchefull endeavor of our present governors,
sundry standing platformes (as you have seen) erected to the very end, and
maintained at the continual charge of the Prince, I will not here stand upon
that matter, but forsaking the shore, betake me Northward to pass along the
River Rother, which divides this Shyre from Sussex: The order of this
description.
where after that I shall have showed you Apledore, Stone, and Newenden, I will
pearce through the Weald, to Medwey, and so labor to perform the rest of my
purpose

Apledore, in Saxon Apultre, in Latin, Malus, that is, an Apletree.
IN the time of King Alfred, that great swarm of the Danes which annoyed this
Realm, and found not here wherewith to satisfy the hungry gut of their
ravenous appetite, brake their company into twain: whereof the one passed
into France, under the conducte of Hasten, and the other remained here under
the charge of Guthrune.

The Danes do spoil, France, and England, at one time.
This Hasten with his company, landed in Pontein, ranged over al Picardie,
Normandy, Angeon, Poieton and passed over Loire, even to Orleance, killing,
burning, and spoiling whatsoever was in his way, in so much that besides the
pitiful butcherie committed upon the people, and the inestimable booty of
their goods taken away, he consumed to ashes above nine hundredth religious
houses, and Monasteries.

This done, he sent away.250. of his ships laden with rich spoil, which came
hither again, entering into the River of Rother, (the^ called as Leland
weeneth, Lymen, at the mouth whereof old Winchelsey sometime stood) and by
soudaine surprise took a small Castle, that was four or five miles within the
land, at Apultre (as some think) which because it was not of sufficient
strength for their defense and conuerture, they abated to the ground, and
raised a new, either in the same place, or else not far from it.

Shortly after commethe Hasten himself also, with eighty sail more, and
sailing up the River of Thamise, he fortifieth at Middleton now Mylton, over
against the I Will of Shepey: Which thing when King Alfred understood he,
gathered his power with all haste, and marchinge into Kent, encamped between
the two hosts of his enemies, and did so bear him self, that in the end he
constrained Hasten to desire peace, and to give his own oath and two of his
Sons in hostage, for observation of the same.

But how soon after, Hasten forgot his distress, and how little he esteemed
either his own troth plighted, or the lives of his children so pledged, it
shall appear when we come to fit place for it: In the mean while I let you
know, that the book of Domesday speaking of Apuldore, lays it in the
hundredth of Blackburne, and describes it to contain eight Carnes, or
Ploughlandes.

Stone, in the I Will of Oxney, called in Saxon (Stana) that is, a stone, or as
the Northren men yet speak, A Steane.
IN the days of King Etheldred, when almost al parts of the Realm felt the
Danishe fury, this place also was by them pitieousely spoiled and brent,
which done, they departed to Sandwiche, and did there, as has already
appeared.

Newendene, in Saxon, Nieldene, that is, The low or deep valley: Leland
calls it Nouiodunum, which word is framed out of the Saxon Niandune, and
sounds as much as the New Hill.
THE situation of Newendene is such, as it may likely enoughe take the name,
either of the deep and bottom (as I have coniectured) or of the Hill and
high ground, as Leland supposed. For it stands in the valley, and yet
clymeth the hill: So that the termination of the name may be Dene, or Dune, of
the valley, or of the hill indifferently. Howbeit, I would easily yealde to
Leland in this matter (the rather, because the common people of that quarter
speak much of a fair Town, that sometime stood upon the hill.) Saving that
both many places there aboutes are upon like reason termed Denes, and that
John Bale (who had seen an ancient history of the house it self) calls it
plainly Newendene.

It is a frontier, and March Town of this Shyre, The course of the River
Lymen, now Rother.
by reason that it lies upon the River, that divides Kent and Sussex in
sunder, which water Leland affirms to be the same, that our ancient
Chronicles call Lymene, though now of the common sort, it is known by the
name of Rother only: It rises (says he) at Argas hill in Sussex, near to
Waterdowne Forest, and falls to Rotherfield, thence to Hichingham, and so to
Roberts bridge (corruptly so termed, for Rothersbridge) from whence it
descends to Bodyam Castle, to Newendene, Oxney, and Apultree, and soon
after opens into the Sea. The place is not notable for any other thing, then
that it harbored the first Carmelite Friars, that Henry the third, that
order came over the Sea, The first Carmelites in England.
arrived in this land, and made their neste at Newendene, which was before a
woody, and solitary place, and therefore (in common opinion) so much the more
fit for Religious persons to inhabit.

They of that profession were called Carmelites, of a hill in Syria, named
Carmelus, where at the first, a sort of men that lived solitarily, were drawn
into companies by one Joan (the Patriarche of Jerusalem) in the days of King
Henry the first: And after that coming into Europe, were by Honorius
Quartus, the Pope, appointed to a rule and order, by the name of the Brothers
of Mary, which title liked them selves so well, that they procured the Pope
Vrbane the sixte, three years pardon, for all such as would so call them: But
certain merry fellows, (seeing their vanity, and knowing how little they were
of kin to Mary the blessed Virgin) called them the brothers of Mary
Aegiptiaca, the harlot, whereat the Pope was so offended, that he plainly
pronounced them Heretics for their labor. I read, that in the reign of King
Richard the second, one William Starnefeld was Pryor of this house, and that
he committed to writing, the original and beginning of the same, But hitherto
(though to no great loss) it has not chanced me to see it.

The Weald, so named of (...) on word peald, which signifies A woodie
country. The Britons called it Andred, of which word the Saxons called it
AnSreSesleag, in Latin, Saltus Andred the chase of Andred. This latter name
was imposed for the exceeding greatness of it: for Anrhsed in British, is as
much as great, or wonderful.
Now then we are come to the Weald of Kent, which (after the common opinion of
men of our time) is contained within very straight and narrow limits,
notwithstanding that in times paste, it was reputed of such exceeding
bigness, that it was thought to extend into Sussex, Surrey, and Hamshyre, and
of such notable fame withal, that it left the name to that part of the
Realm, thorough which it passed: for it is manifest, by the ancient Saxon
Chronicles, by Asserus Meneuensis, Henry of Huntingdon, and almost all others
of latter time, that beginning at Winchelsey in Sussex, it reached in length a
hundredth and twenty miles toward the West, and stretched thirty miles in
breadth toward the North: Kent, why so called.
And it is (in mine opinion) most likely, that in respect of this wood, that
large portion of this Islande (which in Caesar's time contained four several
Kings) was called of the Bryttish word (Caine) Cancia in Latin, and now
commonly Kent: Of which deriuation, one other infallible monument remains,
even til this day in Staffordshyre, where they yet call their great woodie
Forest, by the name of (Kanc) also.

On the edge of this wood (in Sussex) there stood sometime a City, called
(after the same) Andredes Chester, which Ella (the founder of the Southsaxon
kingdom) after that he had landed with his three sons, and chased the
Brytons into the wood, raced, and made equal with the ground: And in this
wood, Sigbert, a King of Westsex, was done to death by this occasion following.

About the year after the Incarnation of Christ, Sigbert succeeded Cuthred
his cousine in the kingdom of the Westsaxons, and was so puffed up with the
pride of his dominion (mightily enlarged by the prosperous successes of his
predecessor) that he governed without fear of God, or care of man, making
lust his law, and mischief his minister: Whereupon one Cumbra, (an Earl and
Counselour) at the lamentable suite of the Commons, moved him to consideration:
But Sigbert, disdaining to be directed, commanded him most dispitefully to be
slain: Hereat the Nobility and Commons were so much offended, that
assembling for the purpose, they with one assent deprived him of his crown and
dignity, and he (fearing worse) fled into the wood, where after a season, a
poor Hogheard (sometime servant to Cumbra) found him (in a place, which the
Saxon Hystories call Prifetsflode) and knowing him to be the same that had
slain his Master, slew him also without all manner of mercy.

The Weald was sometime a wilderness.
The History of this Hoghearde, presents to my mind, an opinion that some
men maintain touching this Weald: which is, that it was a great while
together in manner nothing else but a Desert, and waste Wilderness, not
planted with Towns, or peopled with men, as the outsides of the shyre were,
but stoared and stuffed with heardes of Dear, and droues of Hogs only: which
conceit, though happily it may seem to many but a Paradoxe, yet in mine own
fantasy, it wants not the feet of sound reason to stand upon: For,
besides that a man shall read in the Hystories of Canterbury and Rochester,
sundry donations, in which there is mention only of Pannage for Hogs in
Andred, and of none other thing: I think verily that it cannot be showed out
of ancient Chronicles, that there is remaining in Weald of Kent, or Sussex,
any one monument of great antiquity. And truly this thing I my self have
observed, in the ancient rentalles and surviewes, of the possessions of
Christ's Church in Canterbury, that in the rehearsal of the old rentes and
services, due by the Tenaunts dwelling without the Weald, the entry is
commonly after this form, De redditu. vij.s^.vj. This Benerth, is the service
which the tenant does, with his Carte and Ploughe.
d. De viginti ouis. j.d. De gallinis, and benerth. xvj.d. Summa viij.s^.xj.d.
quieti redditus.


But when they come to the Tenauntes inhabiting within the Wealdy country,
then the style and Intituling, is first,

Redditus de Walda,

Then after that follows, De tenementis Ioa^is at Style in loose.
iij.s^.iiij.d.

Without showing for what ancient service, for what manner of custom, or for
what special cause, the same Rent grew due and payable, as in the first style
or entry is expressed.

Whereupon I gather, that although the property of the Weald, was at the
first belonging to certain known owners, as well as the rest of the country,
yet was it not then allotted into Tenancies, nor Manured like unto the residue:
But that even as men were contented to inhabit it, and by peecemeale to rid it
of the wood, and to break it up with the ploughe: So this latter rent
(differing from the former, both in quantity and quality, as being greater
than the other, and yealded rather as recompense for fearme, then as a
quiterent for any service) did long after by little and little, take his
beginning.

And hereout also springs the diversity of opinions, touching the true
limits of this Weald: The bounds of the Weald.
Some men affirming it to begin at one place, and some at another, whereas
(in my fantasy) there can be assigned, none other certain bounds thereof,
then such as we have before recited out of the ancient Hystories: For even as
in the old time (being then a mere solitude, and on no part inhabited) it
might easily be circumscribed: So since (being continually from time to time
made less by industry) it could not long have any standing or permanent
terms. And therefore, what so ever difference in common report there be, as
touching the same, for as much as it is now (thanked be God) in manner wholly
replenished with people, a man may more reasonably maintain, that there is no
Weald at all, then certainly pronounce, either where it begins, or makes
an end.

And yet if question in Law should fortune to be moved, concerning the limits
of the Weald, (as in deed it may happen upon the Statute of Woods, and
otherwise) I am of opinion, that the same ought to be decided by the verdite of
twelve men, grounded upon the common reputation of the country thereaboutes,
and not by any other means.

But because I wot not, how the natural and ancient inhabitants of this
country will bear it, that a young Nouesse, and lately adopted Denizen,
should thus boldly determine at their disputations, I will here (for a while)
leave the Weald, and go forth to the residue.

Farley, in Saxon, farrlega, and may be interpreted, the place of the Boares,
or Bulls.
FArley, both the East and West, bordering upon Medwey, belonged sometime to the
Monks of Christ's Church in Canterbury, to whom it yealded in the days of
King Edward the Confessor, twelve hundredth Eeles for a yearly rent. This I
exemplify to the end that it may appear, that their reseruations (in
ancient time) were as well in victual, as in money, and that thereof the
lands so leased, were called Fermes, Fermes why so termed.
of the Saxon word, feormian; which is to feed, or yeald victual. Which
Etymology of the word, although it might suffice to the proof of that
matter, yet to the end, that my conjecture may have the more force, I will ad
unto it the authority of Geruasius Tilberiensis, a learned man, that
flourished in the days of King Henry the second, who in his Dialogue, of the
observations of the Exchequer, has in effect as follows. Until the time
(says he) of King Henry the first, the Kings used not to receive money of
their lands, but victuals, for the necessary provision of their house. And
toward the payment of the Soldiers wages, and such like charges, money was
raised out of the Cities and Castles, in which husbandry and tillage was not
exercised. But at the length, when as the King, being in the parts beyond the
Seas, needed ready money, toward the furniture of his wars, and his
subjects and farmers complained, that they were grievously troubled by carriage
of victuals, into sundry parts (...) the Realm, far distant from their
dwelling houses.

The King directed commission to certain discrete persons, which having
regard of the value of those victuals, should reduce them into reasonable
sums of money: The leueying of which sums, they appointed to the Sheriff,
taking order withal, that he should pay them at the Scale, or Beam, that is
to say, that he should pay six pence over and above every pound weight of
money, because they thought, that the money in time would wax so much the
worse for the wearing. etc.

Thus far Geruasius.

I am not ignorant, that Geruasius him self in an other place of that Book,
deriueth the word (Ferme) from the Latin (Firma) Howbeit, for as much as I
know assuredly, that the term was used here amongst the Saxons, before the
coming of the Conqueror, and that the Etymon thereof, descended from the Saxon
language (whereof happily Geruasius being a Norman, was not much skillful) I
am as bold to leave his opinion for the deriuation, as I was ready to cleave
to his report for the History.

Maidstone, contractly for Medweys Town: in Saxon MeSegestun, that is, the
Town upon Medway: it is taken to be that which in Antoninus, is called
Duropronis. One ancient Saxon book, which I have seen writes it thus,
Maegthanstane, which is as much to say, as the mighty, or strong stone: a
name (belike) given for the Quarrey of hard stone there.
THe name of this Town (being framed, as the most part think, out of the
name of the water) might easily move a man to judge, that it had been long
since the Principal town upon the River whereon it is situated: The rather
for that the Saxons (in imposing the names of their chief places) used to
borowe (for the most part) the names of the waters adjoining, Towns named of
the Rivers.
as Colchester was so by them called, of the water Colne: Ciceter (or rather
Cyrenchester) of the water Cyren, in Latin Corinius: Donchaster of the River
of Done: Lyncolne of Lindis: and (to come to our own Shyre) Eilesford, of
Eile, Dartford of Darent, Crayford, of Cray, and such other.

Howebeit, for as much as I find not this place, above once named in any
ancient history, and but seldom mentioned in any Records that I have seen,
I dare not pronounce it of any great antiquity, but speak chiefly of that
which it has gotten within the compass of late memory.

In the time of King Edward the sixth therefore, this Town was incorporated,
and endowed with sundry liberties, all which soon after it forfeited by
joining in a Rebellion moved within this Shyre, under the Reign of Queen
Marie. Nevertheless, of late time the Queens Majesty (that now is) of her
great clemency, has not only restoared to the Town the former
incorporation, but endowed it also with great Privilege, appaireling the Mayor
with the authority of a Justice of the Peace, exempting the Townsmen from
foreign Sessions, and creating the Town it self a Boroughe, enabled to have
voice in Parleament.

In it were four principal ornaments of building, the College, the Bishops
Palaice, the house of the Brothers of Corpus Christi, and the Bridge: The
College.
Of which the first, was built by Boniface (the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Uncle to Eleonor, the wife of King Henry the third) to the honor of Peter,
Paul, and Saint Thomas (the Martyr, as they would have it) and endowed William
Courtney (a successor in that See, and a Noble man, as the other was) pulled
it down, and erecting a new, after his own pleasure, gained thereby the
Secular Priests. The Palaice, that yet stands, The Palaic^
was begone by John Vfford, the Archbishop, but for as much as he died,
before he had brought the work to ye midst, Simon Islepe (ye next in
succession saving one) took this matter in hand, and not only pulled down a
house of the Bishops which had long before stood at Wrotham, but also charged
his whole Province with a tenth to accomplish it. Thomas Arundell (an other
Bishop of the same See) founded a Chaunterie at Maidston, The Schole
which whether it be the same, that was sometime called the house of the
Brothers, and but lately converted by the Townsmen into a Free school, or no,
I will not boldly affirm, but I think it rather so, then otherwise. Of the
Bridge I find no beginning, but I suspect, that it rose by the Archebishops,
which were not only owners of the Palaice hard by, as you see, but Lords and
Patrones of the whole Town, and Church also.

The River of Medway and whereof it took the name.
And thus much only of the Town: as touching the River of Medwey, it seems
to have been so named, either because it stood in the middle of the Kentish
Kingdom, or else for that it ran midde between the two Bishoprics: For the
word (Mideg) signifies nothing else, but the Midway as (Middeg) does noone,
or Midday, unless happily some man would rather have it called (Medpoeg)
because of the meddowe that it makes all along the course of the same.

This River is increased by the four principal Brooks that run into it,
whereof (to begin at the West) the first springs about Crowherst in Surrey
(not far from the head of Darent) it falls to Etonbridge, and taking in the
way Heuer, Penshreste, and Tunbridge, joins with the second at Yealding.

The second arises at Blackbrooks in Waterdown forest, not fully a mile from
Eredge, the Lord Aburgennies house, and comes to Beyham, to Lamberhirst
street, and to a place in Scotney ground, called little Sussex, where it
meets with a small brook called Beaul, (that springs at Tishirst three
miles of, and gives the name to Beauldbridge) from whence they join in
journey to Horsmondon and Merden, and there mingling with the third, they run
altogether to Yalding.

The third Brook takes beginning about Great Charte, and descends to
Hedcorne, Stilebridge, and Merden.

The fourth, and last, breaks out of the ground at Lineham, washes the
Castle of Ledes, a little from whence it receaueth the small water of
Holingburne, and in a company of the same passes toward Maidstone: At which
place (as I think) the name of Medwey, first begins, the rather, because it
has there received all his helps, and crossing the Shyre, as it were in the
midst, labors from thence in one entier Chanel to find out the Sea. The
River Aile, or Eile
For otherwise the River it self is properly called Egle, or, Eyle, of which
both the Town of Ailesford, and the Castle of Alington (or rather Eylington)
do take their names.

If I fail in this deriuation, the fault (for the first part) is his that
made the Chart of this Shyre, and then the folly is mine that follow him, but
the truth notwithstanding is easily to be found out, by any man that will make
inuestigation and examine it, and our trespass also herein more venial, for
that we go not about to shadow it.

Piccendene Hothe, commonly, but aunciently written Pinenden, of Pinian, to
punish: and so it sounds the place of Execution, or punishment.
The name of Harlot, whereof it began.
RObert, ye Duke of Normandy, had issue by a Concubine (whose name, as the
Annals of S. Augustine report, was Harlothe, and after whom, as I conjecture,
such incontinent women have ever since been called Harlots) three Sons, that
is to say, William that afterward subdued this Realm, Robert, that was created
Earl of Moretone, and Odo that was first consecrated Bishop of Baieux, then
Earl of Kent, and lastly Lieutenaunt, or Vicegerent of this whole Realm,
under William his Brother.

Odo the Earl of Kent.
Robert, was reputed a man of small courage, wisdom, and learning, and
therefore passed his time in gloriously: But Odo, was found to be of nature so
busy, greedy, and ambitious, that he moved many Tragedies within this Realm,
and was in the end thrown from the Stage, and driven into Normandy, as
hereafter in fit place shall be more amply declared. In the mean while, for
this present place, and purpose, I find that during his aboade in Kent, The
ancient manner of the trial of right.
he had so incroched upon the lands and Privileges of the Archebishopricke of
Canterbury, and Bishopric of Rochester, that Lanfranc (being promoted to that
See of dignity, and finding the want) complained to the King, and obtained, yt
with his good pleasure they might make trial of their right with him. To the
which end also, the same King gave commission to Goisfrid (then Bishop of
Constance in Normandy) to represent his own person, for hearing of the
controversy: caused Egelric the Bishop of Chichester (an aged man, singularly
commended for skill in the Laws, and Customs of the Realm) to be brought
thither in a Wagon, for his assistance in Counsel, commanded Haymo (the
Sheriff of Kent) to summon the whole County to give in evidence: and charged
Odo his brother to be present, at such time and place, as should be notified
unto him. Pinnendene Heathe (lying almost in the midst of the Shyre, and
therefore very indifferent for the assembly of the whole County) was the
appointed place, and thereunto not only the whole number of the most expert
men of this Shyre, but of sundry other Countries also, came in great
frequencie, and spent three whole days in debate of these Bishops
controversies, concluding in the end, that Lanfranc, and the Bishop of
Rochester should be restored to the possession of Detling, Stoce, Preston,
Danitune, and sundry other lands, that Odo had withholden: And that neither
the Earl of Kent, nor the King him self had right to claim any thing in any
the lands of the Archbishop, saving only these three customs, which concern
the Kings high ways that lead from one city to an other: that is to say:
That if any of the Archebishops tenaunts should dig in such a high way, or
fell a tree cross the same, to the hinderaunce of common passage, and be taken
with the manner, or convinced thereof by Law, he should make amends to the
King therefore:

And likewise when he did commit bloudsheade, manslaughter, or any other
criminal offense in such were deprehended doing the fault, that the ame^ds
thereof belonged to the King also: but in this latter case, if he were not taken
with the manner, but departed without pledge taken of him, that then the trial
and the amends perteined to the Archbishop him self, and that the King had not
to meddle therewith. On the otherside also they agreed, that the Archbishop had
many Privileges throughout all the Lands of the King, and of the Earl, as
namely, the amerciament of bloodshed from such time as they cease to say
Alleluia in the Church service, till the Octaues of Easter: the which how
long it is, let them see which can turn the Pie and the Portuse: and at the
least the one half of every amerciame^t, due for the unlawful begetting of
children, commonly called CySite, which last thing, I do the rather note, to
the end that it may appear, The Clergy have in croched upon the Prince, in
the punishment of adultery.
that in those days the Bishops had not wholly gotten into their hands, the
correction of adultery and fornication, which of latter times they have
challenged from the Laity, with such pertinacie: and which they have punished
(both in the Laity, and clergy) with such lenity, that not only the
Princes commodity is thereby greatly decreased, but also incontinencie in his
subjects intollerably augmented. Neither is it to be proved by this testimony
only, that such was the order in old time, but by the book of Domesday it
self also, where it is plainly said. De adulterio Rex habebit hominem,
Archiepiscopus mulierem. In case of adultery, the King shall have the man, and
the Archbishop the woman. etc. But to return to Pinnendene: the commodity of
the situation it self, and the example of this notable assembly, have been ye
cause, that not only the Sheriffs use to hold their County Courts, but also
to appoint the meeting for choice of Knights to ye Parleament, most commonly at
this place.

Boxley, may take the name either of the Saxon word (boxeleage) for the store
of Boxtrees that peradventure sometime grew there, or of (bucesleag) which is
as much to say, as a place lying in Vmbelico, in the midst, or Navel of the
Shyre, as in deed this Boxley does.
AS touching the foundation of Boxley Abbay, Abbaies do beget one another.
I find an obscure note in ancient Chronicles of S. Wereburges in Chester,
where it is thus reported, Anno, 1146. fundata est Boxleia in Cancia, filia
Clareuallis propria. Which I call obscure, because it appears not to me by
the word (filia) whether it be meant, that Boxley were erected by the
liberality of the Monastery of Clareualley, or else instituted only after
the possession, rule, and order of the same. For the like notes I find in the
same Chronicle of diverse other houses within England, to which the same
Monastery of Clareuale (and others also) were like good mothers: and amongst
the rest, that not many years after, this Monastery of Boxley it self was
delivered of such another spiritual child, called the Abbay of Robertsbridge
in Sussex.

Nevertheless, I make conjecture, that the author meant by (filia) nothing
else, but that one Abbay either furthered by exhortation the building of
another, or else furnished it after the building with Monks of her own brood:
And for more likelyhoode that this should be his mind, Hear (I pray you)
what he says in another place, Comes Cornubiae fundauit Hayles, filiam
Belliloci in Anglia, which his words, distinguishe plainly between the
founder that bare the charge of the buylding, and the Abbay, after the order
and pattern whereof it was instituted. But leaving to comment any longer upon
that doubtful text, I will take to witness the Chronicles of Rochester,
which (putting the matter out of doubt) say plainly, that one William de
Ipre (a noble man, and Lieuetenant to King Stephan, in his wars against
Maude the Empress) founded the Abbay of Boxley, and planted it with a Covent
of white Monks. And so have you at once, the name of the Boxley: whereunto if
you shall add the yearly value (which I read in the Record to have been
two hundredth and four pounds) you have all that I find written concerning
the same. But yet if I should thus leave Boxley, the favorers of false and
feyned Religion, would laughe in their sleeves, and the followers of Gods
truth might justly cry out, and blame me.

For, it is yet fresh in mind to both sides, and shall (I doubt not) to the
profit of the one, be continued in perpetual memory to all posterity, by
what notable imposture, fraud, Iuggling, and Legierdemain, the silly lambs of
Gods flock were (not long since) seduced by the false Romish Foxes at this
Abbay. The manner whereof, I will set down in such sort only, as the same
was sometime by them selves published in printe (as it is sure) for their
estimation and credit, and yet remains deeply imprinted in the mynds and
memories of many on live, to their everlasting reproach, shame, and confusion.

The vngrations Rood of Grace.
It chanced (as the tale is) that upon a time, a cunning Carpenter of our
country, was taken prisoner in the wars between us and France, who
(wanting otherwise to satisfy for his ransom, and having good leisure to
devise for his deliverance) thought it best to attempt some curious
enterprise, within the compass of his own Art and skill, to make him self
some money withal: And therefore, getting together fit matter for his purpose,
he compacted of wood wire, paste, and paper, a Roode of such exquisite art,
and workmanship, that it not only matched in comeliness, and due proportion
of the parts, the best of the common sort: but in strange motion, variety
of gesture, and nimblenesse of joints, passed all other that before had been
seen: the same being able to bow down, and lift up it self, to shake and
stir the hands and feet, to nod the head, to roll the eyes, to wagge the
chappes, to bend the brows, and finally, to represent to the eye, both the
proper motion of each member of the body, and also a lively, express, and
significant show of a well contented, or displeased mind, biting the lip,
and gathering a frowning, froward, and disdainefull face, when it would
pretend offense: and showing a most mylde, amyable, and smyling cheer and
countenance, when it would seem to be well pleased.

So that now it needed not Prometheus fire, to make it a lively man, but only
the help of the covetous Priests of Bell, or the aid of some crafty College
of Monks, to deifie and make it pass for a very God.

This done, he made shifte for his liberty, came over into the Realm, of
purpose to utter his Merchandise, and laid the Image upon the back of a Jade,
that he drove before him. Now when he was come so far as to Rochester on his
way, he waxed dry by reason of travail, and called at an alehouse for drink
to refreshe him, suffering his horse nevertheless to go forward alone
through the City.

This Jade was no sooner out of sight, but he missed the straight western way
that his Master intended to have gone, and turning Southe, made a great pace
toward Boxley, and being driven (as it were) by some divine fury, never
ceased til he came at the Abbay church door, where he so beat and bounced
with his heels, that diverse of the Monks heard the noise, came to the place
to know the cause, and (marueiling at the strangeness of the thing) called the
Abbat and his Covent to behold it.

These good men seeing the horse so earnest, and discerning what he had on his
back, for doubt of deadly impiety opened the door, which they had no sooner
done, but the horse rushed in, and ran (in great haste) to a pillar (which
was the very place where this Image was afterward advanced) and there
stopped him self, and stood still. Now while the Monks were busy to take
off the load, in comes the Carpenter (that by great inquisition had
followed) and he chalengeth his own: The Monks, loathe to loose so beneficial
a stray, at the first make some denial, but afterward, being assured by all
signs that he was the very Proprietarie, they grant him to take it with him.
The carpenter then takes the horse by the head, and first assayeth to lead
him out of the Church, but he would not stir for him: Then beats he and
strikes him, but the Jade was so restie and fast nailed, that he would not
once remove his foot from the pillar: At the last he takes off the Image,
thinking to have carried it out by it self, and then to have led the horse
after, but that also cleaued so fast to the place, that notwithstanding all
that ever he and the Monks also, (which at the length were contented for
pities sake to help him) could do, it would not be moved one inche from it,
So that in the end, partly of weariness in wrestling with it, and partly by
persuasion of the Monks, which were in love with the Picture, and made him
believe, that it was by God him self destinate to their house, the Carpenter
was contented for a piece of money, to go his way and leave the Roode behind
him. Thus you see the generation of this the great God of Boxley, comparable (I
warrant you) to the creation of that old beastly Idol Priapus, of which the
Poet says.

Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum.
Cum faber incertus SCAMNVM, FACERETNE PRIAPVM,
MALVIT ESSE DEVM: Deus inde ego furum. etc.
A Figtree block sometime I was,
A log unmeet for use:
Til Caruer doubting with him self,
WERE BEST MAKE PRIAPVS,
OR ELSE A BENCHE? resolude at last
To make a God of me:
Thencefoorth a God I am, of birds
And thieves most drad, you see.
But what? I shall not need to report, how leudely these Monks, to their
own enriching, and the spoil of Gods people, abused this wooden God after
they had thus gotten him, because a great sort be yet on live, that saw the
fraud openly detected at Paul's Cross, and others may read it disclosed in
books extant, and commonly abroad. Neither will I labor to compare it
throughout, with the Trojan Palladium, which was a picture of wood, that
could shake a spear, and roll the eyes as lively as this Roode did: and
which falling from heaven, chose it self a place in the Temple, as wisely as
this Carpenters horse did: and had otherwise so great conuenience and
agreement with this our Image, that a man would easily believe the device had
been taken from thence: But I will only note, for my purpose, and the places
sake, that even as they fansied that Troy was vpholden by that Image, and that
the taking of it away by Diomedes and Ulysses, brought destruction (by
sentence of the Oracle) upon their City: So the town of Boxley (which stood
chiefly by the Abbay) was through the discovery and defacing of this Idol, and
another (wrought by Cranmer and Cromwell) according to the just judgment of
God, hastened to utter decay and beggerie.

S. Ru^wald, and his miracles.
And now since I am fallen into mention of that other Image, which was honored
at this place, I will not stick to bestow a few words for the detection
thereof also, as well for that it was, as very an illusion as the former, as
also for that the use of them was so lincked together, that the one can not
thoroughly be understood without the other: for this was the order.

If you minded to have benefit by the Roode of Grace, you ought first to be
shryuen of one of the Monks: Then by lifting at this other Image (which was
untruly of the common sort called Saint Grumbald, for Saint Rumwald) you
should make proof whether you were in clean life (as they called it) or no:
and if you so found your self, then was your way prepared, and your offering
acceptable before the Roode, if not, then it behooved you to be confessed of
new, For none might enter into the Temple of Ceres in Eleusis, but such as
were innocent.
for it was to be thought, that you had concealed somewhat from your ghostly
Dad, and therefore not yet worthy to be admitted Ad Sacra Eleusina.

Now that you may know, how this examination was to be made, you must
understand, that this Saint Rumwald was a preatie short picture of a Boy
Saint, standing in the same Church, of it self so small, hollow, and light,
that a child of seven years of age might easily lift it, and therefore of no
moment at all, in the hands of such persons as had offered frankly: But by
mean of a pyn of wood, stricken through it into a post (which a false knave
standing behind, could put in, and pull out, at his pleasure) it was to such
as offered faintly, so fast and immovable, that no force of hand could once
stir it: In so much, as many times, it moved more laughter, then devotion,
to behold a great lubber to lift at that in vain, which a young boy or
wenche had easily taken up before him.

I omit, that chaste Virgins, and honest married matrones, went oftentimes
away with blushing faces, leaving (without cause) in the minds of the lookers
on, suspicion of unclean life, and wanton behavior: for fear of which note
and villainy, women (of all other) stretched their purse strings, and sought by
liberal offering, to make Saint Rumwalds man their good friend and Master.

But mark here (I beseech you) their pretty policy in picking plain folks
purses. It was in vain (as they persuaded) to presume to the Roode without
shrifte, yea, and money lost there also, if you offer before you were in clean
life. And therefore, the matter was so handled, that without trebble oblation,
(that is to say) first to the Confessor, then to Saint Rumwald, and lastly to
the Gracious Roode, the poor Pilgrims could not assure them selves, of any
good gained by all their labor: No more then such as go to Parisgardein,
the Bell Sauage^, or some other such common place, to behold Bear bayting,
Enterludes, or Fence play, can account of any pleasant spectacle, unless they
first pay one penny at the gate, another at the entry of the Scaffolde, and
the third for a quiet standing. I my self can not conjecture, what reason
should move them, to make this Saint Rumwald the Touchstone of clean life
and innocence, unless it be upon occasion of a miracle that he did, in making
two holy Priests to lift a great stone easily, which before diverse lay
persons could not stir, with all their strength and ability: Which thing
(as also his whole life and death) to the end that the tale shall want no part
of due credit, I will shortly recite, as in the work called Noua Legenda
Angliae, I find reported.

A Pagan or unchristened King of Northumberland, had married a Christian woman,
daughter to Penda, the King of Middle England, who would not (by any The
Nativity of S. Rumwald.
The husband (with much to do) consented to the condition, and she not long
after waxed great with child, and as (upon a time) they were ryding toward
their Father King Penda, she fell into travail of child birth, and was
delivered by the way (in a fair medowe) at Sutton of a man child, which so
soon as he was come out of his mothers belly, cried with a loud voice, three
several times, Christianus sum, Christianus sum, Christianus sum. I am a
Christian, I am a Christian, I am a Christian. And not ceassing thus, made
forthwith plain profession of his faith, desired to be baptized, chose his
Godfathers, named himself Rumwald, and with his finger directed the standers
by to fetch him a great hollow stone, that he would have to be used for the
Font: hereupon sondrie of the Kings servant, assayed to have brought the
stone, but it was so far above al their strengthes, that they could not once
move it: when the Child perceived that, he commanded the two Priests (his
appointed Godfathers) to go and bring it, which they did forthwith most
easily. This done he was Baptized, and within three days after (having in the
mean while discoursed cunningly sundry mysteries of Popish religion, and
bequeathing his body to remain at Sutton one year, at Brackley two, and at
Buckingham for ever after) his Spirit departed out of his body, and was by the
hands of the Angels conveyed into heaven.

Mylton, in Saxon Midetun, so called of the situation, for it lies in the
midst between two places, the termination of whose names be in tun also, that
is to say, Newentun, and Marstun.
EVen at such time as King Alfred divided this Shyre into Lathes and
hundrethes, the Town of Midleton, or Milton (as we now call it, by our common
manner of contraction) was in his own hands, and therefore set forth in our
ancient Hystories by the name and title of, Regia Villa de Midleton. In which
respect (of like) he gave to the hundredth, ye name of the same Town, as of a
place more eminent then any other within that precinct. Kemsley Town, in the
Midleton, is the very place, wherein the time and reign of the same King
Alfred, Kemsley Down.
Hasten the Dane (that so much annoyed France) arrived and fortified, as we
have at full disclosed in Apledore before.

This Town, continued of good estimation, until the Reign of King Edward the
Confessor, in whose days, and during the displeasure between him, and Earl
Godwine, such as were of the devotion of the Midleton, while he and his Sons
abroad ransacked, herried and spoiled the skirts, and out sides, of the whole
shyre besides, after which time, I have not read, neither is it likely, that
the place was of any price, or estimation.

Sedingbourne, in Saxon Saetungburna; that is, the Hamlet along the Bourne, or
small River. One interprets it, as if it were, Seethingbourne, Riuus
Feruiens, aut Bulliens, but how likely let others see.
FOr want of pertinent matter, touching either the beginning, increase, or
present estate of this Rochester long since bestowed upon his auditorie there.
In the time of King Henry the third, and after the death of Richard, the
Archbishop of Canterbury (surnamed the great) The Monks of Christ's Church
were determined to have chosen for their Archbishop, Ralfe Nouille, the Bishop
of Chichester, and Chancellor to the King: but Gregory the Pope, fearing that
Ralfe would have travailed earnestly for release of the tribute, which his
innocent predecessor had gained by King John's submission (for the story
says, that Nouille was a good man, and true hearted in his Country) bare the
Monks in hand, that he was rash in word, and presumptious in act, and
therefore much unworthy of such a dignity:

Nevertheless, because he would not seem utterly to infringe the liberty of
their election, he gave them free license to take any other man besides him.
Whereupon, the Monks agreed, and chose one John, the Pryor of their own house.

The Popish manner of preaching.
Now, when this man should go to Rome (as the manner was) for to buie his
confirmation, Henry (then Bishop of Rochester) addressed himself to
accompany him to his Ship, and when they were come to this Town, the Bishop
of Rochester stepped into the Pulpit, like a pretty man, and gave the Auditorie,
a clerkly collation, and Preachement (after many other things) he braste
forth into great joy, (as a man that had been rapt into the third Heaven) and
said. Rejoice in the Lord (my brethren all) and know ye assuredly, that now of
late in one day, there departed out of purgatory, Richard (sometime) King of
England, Stephan Langton, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and a Chaplein of his,
to go to to the divine Majesty. And in that day, thereissued no more, but
these three, out of the place of pains: and fear not to give full and assured
faith to these my words, for this thing has been now the third time
revealed unto me, and to another man, and that so plainly, as from mine own
mind all suspicion of doubt is far removed.

These few words, I have in manner translated out of Thomas Rudburne, and
Mathewe of Westminster, to the end that you might see, with what wholesome and
comfortable bread, the preaching Prelates of that time fed their Auditories,
and that you might hereby consider, that, Si lux sit tenebrae, If the Bishops,
the great torches of that time, were thus dim, Ipsae tenebrae quantae? What
light was to be looked for at the little candels, the soul Priests, and seely
Sir John's. Believe me, if his Fatherhood had not plainly confessed, Popish
purgatory, is derived out of Poetry.
that he came to the knowledge of this matter by revelation, I would easily
have believed, that he had been with Anchises in Hell, as Aeneas sometime was,
where he learned, what souls should come next to life, and where he hard the
liuelyest description of Poetical, or Popish Purgatory, (for all is one) that
is any where to be found.

Which to the end that you may see what agreement there is between the old
and the new Romans, touching this article of religion, I will show it you,
in a few of Virgils own verses.

Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit,
Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est
Multa diu concreta, modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt. Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, alijs sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni:
Quisque suos patimur manes. Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arua tenemus:
Donec longa dies, perfecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aetherium sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
Which Thomas Phaer translated after this manner.

Moreover, when their end of life,
and light does them forsake,
Yet can they not their sins, nor so-
rows all (poor souls) of shake,
Nor all contagious fleshly from
them voides, but must of need
Much things congendred long, by won-
derous means at last out spread:
Therefore they plagued been, and for
their former faults and sins,
Their sundry pains they bide: some high
in air do hang on pinnes,
Some fleeting been in floodes, and deep
in gulfes themselves they tyer,
Till sins away be washed, or clen-
sed clean with purging syer.
Each one of us our paenance here
abide, that sent we be
To Paradise at last: we few
these fields of joy do see.
Till compass long of time, by per-
fect course has purged quite,
Our former cloddred spots, and pure
has left our Ghostly Sprite,
And senses pure of soul, and sim-
ple sparks of heavenly light.
Now therefore, if this Bishops Poetry may be allowed for divinity, me
thinks yt with great reason I may entreat, that not only this work of
Virgils Aeneides, But Homers Iliades, Ouides Fastes, and Lucians Dialogues
also, may be made Canonical: for these al excel in such kind of fiction.

Tongue Castle, or rather Thong Castle, in Saxon thangceastse, in British
Caerkerry, of (Thwang, and Karry) both which words, signify a Thong of
leather.
THe British Chronicle, discoursing ye inuitation, arrival, and interteinment
of Hengist and Horsa, the Saxon captains, mentions, that among other devises
(practiced for their own establishme^t and security) they begged of King
Vortiger, so much land to fortify upon, as the hyde of a beast (cut into
thonges) might incompasse, and that thereof the place should be called
Thongraster, or Thwangraster: after such a like manner, as Dido (long since
beguiling Hiarbas, the King of Lybia) builded the Castle Byrsa, containing
twenty and two furlonges in circuit, of which Virgil spoke, saying.

Mercatique solum, facti de nomine Byrsam,
Taurino possint quantum circundare tergo. etc.
They bought the soil, and Byrsa it called,
when first they did begin,
As much as with a Bull hide cut,
they could enclose within.
But Saxo Grammaticus applies this Act to the time of the Danes, Doncaster in
the North Country.
affirming that one Iuarus (a Dane) obtained by this kind of policy, at the
hands of Etheldred, the Brother of Alfred to build a fort. And as these men
agree, not upon the builder, so is there variance between written story, and
common speech, touching ye true place of ye building: for it should seem by
Galfrid, Hector Boctius, and Ric Cirencester, ye it was at Doncaster in the
North Country, because they lay it in Lindsey, which now is extended no
further the^ to the North part of Lincoln shyre: But common opinion (conceived
upon report, received of ye elders by tradition) chalengeth it to Tongue Castle
in this Shyre: Whereunto if a man do add, that both the first planting, and
the chief abiding, of Hengist and Horsa, was in Kent, and adioyne thereto the
authority of Mathewe of Westminster: which writes plainly, that Aurelius
Ambrose, the captain of the Britons, provoked Hengist to battle at Tongue in
Kent, he shall have cause, neither to falsify the one opinion lightly, nor to
faith the other unadvisedly.

And as for mine own opinion of Doncaster, (which is taken to be the same,
that Ptolome calls Camulodunum) I think verily, that it was named of the
water Done, whereon it standethe and not of Thong, as some feign it. Which
deriuation, whether it be not less violent, (and yet no less reasonable,)
then the other, I dare refer to any reasonable and indifferent Reader. To this
place therefore, of right belongs the story of King Vortigers Wassailing,
which I have already exemplified in the general discourse of the ancient
estate of this Country, and for that cause do think it more meet to refer
you thither, then here to repeat it.

Tenham, in Saxon TynHam; that is to say, a Town (or Hamlet) often houses, as
Eightam, had the name of EaHtHam, a Hamlet (or Town) of eight dwellings.
AT Tenham was long since a mansion house, pertaining to the Sea of Canterbury,
John, Hubert the Archbishop departed this life, as Mathewe Parise reports,
who adds also, that when the King had intelligence of his death, he brast
forth into great joy, and said, that he was never a King (in deed) before
that hour.

It seems, that he thought him self delivered of a shrewe, but little forsawe
he that a shrewder should succeed in the room, for if he had, he would
rather have prayed for the continuance of his life, then ioyed in the
understanding of his death. For after this Hubert, followed Stephan Langton,
who brought upon King John such a tempestious Sea of sorrowful trouble, that
it caused him to make shipwreck, both of his honor, crown, and life also:
The story has appeared at large in Dover before, and therefore needs not
now eftsoons to be repeated.

Shepey, in Latin, Insula ouium, and Oninia, in Saxon, Sceapige, the I Will of
Sheep.
SExburga (the wife of Ercombert, a King of Kent) following the ensample of
Eanswide, the daughter of King Ethelbald) erected a Monastery of women Shepey,
called Minster, which (in the late Just, and general suppression) was found
to be of the yearly value of an hundredth and twenty pounds.

This house, and the whole I Will was scourged by the Danes, whom I may well call
(as Attila, the leader of the like people, called him self) Flagellum Dei, the
whip or Godwine and his sons (in the time of their proscription) landed at
Shepey, and harried it.

The English sheep and wool.
either for the number of the Sheep, or for the finenesse of the fleese,
although ancient foreigne writers ascribe not much to any part of all
England, and much less to this place, either for the one respect, or for the
other: But whether the Sheep of this Realm were in price before the coming
of the Saxons, or no, they be now ( God be thanked therefore) worthy of great
estimation, both for the exceeding finenesse of the fleese (which passes all
other in Europe at this day, and is to be compared with the ancient delicate
wool of Tarentum, or the Golden Fleese of Colchos, it self) and for the
abundant store of flocks, so incresing every where, that not only this little
Isle, which we have now in hand, but the whole realm also, might rightly be
called Shepey.

Quinborowe, called in Latin, Regius Burgus, in Saxon, CyningburH, That is to
say, The Kings Castle.
King Henry the eight fortfieth his Realm.
AT the West end of Shepey, lies Quinborowe Castle, the occasion of the first
building whereof, was this. King Edward the third, determining (about the
thirteenth year of his reign) to make demand of his right to the Crown of
France, first quieted Scotland by force, then entered amity with his
neighbors of Holland, Seland, and Brabant, and lastly (fortifying at this
place for defense of the Thamise) made expedition by Sea, and land, against
the French King, and moved war that had long continuance, wherein,
nevertheless after sundry discomfitures given, before Sluse, Cressey, Calaice,
and Poitiers, he was in the end, right honorably satisfied.

During this building, William of Wickam (surnamed Perot) a man not so
plentifully endowed with good learning, as abundantly stored with
Ecclesiastical living, Henry the Dele.

Of Quinborowe, Leland says thus, Castrum Regius editum recipit
Burgus, fulmina dira, and insulanos
Tutos seruat, ab impetu vel omni.
A Castle high, and thundering shot,
At Quinbrought is now plaste:
Which keeps safe the Ilanders,
From every spoil and waste.


The name is fallen (as you see) by deprauation of speech from Kingesborowe,
to Quinborowe: howbeit, the Etymology is yet conserved, both in our ancient
hystories, and in the style of the Court (or Lawday) there. I may add, that in
memory of the first name, the Ferrie or passage from the I Will to the maine
land, is yet called The Kings ferrie also.

Feuersham, in Saxon fafresHam;
AS it is very likely, that the Town of Feuersham received the chief
nourishment of her increase from the Religious house: So there is no doubt, but
that the place was somewhat of price long time before the building of that
Abbay there. For it is to be seen, that King Ethelstane Feuersham, about six
hundredth and forty years ago: at which time (I think) it was some Manor
house belonging to the Prince, the rather, for that afterward King William the
Conqueror (to whose hands at length it came) amongst other things, gave the
aduowson of the Church, to the Abbay of S. Augustines, and the Manor Normane in
recompense of service. But what time king Stephan had in purpose to build the
Abbay, he recovered the Manor again, by exchange made with William de Ipre
(the founder of Boxley) for Lillychurch: and raising there a stately Monastery
(the temporalties whereof did amount to a hundred fifty and five pounds) he
stored it with Cluniake Monks.

This house, was first honored with the burial of Adelicia the Queen, his
wife: Then with the Sepulture of Eustachius his only son: and shortly after
him John, there brake out a great controversy between him and the Monks of
S. Augustines, Monks do contend with the King forceably,
touching the right of the Patronage of the Church of Feuersham. For,
notwithstanding that King William the Conqueror, had given it to the Abbay
Hubert the Archbishop was one) that whispered King John in the ear, that the
right of the Aduouson was deuoluted unto him: which thing he believing,
presented a Clarke to the Church, and besides commanded by his writ, that his
presentee should be admitted. The Abbat on ye other side withstoode him, and
for the more sure enjoying of his possession, not only eiected the Kings
Clarke, but also sent thither diverse of his Monkers to keep the Church by
strong hand. When the King understood of that, he commanded the Sheriff of
the Shyre, to levy the power of his county, and to restore his presentee:
Which commandment the officer endeavored to put in execution accordingly: But
such was the courage of these holy hoorsons, that before the Shefiffe could
bring it to pass, he was driven to win the Church by assault, in the which
he hurt and wounded diverse of them, and drew and haled the rest out of the
doors, by the hair and heels.

Now it chanced that (at the same time) John the Cardinal of Saint
Stephans, (the Popes Legate into Scotland) passed through this Realm, to whom
(as he soiourned at Canterbury) the Monks made their moan: and he again, both
encouraged them to send their Pryor to Rome for remedy, and furnished them
with his own Letters, in commendation of their cause: In which, amongst other
things, he told the holy father Innocentius plainly, that if he would suffer
Monks to be thus entreated, the Apostolic authority would soon after be set
at naught, not only in England, but in all other countries also. Here upon the
Pope sent out his commission, for the understanding of the matter: but the
Monks (being now better advised) took a shorter way, and sending to the King
two hundredth marks in a purse, and a fair Palfrey for his own sadle, they
both obtained at his hands res^itution of their right, and also wan him to
become from thencefoorth their good Lord and Patron.

But here (I pray you) consider with me, whether these men be more likely to
have been brought up in the Schole of Christ, and Paul his Apostle (who
teach, Ne resistatis malo: and vincatis bono malum) Or rather to have drawn
their divinity out of Terence Comedy, where the counsel is, Malumus nos
prospicere, quam hunc vlcisci accepta iniuria, yea, and out of the worste point
of all Tullies Philosophy, where he permits, Lacessitis iniuria, infer
vim and iniuriam, seeing they be so ready, not of even ground only, but before
hand, not to answer, but to offer, force and violence, even to Kings and
Princes themselves. I wis they might have taken a better lesson out of Terence
him self, who advises wise men, Consilio omnia prius experiri, quam armis,
and therefore I pity their beating so much the less. But by this and such
other Monkishe parts of theirs, you may see, Quid otium and cibus faciat
alienus.

Genlade, and Gladmouthe.
BEda has mention of a water in Kent, running by Reculuers, which he calls
Genlade: This name was afterward sounded Yenlade, by the same misrule, that
geard is now Yard, geoc Yoke, gyld Yield, gemen Yeomen, and such other.
Henry of Huntingdon also reports, that King Edward (the Son of Alfred
builded at Gladmouth: This place I conjecture to have stood at the mouth of
that River, and thereof to have been called first Genlademouthe, and af^erward
(by contraction, and corruption of speech) Glademouthe. For, The names of
Towns framed out of the mouths of Rivers. The corruption of our English
speech.
to compound the name of a Town, out of the mouth of a River adioining, was
most familiar with our ancestors: as the name Exmouthe was framed out of the
River Ex: Dartmouthe of the water Dert: Stourmouth in this Shyre, of Stowre,
and such other like: And no less common with us of later time is it, to
corrupt (by contraction) the true names almost of al places, but especially of
so many of the same, as consisted at the first of three sillables, or above.

For, of Medweys Town, we make Maidstone, of Eglesford, Ailsford, of Ottanford
Otford, of Seuennocke Sennock, and so forth infinitely both throughout this
Shire, and the whole Realm: and that so rudely (in a great many) that hardly a
man may know them to be the same: For Maildulphesbyrig we call Malmesbury,
Eouesham Esham, and Hagustaldsham we cut of by the waste, and nickname it,
Hexam: Neither has this our manner of abbreuiation, corrupted the names of
towns contagion) almost our whole speech and language, calling that which in
old time was Heofod; now Head, Kyning King, Hlaford Lord, Sunu Son, and in
numerable such other, so that our speech at this day (for the most part)
consists of words of one syllable.

Which thing Erasmus observing, merrily in his Ecclesiast. Compares the
English tongue to a Dogs barking, that sounds nothing else, but Baw, waw,
waw in Monosillable.

If this roueing arrow of mine own conjecture, have missed the mark of
Glademouth whereat I directed my shot, yet will I prick at Yenlade with an
other out of the same quiver, and happily go nearer it. Beda speaks there of
the Northeast mouth of the flood Genlade: which speech of his were idle, if
that water had none other mouth but that one. And therefore, having read that
the Northwest month of the same water, running between Shepey and Hoo, is
called Yenlade also (though our Statute books, misplacing some letters, name
it corruptly Yendal) I suppose, that Yenlade is a name proper to the whole
stream that passes between Shepey and the maine Land, having the two mouths,
Eastswale and Westswale, well enough known.

Reculuers, in Saxon Raculf Mynster; derived (as I guess) of the British
word, Racor, that signifies forward, for so it stands, toward the Sea.
THe present estate of Reculuers, deserves not many words: As touching the
antiquity therefore, and beginning of the place, I read, first that Ethelbert,
^he first King of Kent, having placed Augustine at Canterbury, withdrewe
himself to Reculuer, and there erected a Palaice for him self and his
successors: Furthermore, that Ecgbrighte, (the seventh King of Kent, in
succession after Hengist) gave to one Bassa, the land at Reculuer, The River
called Wa^tsume.
to build him a Mynster upon, which stood at the one side of the water.
Wantsume, that ran two sundry ways into the Sea, and made Tanet an Island:
And finally, that not long after the same time, one Brightwald Canterbury, and
was the first o all the Saxo^ Nation, that aspired to that dignity. In which
behalf, Reculuers, (how poor and simple soever otherwise) has (as you see)
somewhat whereof to vaunt it self: As it may also, of the body of Ethelbert
the second (a King of Kent) which (as the Annals of Saint Augustines report)
remains likewise interred there.

Thus have I walked about this whole Diocoese: now therefore let me cut over
to Watlingstreete, The order of this description.
which I will use for my way to Rochester, and tell you of the places that lie
on each side. But first, hear (I pray you) of Stouremouthe, and Wyngham, which
be in my way to Watlingstreate.

Stouremouthe, in Latin, Ostium Sturae, that is to say, the mouth of the River
Stoure.
KIng Alfred, having many times (and that with much loss, and more danger)
encountered his enemies the Danes, and finding that by reason of the sundry
swarms of them, arriving in diverse parts of his Realm at once, he was not
able to repulse them being landed, he rigged up a royal Navy, and determined
to keep the high Seas, hoping thereby either to beat them upon the water, or
to burn their vessels if they should fortune to arrive. Soon after this, it
fortuned his Navy Danish fleet at the mouth of the River Stoure, where at the
first enccunter, the Danes lost sixteen sail of their ships: But, (as many
times it falls out, that security follows victory) so ye Kings army kept
no watch, by reason whereof the Danes having repaired their forces, came
freshly upon the English Mariners at unawares, and finding them fast a sleep,
gave them a great and bloody overthrow.

The likeness, or rather, the agreement, of the names, would lead a man to
think, that the true place of this conflict, should be Stouremouthe in this
Shyre, the rather for that it is derived of ye mouth of the river Stoure and
that by the circumstance of the story it appears, that King Alfred was in
Kent when he made determination of this journey.

Howbeit, he that shall advisedly read the story, as it is set down by
Asserus, shall confess it to have been in Eastangle, which contained Norfolk
and Suffolk, etc. And for the more certeinty, I take it to have chanced at
the same place, which we now call Harwiche Haven. For that River divides
Essex from Suffolk, and not far from the head thereof in Essex, there stands
a Town yet called Sturmere, which (in my fantasy) sufficiently mainteineth
the knowledge of this matter. Thus much I thought fit to say of the name
Stowremouth, least otherwise the Reader (whom I would keep within the limits
of Kent) might be shipped in the boat of this error, and be soudainly carried
from me. Again, it shall not be amiss (for the better understanding of this
self same History, penned by Henry Huntingdon) to note that in this place,
he calls the Danes, not Paganos, as in ye rest of his book he uses, but by a
strange name Wicingas, as the Saxon Chronicles, in report of the same matter,
do term the^: which word (I think) he took out of some Saxon Chronicle that
he followed, and happily understood not what it signified: For if he had, why
should he not rather (since he wrote Latin) have called them Piratas, as the
word in deed means, and as Asserus in the rehersall of the same fight, had
done before him. It may be, The decay of the old English tongue.
that he was a Norman borne: but truly I suppose rather, that the Saxon speech
was well nighe worn out of ure, in the reign of King Stephan, (under whom he
lived) seeing that even immediately after the coming in of the Conqueror, it
began to decline. For it is plain, that the Normans at the very first entry,
labored by all means, to supplant the English, and to plant their own
language amongst us: and for that purpose, they both gave us the laws, and all
manner of pastimes, in the French tongue, as he that will peruse the Laws of
the Conqueror, and consider the terms of Hawking, Hunting, Tenise, Dice
play, and other disportes, shall easily perceive: They rejected also, the
Saxons Characters, and all that their wonted manner of writing, as writes
Ingulphus, the Abbat of Croyland (which came over with them) and as a man may
yet see in the book of Domesday it self, which (notwithstanding that it was
written within a few years, after the arriual of the Conqueror) yet being
penned by Normans, it reteineth very few letters of the Saxon Alphabet. Thus
far by occasion of the water Stoure in Suffolk: as touching the course of
our own River of the same caling (which both gives the present name of
Stourey, and Stouremouthe, and the old name to Canterbury, also) I will
refer you wholly to the Map of this Shyre.

VVingham.
BEsides the stately, The Archebishops were well housed.
and Princelike Palaices at Canterbury, Maidstone Otford, Knoll, Croyden, and
Lambhythe, which the Archbishops of this Shyre kept in their hands, both to
perform their set solemnities of housekeping, and to soiourne at, with their
whole trains, when they traueiled toward the Court, and Parleament, or
remained for business about the same: they had also of ancient time diverse
other Manor houses of less cost and capacity, planted in diverse parts of
this Country, in which they used to breathe themselves, after their great
feasts and affairs finished, and to lodge at, when they travailed the Country
to make their visitations. Of this number (amongst other) were Foorde, Charte,
Charing, Charteham, Tenham, and this our Wingham: at the which, Baldwyne (the
Archbishop in the Reign of King Henry the second) lay, at such time, as he
had contention with his covent of Christ's Church, for making a Chapel at
Hakington, as in fit place you shall find more largely disclosed. In the
mean season, I will only tell you, that (as the Annals of Saint Augustines
report) when two of his Monks came to this house on horsbacke, in great have
to serve the process of that suite upon him, he received the Process
dutifully, but he caused them to dismount, and to walk home on foot fair and
softly. At this house also, Provision of armour^
King Edward the first rested for a season, with Robert of Winchelsey (then
newly made Archbishop) whilst he took order for the defense of the Sea
Coasts, charging both the spirituality and commons with horse and armor,
according to the quantities of their liuelyhoodes and possessions.

And here was he advertised, that one of his family (called Sir Thomas
Turbeuille, whom he had sent into Gascoine with commission) was fallen into ye
hands of the French King his enemy, and imprisoned in Paris, and that for his
deliverance he had conspired with the French King, and promised to betraie the
King, his master: whereupon king Edward caused such diligent watch to be
laid for him, that he was taken, and such speedy and severe justice to be
executed upon him, that he was forthwith condemned, drawn through London, and
hanged on live. Of this man a Poet of that age, alluding to his name, made this
verse following, and some other.

Turbat tranquilla clam, Thomas Turbida Villa. etc.
Our things now in tranquillity,
Thom. Turbuill troubles privily.
The names of Lathes, and of Wapentakes.
It is no small token of the ancient estimation of this place, that it giuethe
the name to the whole hundrethe in which it is situate: for that is most
usual, both in this Shyre, and elsewhere, that the whole territory, (be it
Lathe, Wapentake, or Hundredth) most commonly bears the name of some one
place, most notable, and excelling other within the same at the time of the
name imposed, although happily at this day, some other place do much exceed
it. To make an end, here was sometime a religious College, the governor
whereof was called a Provost, which I suppose to have been founded by some of
the Archebishops, and I find to have been valued at fourscore and four
pounds of yearly revenue.

Watling street in Saxon, eatlingastrete, of one Weatle, whom the printed
book of Mat. West. calls untruly Wading.
KIng Molmutius, the British Solo^, and first Law maker, The Privileges of
high ways.
decreed amongst other things: that such as were found praying in the Temple,
laboring at the plough, or travailing in the high ways should not be
impeached by any officer, but that they should enjoy peaceable freedom and
liberty, both for their goods and persons: But, forasmuch as he had not (in
his life time) described those ways that he would have thus priuileged, great
contention arose after his death, which ways should be taken for high and
royal, and which not: and therefore, Belinus, (his Son and successor) to
cease all controversy, limited in certain, four especial high ways:
whereof the first was called, Ermingstreete, and lead (after the opinion of
some) from Southhampton to S. David's in Wales, or (as others write) to Carlisle
in the North: the second was named Fosseway, and extended from Cathnes in the
North of Scotland to Totnes, a cape of Cornwall: The third Ikeneled (or as
others write it) Rekeneld, and reached from East to West (as Huntingdon
affirms) but as others will, from Tinmouth to S. Dauides, which is from
Northeast to Southwest. Watlingstreete, where we now are, was the fourth, and
it began at Dover (after the opinion of Ralfe Higden) passed through the
midst of Kent, crossed the Thamise at the West end of London, (howbeit others,
to whom I rather incline, think that it ran through London, and there left
the name to Watlingstreet there) from thence to S. Albons, Du^stable,
Stretford, Towcester, Lilburne, and Wrecken, thence over ye river of Seuerne to
Stretton, and so through the midst of Wales to Cardigan, and to the bank of
the Irishe Sea. And this is the common and received opinion (although in deed
there be diverse) touching the first beginning and description of this way. But
Simon the Chaunter of Durham, and he that made the continuation to the History
of Asserus Meneuensis (both very good authors) ascribe both the beginning and
the name also of this way, to the sons of a Saxon King, whom they called
Weatle: which their opinion, as I do not greatly receive, because I find not
that name (Weatle) in any Catalogue of the Kings that I have seen: So will I
not rashely reiecte it, for the estimation that I otherwise retain of the
writers them selves: But do leave the Reader to his free choice, to take or
leave the one, or the other.

And, as there is difference concerning the first beginning and name of this
way: So al agree not in the trace and true course of the same. For Henry (the
Archedeacon of Huntingdon) affirms, that it stretched from Dover to Chester.
And this Simon reports, that it extended it self from the East Sea, to the
West. Which third and last opinion, may well enough stand, either with the
first, or the second. But now, as touching this privilege granted by
Molmutius, although it continue not altogether in the same plight, yet some
shadow thereof remains even to this day, as by the laws of King Edward the
Confessor, which confirmed the protection of the four ways by name, and by
the Statute of Marlbridge, which forbids distresses to be taken in any the
Kings high ways, or common streets, and by the Statute (called Articuli
Cleri) which commands that such as abiured, should not be molested while
they be in the high ways, may evidently appear. I find in History, that
this Watlingstreete, has heretofore, not only served for the free passage of
the people, but that it has been (at times also) a mark and bounder between
some Kings, for the limits of their jurisdictions and authority: For so it was
between Edmund and Anlaf, Alfred and Guthrum, and others. But, because these
matters reach further then this Shyre extends, The order of this description.
I will reserve them to fit place, and show you in the mean while, what I
count note worthy on both sides of this way, till I come to the Diocese of
Rochester.

Lyminge.
ON the South side of Watlingstreete, and under the Downs, Lyminge is the
first that offers it self: concerning the which, I have found a note or
twain, that make more for the antiquity, then for the estimation of the
place: for I read in the Annals of S. Augustines of Canterbury, that Eadbald
(the son of King Ethelbert, the first Christened King of Kent) gave it to
Edburge his sister, who forthwith clocked together a sort of simple women,
which under her wing there, took upon them the Popish veil of widowhood.
But that order in time waxed cold, and therefore Lanfranc the Archbishop, at
such time as he builded Saint Gregory's in Canterbury (as we have touched in
Tanet before) reckoning it no small orname^t of his dotation, S. Gregory's in
Canterburi first builded.
to bestow some renouned Relic, that might procure estimation to his work,
translated Edburge from Lyminge to Saint Gregory's, Relics.
and verefied in Papistrie, the old Maxim of Philosophy, Corruption vnius,
generatio alterius.

Baramdowne, in the Saxon, BarHamdune; That is to say, the hill where the Bores
do abide.
AS this place is of it self very fit (by reason of the flat leuel and
playnesse thereof) to array an heast of men upon: So have we testimony of three
great armies that have mustred at it: The one under the conduict of Julius
Caesar, who landing at Dele (as we have before showed) surueyed his host at
Baramdowne, and marching from thence against the Britons, so daunted their
forces, that he compelled them to become tributarie: No less unfortunate, but
much more infamous to this country, was the time of the second muster, King
John yealdeth to the Pope.
which happened in the reign of King John: who hearing that Philip (the king
of France) had by incitation of the Pope (as has already appeared in Dover)
prepared a great army to invade him, and that he was ready at Calaice to take
shipping, determined to encounter him upon the Sea, and (if that assay
succeeded not) then to give him a battle on the land also: For which
service he rigged up his ships of war, and sent to the Sea, the Earl of
Salisburie, (whom he ordained Admiral) and calling together fit men from all the parts of the Realm, he found (by view taken at this place) an army of
sixty thousand men to encounter his enemies, besides a sufficient number of
able and armed soldiers, to defend the land withal: Now, whilst he thus
awaited at Baramdown, to hear further of his adversaries coming, Pandulph
(the Popes Legate) sent unto him, two Knights of the order of the Temple, by
whose mouth he earnestly desired the King to grant him audience. The King
assented, and the Legate came unto him, and said in sum as follows.

Behold (O Prince) the King of France is in arms against thee, not as
against a private enemy to him self alone, but as an open and common
adversary both to the Catholic Church, to the Popes holiness, to whole
Christendom, and to God him self: Neither comes he upon opinion of his own
power and strength, but is armed with great confidence of Gods favorable aid,
accompanied with the consent of many great Princes, furnished with the presence
of such as thou haste banished out of thy Realm, and assured by the faithful
promises of sundry of thine own Nobility, which now are present in person
with thee. Consider therefore in what danger thou stand, and spare not to
submit thee, while space is: least if thou persist, there be no place left of
further favor. The King hearing this, and being (upon causes known to him
self) more distrustful of Traitors at home, then fearful of enemies
abroad, agreed to serve the time, and taking the Legate to Dover with him,
sealed the Golden Bull of submission, whereby England was once again made a
tributarie Province to the City of Rome, and that in so much the more vile
condition, then it was before: as an usurped Ierarchie, is inferior to a
noble, lawful and renoumed Monarchy. For it is truly said, Dignitate domini,
minus turpis est conditio serui. Now when the French King on the other side of
the Seas, had word hereof, he retired with his army in a great choler,
partly for that he was thus deluded, but chiefly because he had lost his
Navy, which the Earl of Salisbury had set on fire in the haven at Calaice.

The Barons war.
Simon Mountfort (the Earl of Leycester,) that was elected by the Barons of
this Realm, general of that army which they raised against King Henry the
third, arrayed thirdly a very great host of men here, at such time as he
feared the arrival of Eleonar the Queen, who being daughter to the Earl of
Province, and then left in France behind the King and the Earl, (which
also had been both there a little before, to receive the French Kings reward,
touching their controversy) ceased not by all possible means, to solicit
the King of France, and to incite other her friends and allies, to aid King
Henry against the Nobility. But whether it were, that presently they could
not, for their own affairs, or that at al they durst not, knowing that their
coming was awayted, they served not her desire: by means whereof, the Lords
waxed strong, and soon after gave the King a battle in Sussex, wherein they
both took him, and his brother Richard, and his eldest son prisoners. But
as touching the original, proceeding, and event of these wars, I willingly
spare to speak much in this place, knowing that I shall have opportunity
often hereafter to discourse them. Now therefore, let us consider, a few other
places, and then haste us to Canterbury.

Charteham.
AFter such time, as King John had made him self the Popes tenant of the
Crown and Realm of England, (as even now I told you) the Clergy of this
country was so oppressed with Romish exactions, that they were become, not
only unable, but thereby unwilling also, to relieve the necessity of the
Prince, with any pressed of money, as in times paste they had accustomed to do.
Whereat the King on the one side taking offense, pressed them many times very
hard, not ceasing till he had wroong somewhat from them: And on the other side,
appealing to their holy fathers aid, procured (by their great cost) many
sharp prohibitions, and proud menacies against him. So that sundry times in the
reign of King Henry the third, this Balle was busily tossed between the
King and the Pope, the Clergy (in the mean while) looking upon, but nothing
laughing at the game. The Popes revenue in England.
Amongst other things done for the manifestatio^ of the Popes rauine, ye same
King at one time commanded a general suruiew to be made of the Popes Lions in
France, with commission to sue for redress: The like complaint also, was at
the same time, and for the same cause, exhibited by the King of France:
Neither was the state of the Empire free from the heavy yoke of that Popish
oppression: for M. Parise reports that even the^, the Emperor him self wrote
an earnest letter to the King and Nobility of this realm, soliciting the^ to
join with him in withstanding ye tyranie of the Romish See. Howbeit, all this
could not help, but that the Popes (laboring daily more and more with this
incurable disease of Philargyrie) continually pilled the English Clergy, and
so encountered King Henry, that in the end he was driven to use the mean of
the Popes authority, whenever he needed aid of his own spirituality.

After Henry, followed his Son Edward the first: who being more occupied in
Martial affairs then his Father was: And thereby more often enforced to use
the help of his subjects, for the raising of some necessary Masses of money,
now and then borrowed of his Clergy, till at the length, Pope Boniface the
eight (treading the path of his predecessors pride) took upon That if any
Clerk gave to a lay man, or if any lay person should take of a Clerk, any
spiritual goods, he should forthwith stand excommunicate. By color of which
decree, the Clergy of England, at such time as the King next desired their
cu^tribution toward his wars, made answer with one assent, That they would
gladly, A Parleame^t without the Clergy.
but they might not safely without the Popes license, agree to his desire.
Hereat the King waxed wroth, and calling a Parleament of his Nobility and
Commons (from which he excluded the Bishops and Clergy) enacted, that their
persons should be out of his protection, and their goods subject to
confiscation, unless they would by submitting themselves redeem his favor.
It was then a world to see how the welthie Bishops, fat Abbats, and rich
Pryors, in each quarter be stirred them, each man contending with liberal
offer to make his ransom, in so much as the house of Saint Augustines in
Canterbury Annals of their own Abbay report) gave to the King two hundrethe
and fifty pounds in money for their peace, having lost before
(notwithstanding al their haste) two hundredth and fifty quarters of their
wheat, which the Kings Officers had seized to his use, and shipped to be sent
into Gascoin for the victualing of his men of war. Only Robert of Winchelsey
(then Archbishop of Canterbury) refused to aid the King, The traitorous
behavior, of Robert of Winchelsey, the Archbishop.
or to reconcile himself, in so much as of very stomach he discharged his
family, and abandoned the City, and withdrewe himself to this Town: from
whence (as mine Author says) he road each Sunday, and Holyday to the Church
adjoining, and preached the word of GOD.

Polidore, in his own opinion, gives him an apt Theme writing that he preached
upon this text, Polidore, was the Popes creature.
Melius est obedire Deo, quam hominibus, It is better to obey God, then men
which, if he will have to serve the turn, he must construe it thus, It is
better to obey the Pope, then the King, and so make the Pope a God, and the
King no more then a common man. But Peter the Apostle of God, from whom the
Pope would seem to derive, and Polidore the Apostle of the Pope (for he first
sent him hither, to gather his Peter pence) were not of one mind n this point:
For he inioyneth us plainly. Subditi estote omni humanae ordinationi propter
Dominum, sieve Regi, tanquam praecellenti. etc. Be ye subject to all humane
ordinance, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as to the most
excellent. etc. making the King the most excellent under God, (who no doubt)
if he command not against God, it is to be obeyed before the Pope, concerning
whom, we have no commandment at all in Gods Scripture. Howbeit, since
Polydore and the Bishop served one common Master, namely, the man of Rome, it
is the less marvel, if he commend his endeavor in this part, and that is of
the less credit also which he writes of him in an other place, where he
bestows this honorable Elogium upon him, Quantum in eo fuit, de Religione
iuxta atque de Repub. promereri studuit, a qua nunquam discessit, nunquam
oculos deiecit: ita officio suo atque omnium commodis sibi seruiendum censuit.
As much as in him was, he studied to deserve well, both of religion, and of
the common wealth, from the which he never departed, ne turned away his eyes:
so thought he it meet to serve his own duty, and the profit of all men: As
concerning his desert in religion, I will say nothing, because it may be
thought the fault of that age and not of the person only: but as touching his
behavior toward his Prince and Country (wherein also consists no small part
of religion and fear of God) since our law allows of the trial De vicineto,
I will bring you one of his next neighbors to depose for him, a man that lived
in the same time with him, I mean the writer of the Annals of Saint
Augustines, who upon the year 1305. has this note following.

Eode^ an. 7. Kal. Maij, cu^ saepe dictus Archiepiscopus Robertus, super multis
Articulis enormibus (and praecipue super proditione, quam cu^ quibusdam
comitibus, and proceribus multis, pactus erat in dolo, vt Regem a Regni solio
deijcerent, and silium eius Eduardum, ipsius in trono subrogarent, and patrem
perpetuo carceri manciparent) a Rege calumniaretur, and inficiari non posset
obiecta: vltra quam credi potest timore percussus, ad Regis pedes pronus cadens
in terra^, vt eius mereretur assequi clementia^, sese per singula flens and
eiulans, Regis subdidit voluntati: Sic igitur humiliatus est ille Deo odibilis
and superbus, qui per totum Angloru^ orbem, oris sui flatu, more meretricio,
Sacerdotium deturpauit, and Clerum: and in populo tyrannide^ exer cuit
inauditam. Et qui Regem, Dominum suum, literatorie ei scribens, nominare renuit
superbiendo, nunc humiliatus, and Regem, and Dominum suum facit, and nominat,
obediens factus, sedinuitus ei deuotius seruiendo.

The same year, the 25. of April, when as the often named Robert the
Archbishop, was challenged by the King for many points of great enormitie, and
especially for the treason which he had imagined with certain Earls and
Noble men, to the end that they should displace the King from the seat of his
Kingdom, and place his son Edward in his throne, and cast the Father into
perpetual prison: and when he could not deny the things objected against him,
being stricken with an incredible fear, and falling down prostrate upon the
earth at the Kings feet, that he might deserve to obtain his favor, with
weeping and wayling he submitted himself wholly to the Kings pleasure: and
thus was that proud, and most hateful man to God, brought low and humbled,
the which defiled throughout all England, with the breath of his mouth, like
an harlot, the state of the Priesthode and Clergy, and exercised intolerable
tyranny over the people: and he, which before writing unto the King, refused
in his letters for pride to call him his Lord, now being humbled, both
acknowledgethe and calls him his Lord and King, being made obedient, and to
serve him with great devotion, but yet against his will.

Again, when as in the same year, he was cited to appear at Rome (upon
complaint that he had wastfully spoiled the goods of his Church) and came to
the Court to sue for license to pass over the Seas, the King as soon as he
came to his presence, and had moved his suite, caused the presence chamber door
to be set wide open, willed the standers by to give ear, and spoke a loud to
the Bishop in this manner, as the same author reports,

Licentiam transfretandi, quam a nobis postulare venisti libenter tibi
concedimus, reuertendi autem licentiam nullam damus, memores doli, ac
proditionis quas in Parlemento Lincolniae cum Baronibus nostris in Regiam
machinatus es Maiestatem, cuius rei litera signo tuo sigillata testis est, and
testimonium perhibet contra te euidenter. Sed propter amore^ beati Thomae
Martyris, and Ecclesiae cui praees reuerentiam, vindictam hucusque distulimus,
reseruantes eam Papae, qui nostras iniurias vlciscetur, vtpote speramus. A
protectione vero nostra, te prorsus excludimus, omnem gratiam negantes and
miserecordiam, quia re vera semper immisericors fuisti: Cumque Wintoniensis
Episcopus pro eo intercederet, and Archiepiscopum Dominum suum esse diceret,
Rex affirmauit, se omnium Praelatorum regni, and Regem, and Dominum esse
principalem.

We willingly grant you license to pass over the Seas according as you are
come to desire, but to return again we give you no license at al, being
mindful of the deceit and treason, which you did practice with our Barons,
against our Kingly Majesty in the Parleament at Lincoln, of the which thing
your letter signed with your own seal is a witness, and evidently gives
testimony against you: Howbeit, for the love of Saint Thomas the Martyr, and
for the reverence of the Church, over the which you are set, we have hither to
differred the revenge, reserving it to the Pope, which, as we hope, will make
revenge of our injuries. But we utterly exclude you from our protection,
denying you all grace and mercy, because in deed you have alwais ben an
unmerciful man: And when as the Bishop of Winchester made intercession for him,
and said, that the Archbishop was his Lord, the King affirmed, that he himself
was the King and chief Lord of all the Prelates of the Realm.

This I have exemplified the more at large, both to the end that you may see
how great a traitor to his Prince, how unmerciful a tyrant to the Common
people, King Edward the first, claymeth supremacy over the Clergy,
and how foul a blemishe to the Ecclesiastical order, this Bishop was, quite
contrary to that which M. Polydore affirms of him: and also that you may
understand, what authority King Edward the first in plain terms challenged
over his Clergy, not such as Anselme offered King William Rufus, when he
took Canterbury of his gift, saying, Summo pontifici debeo obedientiam, tibi
consilium. I owe my obedience to the high Bishop, and my counsel to you. But
such as a true subject owes to his Liege King, and lawful sovereign, and
such as differs no more from that which we at Principalis Dominus, and
supremus Gubernator do vary in sunder. And yet (behold the madness of the
time) after the death of this Bishop, the common people forsoothe resorted to
his tumbe, and would needs have made a Saint of him, had not the Sepulcher
been defaced and their folly stayed, by public ordinance.

Chilham Castle, in Saxon Cyleham, that is, the cold dwelling.
IN the allotment of Lands, for the defense of Dover Castle (whereof we have
before spoken) Chilham fell to Fulbert of Dover, who, in consideration thereof,
undertook to find at his own charge, fifteen able Soldiers, whereof three
should ward in the Castle, every month, by the space of 20. weeks in the
year. I suspect, that it came afterward to the possession of the
Archbishop: For I remember that I once read, that King John came thither to
treat with Stephan Langton the Archbishop, for reconciliation to be had
between them.

Wye, the word in British signifies, an Egg.
WHat time king William the Conqueror endowed his Abbay of Battle in Sussex,
he gave thereunto (amongst other) his Manor of Wye, containing at that time,
seven hydes, or ploughe lands, and being (before that time) of the Demeasnes
of the Crown.

The Chronicles of Battle Abbay affirm, that there were sometimes two and
twenty Hundrethes, subject to the jurisdiction of this Town: which if it be
true, then (as far as I can reach by conjecture) the territory of Wye was
the very same in compass, that now the Last of Screy, or Sherwinhope
describes, that is to say, the fifth part of this whole Shyre, consisting of
two and twenty Hundrethes in number. The same King, granted to his Monks of
Battle, wrek of the Sea, falling upon Dengemarishe a portion of Wye, The old,
and new manner of wrecke, at the Sea.
and willed further by his Chart of donation, that if any fish (called a
Craspeis) that is, Crasse piss, a great or royal fish, as whales, or such
other, (which by the Law of Prerogative perteined to the King himself) should
happen to be taken there, that the Monks should have it wholly: And if it
fortuned to arrive in any other man's land, (lying between Horsmede, and
Withburn) that yet the Monks should enjoy the whole tongue, and two third
parts of the rest of the body.

Now, in the Reign of King Henry his Son it fortuned, that a ship laden
with the Kings own goods was wrecked within the precinct of this liberty,
which his Officers would have taken, and saved to his use: but Geffray, (then
Abbat of Battle) withstoode them, and that so stoutly, that the matter by
complaint came to the Kings own hearing: who (to make known how much he
valued his fathers grant) yielded the matter wholly, into the Abbats own
courtesy,

The same Story observes a thing touching Wreck, (or rather Varech, as the
custom of Normandy from whence it came calls it) not unworthy ye recital,
that is, that of ancient time, if a ship were cast on shore, torn with
tempest, and were not repaired by such as escaped on live within a certain
time, that then this was taken for Wreck, and so used along the coast: But
Henry the first (says the book) disliking the justice of that custom,
ordained, that if from the^cefoorth any one thing (being within the vessel)
arrived on live, then the ship and goods should not be seized for wrecke. This
decree had force during all his reign, and ought of congruence to have endured
for ever: Howbeit, after his death, the owners of land on the Sea shore,
showing themselves more careful of their own gain, then pitiful of other
men's calamities, returned to the old manner: Which their unmerciful couetise,
(as I suppose) provoked king Edward the first, by the statute, (that we call
Westminster the first) to make restitution of King Henry's law, which (even
to this day) remains in force, though not altogether so heavy against
poor men (afflicted by misfortune of the Sea) as that former usage was, yet in
deed, neither so easy as Christian charity would, nor so indifferent as the
laws of other countries do afford, And therefore, I will leave it, as a thing
worthy (amongst other) of reformation, when God shall give time.

There was at this place, a College, The College
valued in the Records, at ninety three pounds of yearly revenue, In which
king Edward the second (after the burial of his father, and before his own
Coronation) held the solemnity of a

Motindene, of Mod and dene' that is, the proud valley, a name imposed (as I
think) for the fertility.
I Have not hitherto, found any thing touching the house of Motindene in
Hetcorne, save only, that the head thereof was called Minister, and that the
house it self was of the yearly value of sixty pounds: Neither would I have
aforded it so much as paper, or place here, but only that you might
understand, with what number of buildings, variety of sects, and plenty of
possessions, Popery was in old time provided for, and furnished. No corner
(almost) without some religious house, or other: Their suites and orders were
hardly to be numbered: and as for their lands and revenues, it was a world to
behold them. The value of the Religious houses in this Shyre.
I find, that the yearly extent of the clear value of the Religious livings
within this Shyre, amounted to five thousand pounds, Bishoprics, Benefices,
Friaries, Chaunteries, and Saints offerings, not accounted, which thing also
I do the rather note, to the end that you may see, how just cause is given
us, both to wonder at the hoate zeal of our ancestors in their spiritual
fornication, and to lament the coldenesse of our own charity, toward the
maintenance of the true spouse of Jesus Christ. For, if ever, now most
truly, is that verefied, which the Poet long since said, Probitas laudatur,
and alget.

Canterbury, is called in Saxon Ca^tparabyrig, that is to say, The city (or
court) of the men of Kent: which also agrees with the Brittishe word Caer
Kent, signifying the City of Kent. It is termed in Latin diversely, of some
Doruernum, and Daruernum, of others, Durouernum: of some Dorobernia, and of
some Dorobrinia, All which names, Leland coniectureth to proceed, either of
the River called Stowr (as we have showed) or else of the Brittishe word Dour,
which signifies water, because the country thereaboutes, is plentuously
stored therewith. One other late writer, takes it to be called Daruernum, as if
it were, Dour ar guerne, that is, the water near the Fenne or Marish.
TO the end, that (confusion avoided) each thing may appear in his proper
place, it shall not be amiss, to part the treatise of this City into twain,
whereof the first shall contain the beginning, increase, and declination of
the City it self: The second shall set forth, the erection, and overthrow
of the Religious houses and buildings within the same. The City, when it began.
The author of the Brittishe story affirms, that one Rudhurdibras, or (as
some copies write it) Lud Rudibras, (a King of the Britons, almost nine
hundredth years before the Incarnation Christ) builded a City, which he
called Carlem, or (as Henry of Huntingdon, in his recital of the cient
Brittishe Cities, names it) Caer Kent, that is to say, the City (or rather)
the chief City of Kent. For, in the process of the same History it
appears in deed, that at such time as Vortiger, King of the Brittons
entertained the Saxon Captains, Hengist and Horsa, he soiourned at Canterbury,
the head City of all that country, and that prerogative, it retained in the
time of the Saxons them selves also: For by the testimony of Beda, and Mathewe
of Westminster, it was (when Augustine arrived in Kent) Caput Imperij, Regis
Ethelberti, Ethelbert.

To this Augustine, the sade King gave (after a manner, as I conjecture) the
Lordship, or royalty of the same city: For, I read (as I have before showed)
that he gave him his own Palaice, and builded another for him self at
Reculuer: and it is to be seen in the ancient Saxon laws, that of old time
the Archebishops had their Coynage within the City.

I find also in the book of Domesday, that King Edward the Confessor, had
only one and fifty Burgesses, which yealded him rent within this City, and
two hundredth and twelve other persons owing him suite, and that the Castle of
Canterbury, and the residue of the inhabitauntes were subject to the Bishop,
and the Religious houses. Howbeit, the Bishops were never absolute owners
hereof, till the time of King William Rufus, who (as the Annals of Saint
Augustine say) Dedit ciuitatem Cantuariae Anselmo ex solido, quam Lanfrancus
tenuerat ex beneficio.

This City (since the union of the Kentishe kingdom to the West Saxon) has
been chiefly maynteined by two things: First, by the residence and
hospitality of the Archbishop, and Religious persons, and then by the
liberality and expense of such, as either gadded to S. Thomas for help and
devotion, or travailed toward the Sea side, for their private affairs and
business.

Amongst the Bishops, Theodore (a Grecian borne, and the seventh and last of
those that came out of Italy) Lanfranc (the first Norman, advanced by the
Conqueror) and Simon Sudburie (that lived under King Edward the third) have
been the most beneficial unto it.

Of the which, Theodore, by license of Vitelianus (then Pope) founded within
the City, The old Schole at Canterbury
a Schole (or College) wherein he placed Professors of all the liberal
Sciences, which also was the very pattern to the schole that Sigbert the King
of Eastangle afterward builded: but whether that were at Cambridge, or at some
other place besides within his kingdom, I leave to Doctor Caius of Cambridge,
and Master Key of Oxforde to be disputed, and to indifferent Readers to be
adjudged.

The Reverend father, Matthew, now Archbishop of Canterbury (whose care for
conservation of learned Monuments can never be sufficiently commended) showed
me not long since, the Psalter of David, and sundry Homelies in Greek, Homer
also, and some other Greek authors, beautifully written in thick paper, with
the name of this Theodore prefixed in the front, to whose Library, he
reasonably thought (being thereto led by show of great antiquity) that they
sometime belonged.

The other two, Lanfranc, and Simon of Sudbury, did cost upon the gates and
walls, bringing thereby both strength and beauty to the City.

Such was then the first beginning, and increase of Canterbury: Let us now
therefore see also, what harms it has now sustained, and to what decay it is
fallen. Besides sundry particular harms, done to diverse of the Religious
places, the town it self has often received detriment by casualtie of fire.
For the author Asserus Meneuensis affirms, that about the year after Christ
seven hundredth fifty and four, it was sore wasted with fire. Again, in the
year, nine hundredth and eighteen, Alfleda the mighty Lady of Mercia,
besieging and burning the city it self, spoiled, killed, and expulsed the
Danes, that the^ possessed it: In revenge whereof, they afterward, about ye end
of the reign of King Ethelred, did not only besiege, take, and burn this
city, but also put to most barbarous and cruel death, Alphegus the
Archbishop, (for that he refused to charge his farmours and the citizens
toward his ransom above their ability) and they sieve of the Monks,
Townsmen, and other common people, the whole nynes throughout the multitude,
reserving on live the tenthe man only: So that they left of all the Monks but
four, and of the Lay people four thousand and eight hundredth: Where (by the
way) it is to be noted, that this city, and the country thereabouts (the
people whereof, be like, fled thither for succor) was at that time very
populous, having to loose forty three thousand and two hundredth persons: in
which behalf, there want not some (I wot well) which do affirm, that it
had then more store of buildings, then London it self:

And truly it is well known, that they were very rich at Canterbury also,
for not long before (by the advice Siricius, their Archbishop) they bought
their peace at the hands of the Danes, with thirty thousand pounds of ready
money. But let me proceed: fourthly, in the days of King Henry the second,
even Thomas Becket the Archeshop, this city of Canterbury was wholly consumed
with fire: And now lately and lastly, in the reign of King Henry the eight,
it was in some parts blasted with flame, wherein (amongst other things) diverse
good books, which a Monk of S. Augustines had brought from beyond the Seas,
were brought to ashes. I had almost forgotten a story in Beda, where he
makes, Mellitum mendacium, (mention of Mellitus, I should have said) and
reports, that when as (upon a time) a great part of this city was touched
with fire, and that the flame hasted toward the house of this Mellitus (then
Archbishop there) he commanded, that they should bear him against it, even
into the greatest fury thereof. And that whereas before it could not be
quenched by any water, (though never so plentiously poured upon it) forthwith
at his presence the wind turned, and at the vehemency of his prayer, the fire
not only ceased to go any further, but also immediately went out, and was
extinguished. I wot well, this writer is called, Venerabilis: but when I read
this, and a number of such, which make the one half of his work, I say with
my self, as sometime did the Poet, Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus
odi:
What ever thing thou show me so, I hate it as a lie. The decay of
Canterbury, and other places.



To proceed therefore in my former course, and to tell the truth, little had
all these casualties of fire and flame been to the decay of this town, had
not the dissolution and final overthrow of the Religious houses also come
upon it. For, where wealth is at commandment, how easily are buildings
repaired? and where opinion of great holiness is, how soon are cities and
towns advanced to great estimation and riches?

And therefore, no marvel, if after wealth withdrawn, and opinion of holiness
removed, the places tumbled headlong to ruin and decay: In which part, as I
can not on the one side, but in respect of ye places the^ selves, pity and
lament this general desolatio^, not only in this Shyre, but in all other places
of the Realm: So on the other side, considering the maine Seas of sin and
iniquity, wherein the world (at those days) was almost whole drenched, I
must needs take cause, highly to praise God, that has thus mercifully in our
age delivered us, disclosed Satan, unmasked these Idols, dissolved the
Synagoges, and raced to the ground all Monumentes of building, erected to
superstition and ungodliness: And therefore let every godly man cease with me
from henceforth to maruail, why Canterbury, Walsingham, and sundry such like,
are now in these our days become in manner waste, since God in times paste
was in them blasphemed most: And like the soldiers of Satan, and
superstitious Mawmetrie, howl, and cry out with the heathen Poet.

Excessere omnes, aditis, arisque relictis,
Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. etc.
The Gods each one, by whose good aid
This Empire stood upright
Are flowne: their entries and their altars
eke abandond quight.
For, seeing God in all ages has not spared to extend his vengeance, not only
upon the persons, but upon the places also, where his name was dishonored,
striking the same with solitude and exterminion, as we read of Sodom,
Jerusalem, and others: How then should he forbear these harborowes of the
Devil, and the Pope, which in horrible crimes contended with Sodom, in
unbelief matched Jerusalem, and in folly of superstition, exceeded all
Gentilitie.

By the just judgment of God therefore, Canterbury came soudenly from great
wealth, multitude of inhabitaunts, and beautiful buildings, to extreme
poverty, nakedness, and deca^: having at this day, Parishes more in number,
then well filled, and yet in all not above twelve, in which plight, for pity I
will leave it, and (referring you to the statutes. 32. and 33. of Henry the
eight, provided for the reedifying of decayed houses, as well in this City, as
also in Roch^ster, Feuersham, and the Five ports) I will turn me t^ the
History of the religious buyldings.

There was i^ Canterbury, Continual contention, between the two great houses
in Canterbury.
within the time of late memory (besides others) two houses of great
estimation and lyuelyhoode, the one being called Christ's church, and the other
Saint Augustines, the Monks of the which places, were as far removed from
all mutual love and society, as the houses themselves were near linked
together, either in regard of the time of their foundation, the order of their
profession, or the place of their situation: And therefore in this part it might
well be verified of them, which was wont to be commonly said, Vnicum Arbustum,
non alit duos Erythacos.

For in deed, one whole City, nay rather one whole Shyre and Country, could
hardly suffice the pride and ambitious avarice of such two Religious
Synagogues, The which as in all places, they agreeed to enrich them selves by
the spoil of the Laity: So in no place they agreed one with another: But
(each seeking every where, and by all ways, to advance them selves) they
moved continual, (and that most fier^ and deadly) war, for lands,
privileges, relics, and such like vain worldly preeminences: In so much
(as he that will observe it, shall find) that universally the Chronicles of
their own houses, contain (for the most part) nothing else, but suing for
exemptions, procuring of relics, struggling for offices, wrangling for
consecrations and pleading for lands and possessions: For proof whereof, I
might justly allege inumerable brawles, stirred between ye Religious houses of
this City, wrestling, sometime, with the Kings, sometime with the Archbishops,
and oftentimes ye one with the other, ^l which be at large set forth by Thomas
Spot the Chroni^ler of S. Augustins: But, for as much as I my self deligh^ little
in that kind of rehearsal, and do think that other men (for the more part of ye
wiser sort) be sufficiently persuaded of these their follies, I will lightly
pass the^ over, and labor more ^argely in some other thing. And because that
the Monas^erie, or Priorie of Christ's Church, was of the more fame, I will
first begin with it.

Christes-Churche in Canterbury
After that Augustine, the Monk, which was sent from Rome, had found such
favor in the sight of King Ethelbert, that he might freely Preach the Gospel
in his Country, he chose for assembly and prayer, an old Church in the East
part of this City, which was long time before builded by the Romans, and he
made thereof (by license of the King) a Church for himself and his
successors, dedicating the same to the name of our Savior Christ, whereof it
was called afterward, Christ's Church. After his death, Laurence his
successor, brought Monks into the house, the head whereof was called a Pryor,
which word (howsoever it soundethe) was in deed but the name of a second
officer, because the Bishop himself was accounted the very Abbat.

For in old time, the Bishops were for the most part chosen out of such
Monasteries, and therefore most commonly had their Palaces adjoining, and
governed as Abbats there: by means whereof it came to pass, that such Abbeys
were not only much amplified in wealth and possessions, but also by favor of
the Bishops, their good Abbates, ouerloked all their near neighbors, as
hereafter in further course shall better appear.

I find not, that any great cost was done vp^n this Church, till Lanfrancs
days, who not only buided Benedict^ Monks therein, the number of which he
advanced from thirty, to one hundredth and forty, but also erected certain
Hospitals, which he endowed with one hundredth and forty pounds by year,
and repaired the walls of the City it self: And here by the way, it is
Mathewe Westminster, that there were Monks in this house, ever since the time
of Laurence the second Archbishop, although some report, that Elfricus, was
the first that expulsed the Seculer Priests, and brought the Monks in place.

Not long after Lanfrancs time, succeeded William during whose government, this
lately advanced building was blasted with flame, but he soon after reedified
it of his own purse, and dedicated it with great pomp and solemnity, in the
presence of the King and his Nobles. After him followed Theobaldus (whom Pope
Innocent the second, honored with the title of Legatus natus: and then comes
Thomas Becket, the fifth in order after Lanfranc, by whose life, death, Thomas
Becket, the Archbishop and his history.
and burial, the estimation of this Church was advanced beyond all reason,
measure and wonder. For, not withstanding that it had been before yt time
honored with the arm of S. Bartholmew, (a Relic that King Canutus gave)
with the presence of Augustine yt brought in Religion, with the burial of
eight Kentishe Kings, Wightred, and of a great number of Archebishops after the
time of Cuthbert: Likewise afterward with the famous asse^bly at the homage
done by the Scottishe King William, to King Henry the second, and at the
Coronation of King John: with ye several Marriages also of King Henry the
third, and King Edward Edward (called commonly the Black Prince) and Henry
the fourth: yet the death of this one man not martyred (as they feign, for the
cause only, and not Stephan Langton had made a Golden shrine for his body on
earth, and commanded the Annual day of his departure to be kept solemn, not
only the Lay and Common sort of people, but Bishops, Noble men, and Princes, as
well of this Realm, as of foreign parts, resorted on Pilgrimage Midas, or
Craesus, and so famous and renowned (every pillar resounding Saint Thomas, his
miracles, prayers and pardons) that now the name of Christ was clean
forgotten, and the place was commonly called, Saint Thomas Church of
Canterbury.

I pass over the stately buildings, and monuments, (I mean Churches, Chapels,
and Oratories) raised to his name: the lewd books of his life, and iestes,
written by four sundry persons to his praise: The blasphemous Hymns, and
collectes, devised by churchemen for his service: and sundry such other
things, which as they were at the first inuen^^ to strike into the heads of
all hearers and beholders, more then wonderful opinion of devotion and
holiness: So now the truth being tried out, and the matter well and
indifferently weighed) they ought to work with all men, an utter detestation,
both of his, and all their, hypocrisy and wickedness.

For, as touching himself (to omit that which truly might be spoken in
dispraise of the former part of his life, and to begin with the very matter
it self, whereupon his death ensued) it is evident, both by the testimony of
Mathewe Paris (a very good Chronicler, that lived under King Henry the third)
and by the four Pseudo Evangelists themselves that wrote his Iestes, that the
chi^fe cause of the Kings displeasure toward him grew upon occasion, that he
opposed himself against his Prince, Gods lawful and Supreme minister on
earth, in maintenance of a most vile and wicked murder. The matter stood
thus. Within a few of the first years of King Henry the seconds Reign, the
Thomas Becket himself was one) took order at Claredowne, that if any Clerk
from thencefoorth committed felony, or treason, he should first be degraded,
and afterward delivered to the Lay power, there to receive as to his offense
belonged.

Not long after, it chanced one Philip Broic (a Chanon of Bedford) to be
apprehended for murder, and to be brought before the temporal justice, where
he not only showed no remorse of ye wicked fact, but also (in hope of
Ecclesiastical exemption) gave very evil language to the Judge: the Judge
complained thereof to the King, and the Chanon belike made means to the
Archbishop.

For the King no sooner endeavored to put his Law in execution, but the
Archbishop, (both forgetful of h^s duty to God, and his Prince, and
unmindful of his own oath) set him self against it, affirming plainly, that
he neither could, ne would suffer it.

Hereupon the Prince waxed wroth, and by little and little his indignation so
kindeled, (by matter that the obstinacy of the Bishop daily ministered) that in
the end it was to hot for Becket to abide it: Then speedeth he himself to
Rome, and pours into the Holy Fathers bosom, complaint of most grievous
oppression, extended against the Clergy: The Popes Holiness, sorry to
discourage so good a Soldier, as the Bishop was, and withal loathe to loose so
mighty a friend, as King Henry was, by letters and Legates, prays,
commaundethe, persuadethe, and threatens reconciliation and atonement, which
after great a do by the means of the French King, and other his instruments,
was in a sort brought to pass.

Then Thomas Becket retourneth with the Kings favor into the Realm, from
whence he had six years before departed without license, and therefore
without, or rather against Law, and immediately seeks to revenge himself
upon such the Bishops, as had in his absence assisted the King. Which when
the King (being then in Normandy) understood, it chanced him, in great
grief of mind to cast out some words, that gave occasion and hardines to
Reginald Bear, William Tracy, Hughe Moruill, and Richard Bryton (four of his
Gentlemen) to address themselves for his revenge: These four therefore,
passed the Seas, came to Canterbury, found out the Bishop, followed him into
his Church^, and upon the Stairs of the same, did him very cruelty, and
dispitefully to death.

This shortly is the chief substance, and circumstance of all this Tragedy,
drawn out of our own Countriemen, and Thomas his favorers, howsoever
otherwise Erasmus (led by some sinister information) has reported it, as
shall hereafter appear in Otford.

Wherein, as I can not on the one side allow this murder, (executed, not by
any public Minister of Justice, but by a private and injurious arm:) So on
the other side, I report me to al indifferent and Godly Readers, whether such
a life deserved not such a death, and whether these Popish Parasites, that
have painted forth his praises, make not themselves, thereby parteners of all
his pride and wilful rebellion.

I might here rest long, upon diverse other things concerning the King and
this Archbishop, namely, how that he suffered the King to hold his stirup
twice in one day in Normandy, but in Prato Proditorum, as Mathewe Parise very
pretely writes it: How the King came with bare and bleeding feet to
Canterbury, to purge himself of the murder: How he bared his body to the
Monks of this house, and received of every Religious Person there, four, or
five stripes, in which self year (by the way) their whole church was
consumed with fire: and some other matters besides, which make manifestly for
the proof of great presumption in ye Clergy, and of vile abiection of the
Princes of those days: But, because that I am fearful that I grow to long,
I will leave Saint Thomas him self, and after (a few words more of this
Church) step over to Saint Augustines.

After Thomas, this Church found three especial mainteiners of the building,
William Courtney which by his Testament bequeathed one thousand Marks toward
the amendment of the body of the Church, the walls, Thomas Arundel, which
erected one of the Bell Towers, gave five Belles, and Christened them after the
Popish manner: And Henry Chicheley, who both repaired the library with books
and building, and did great cost upon one of the Bell Towers also.

Now to Saint Augustines. Saint Augustines.
Augustine, having thus established a See for him self and his successors,
obtained further of King Ethelbert (for the better furtherance of the service,
that he had in hand) a Church, that then stood between the walls of the
City, and S. Martines, wherein the King himself used before to make his
prayers, and offer sacrifice to his Idols:

This Church, he purged from Profane abuse and name (as they say) and
dedicated it to the service of God, and to the honor of Saint Pancrace:
Neither ceased he thus, but shortly after entreated the same King to build a
Monastery in the soil adjoining, which he also appointed Peter, and Saint
Paul and placed Monks therein: This Monastery, in memory of his benefit,
lost the first name, and was ever after called Saint Augustines.

The dead, in old time were buried out of the Cities.
Now whereas the true meaning, both of the King and Augustine was, that this
Church (for so much as both then, and long after, it was not their manner to
bury their dead within the walls of any City, a thing forbidden of old, by
the law of the twelve tables) should be from thencefoorth a common Sepulcher to
all their successors, as well in the Kingdom, as in the Archebishopricke, yet
such was the favor of the Bishops, Augustine toward their own church, that
in the process of time Saint Augustines was defrauded of the Sepultures, both
of the one and the other.

For in Brightwaldes days, the burial of the Kings was taken from it: and
Cuthbert the Archbishop in his life begged of King Eadbert, that for the
advancement of Saint John's (a new Church, that he had erected for that
purpose, and for the execution of judgments Ordale, and which was afterward
fired with the flame of Christ's Church, whereunto it was near adjoining) the
Bishops also might from thencefoorth be buried there. And for the more surety
to attain that his desire, he took order in his life (by oath of all his
Covent) that they should suffer his corpse to lie three days in the ground
after his death, before any Bell should be rong, or other open solemnity
used, that might notify his departure to the Monks of S. Augustines. Only
Ieanbright (the fourteenth Bishop) whom other copies call Lambright) was
conveyed to the ground at Saint Augustines, by this occasion.

After the death of Bregwine (the Archbishop) this Ieanbright (then being
Abbat of Saint Augustines, and fearing that he should be deceived of the
body of Bregwine, as Aldhun his predecessor had been beguiled of Cuthberts
before) he came appointed with armed men, determining to take it away by
force, if he might not by fair means obtain it. But the crafty Monks of
Christ's Church, had buried the body before he came, so that he was driven to
depart home frustrate of his desire, and to seek his amends by action in the
law. Notwithstanding, because they perceived hereby, that he was a man of good
courage, and therefore very meet in their opinion to be their Captain, they
shortly after chose him Archbishop, in hope that he would have maintained
their quarrel: but he nevertheless took such order, that he was buried in
S. Augustines with the rest of his predecessors.

Popish braules.
Thus you see, how soon after the foundation, these houses were at dissension,
and for how small trifles, they were ready to put on arms, and to move great
and trouble some tragedies: Neither do I find, that ever they agreeed after,
but were either at continual brawling within them selves, either suing before
the King, or appealing to the Pope, and that for matters of more stomach, then
importance: As for example, whether the Abbat of Saint Augustines should be
consecrate or blessed in his own Church, or in the others: whether he ought
to ring his belles to service, before the other had rong theirs: whether he and
his tenaunts ought suite to the Bishops Court: and such like, wherein it can
not be doubted, but that they consumed inestimable treasure, for maintenance
of their most peuishe and Popish pride and wilfulness. If any man delight to
know the particulars, let him read the writing of Thorn and Spot, their own
Chroniclers, as for my self, I think it too long to have said thus much in
general, and therefore will haste me to Ethelbert, Eadbaldus (his son) at
the instance of Laurence, the Archbishop, builded a fair Church in this
Monastery, S. Mary's, in Canterbury.
which he called Saint Mary's. In which place many years after (if at the
least you will believe Thomas Spot) Saint Dunstane sensibly heard, and saw,
our Lady Saint Adryan, and a sort of Angels singing and dancing together.
Eadbaldus, King Canute (the great Monarch of this Realm) Egilsine (the Abbat
ye fled for fear of the Conqueror) Scotlandus (whom the same King Egelsins
place.) Hugo de Floriaco (yt was of kindred to king William Rufus, and by him
made Abbat) were places, and others other sorts of edefices. The Saints,
whose dead bodies and relics, The Saints and Relics, at Canterbury.
brought to this church great veneration, and gain, were these specially,
Adryan, Albin, John. etc. religious persons: Eadbald, Lothar, Mul, and
Wightred, sometimes Kings: S. Sexburg, and S. Myldred of Thanet, (whose body
was given then by King Canute,) And Saint Augustine their founder him self.

Of this last man (to let slip a many of others) this one miracle they report,
S. August.
that at such time as the Danes entered Kent, and spoiling this City,
ransacked almost every corner thereof, this house of Saint Augustines Dane
had taken hold of Saint Augustines Pall or cloak, (wherewith his tumbe was
covered) it stacke so fast to his fingers, that by no means possible, he
could lose it, till he came and yealded himself to the Monks, and made
sorrowful confession of his fault. Much like to this, it is written, that at
the overthrow of Carthage, the hand of one that would have spoiled the God
Apollo of his Mantel, was found amongst the fragments. This our good fellow
was not so cunning (belike) as Dionysius, for he took a golden cloak from
Jupiter, and had no hurt at all thereby. But either this our Pall was weaued,
Ex auro Tholosano, or else (which I rather believe) this Canterbury tale was
forged A rabula Romano. Besides all these, the Monks seeing how little their
relics were esteemed, in comparison of Thomas Beckets, and believing (as the
Romans sometimes did of Dea Pessenuntia) that their house should be highly
advanced, if they might get thither so glorious a God as he was, they made a
foul shift for a piece of him also. There was a Monk of Christ's Church, called
Roger, who had in charge to keep the Altar where Becket was slain. This man
they chose to their Abbat, in hope (says mine author) that he would bring
somewhat with him: in which doing they were not altogether Thomas his blood
that was shed, and a piece of his Crown that was pared off. Thomas Becket had
two heads.
But here by the way, mark (I beseech you) the gross iugling that these slow
bellyed syres used to delude the world withal. Erasmus (in his Colloquies)
writes, that the whole face of S. Thomas, being sumptuously set in gold, was
religiously kept within a Chapel beyond the high altar, and that they told
him, the rest of the body lay in a shryne of gold, and of great Majesty,
which they showed besides.

But the truth is, that at such time as the late godly and most Christian
Archbishop Cranmer, and the wise and noble counseler Cromwell, were at
Canterbury, in commission for defacing of this Shryne, they found an entier
body, and complete in all his parts within the same, as some yet on live, and
then present, can testify: so that either this their great God, was a bishop
Biceps, and lacked but one head more to make him Cerberus, or Chimaera: or else
(which is most certain) these Monks were marvelous and monstrous
magnifiers, of such deceiuable trumperie, and wanted nothing at all to make
them, Cretenses or Cecropes. But to my purpose again, as touching the
privileges, possessions, estimation and majesty of this house, it were too
much to recite the one half, and therefore I will only let you know, that
of ancient time the Abbat had allowance of a Coynage, or Mynte within him
self, by grant of Ethelstane: That he had place in the general counsel, by
gift of the Pope Leo: That the house had five Couents, containing in all,
sixty five Monks: And finally, that (besides jurisdiction over a whole Last
of thirteen Hundreds (it had possession of liuelyhoode to the value of eight
hundredth and eight pounds by year.

Now, besides these two great houses, there were in Canterbury some other also
of less note: S. Gregory's in Canterbury.
As S. Gregory's (a Church of Chanons, belonging to the Hospital that Lanfranc
built) which was fired in the time of King Stephan, and valued in the Records
at thirty Laurence, S. Laurence^ Hospital.
edified by Hughe (the Abbat of S. Augustines) for his sick Monks, and rated
at twenty pounds yearly:

S. James Hospital, erected by Eleonor, S, James Hospital, S. Sepulchers.
the wife of King Henry the third: S. Sepulchers, a house of Nonnes, prepared
(belike) to serve the necessity of the hot Monks, esteemed at twelve pounds
by year: The White translated by one ^ohn Dig, White friars.
to the Isle of Bynwhite, lately the house of one Rolph: And S. Myldreds S.
Mildred^
in the South side of the City, long since (but not lately) an Abbay. There is
extant in Canterbury also, the ancient and stately Palaice of the
Archebishops, The Bishops Palaice.
not that which King Ethelbert first gave to Augustine at Staplegate, for it
was but a mean dwelling house, answerable to his small company, and first
beginnings: but the very same which he secondly bestowed on him (when he left
Canterbury, and went to Reculuer) which was Hubert the Archbishop had aspired
to the Sea, was decay^d, either by age, or flame, or both: Who therefore puled
down the most part of it, and in place thereof laid he foundation of that
great Hall, and other the offices, that are now to be seen: But by reason
that he himself wanted time, (being prevented by death) and some of his
followers lacked money (having otherwise, bestowed it lauishly) to perform
the work, it rested till the days of Boniface, who both substantially, and
beautifully finished it.

Martines, S. Martines was a Bishops See.
where was sometime an ancient Church, erected by the Romans, in which (before
the coming of Augustine) Bertha, the wife of King Ethelbert, having received
the Religion of Christ before him, was accustomed to pray. In this small
Oratorie, Augustine (by the Kings permission) celebrated divine service, and
administered the Sacraments, until that by further taste of the Kings favor, he
obtained larger room to build his Monastery upon. And this Church was long
time after, even until the coming in of the Normanes, the Sea of a Bishop, who
(always remaining in the country (supplied the absence of the Metropolitan,
that for the most part followed the Court: and that as well in governing the
Monks, as in perfourming the solemnities of the Church, and exercising the
authority of an Archedeacon. Godwine was the last which sat in that chair,
after whose death, Lanfranc (being as ielouze of a partner in his spiritual
Ierarchie, as ever was Alexander in his temporal Empire) refused to consecrate
any other, affirming plainly, that Two Bishops were to many for one City.
Nevertheless, because he needed the help of a substitute, he created in place
thereof, one of his Chaplains, Archedeacon of Canterbury.

Hakington.
BAldwine (an Archbishop of Canterbury, S. Sepulchers by Canterbury.
under the reign of King Henry the second) minding to advance the
estimation of Thomas Becket, his lately murdered predecessor, and withal to
make him self memorable to posterity, thought this one way the best for
obtaining his double desire, namely, to build some stately Church Monument,
and to match in the patronage thereof, Thomas that Prototraitour and rebel to
his Prince, with Stephan the Protomartyr, and true servant of Almighty God.
For which purpose, and to the end that his act might have the more
countenance and credit, he obtained a license from Pope Urban, in this form
as Mathewe Parise reports it. Presentium tibi authoritate mandamus, vt liceat
tibi Ecclesiam in honorem beatorum Stephani, and Thomae, martyrum, constituere,
and idoneis eam ordinare personis, quibus beneficia quae ad eorum
sustentationem constitueris, canonice debeas assignare. Item mandamus, vt
quarta part oblationum, reliquijs Sancti Thomae monachorum vsibus concessa,
quarta fabricis ecclesiae deputata, quarta pauperibus deputata, quartam
portionem reliquam liceat tibi in alios vsus, pro tuae voluntatis arbitrio
erogare. etc. This done, The Monks contend with the Archbishop and do prevail.
he pulled down an old timber Chapel that stood at Hakington, and raised in
place thereof, a fair Church of hewed stone. But, for as much, as not only the
charge to furnish that present building, was fetched from S. Thomas offering at
Canterbury, (much to the decay of the Monks gain) but also the yearly
maintenance thereof, was to be drawn from ye same Hanaper, and to be bestowed
upon certain Seculer Chanons, (a sort of religious persons, that ye monks
despised) who yet might happily in time to come, be made equal with the Monks
themselves in the election of the Archbishop, to the general discredit of
their holy order, and utter violation of their former Privileges, therefore the
Covent of Christ's Church, thinking it fit to withstand such beginnings,
complained hereof to Pope Innocents holiness (for Urban was then dead) and
were so well heard in their suite, that the Archebishops building was
countermaunded, and he with forced patience, contented to cease the work.
Nevertheless, having hope, that if the thing were by great distance of place,
removed out of the Monks eye, he might with better quiet bring his desire to
the wished effect, he attempted the like platfourme at Lambhithe, his own
house near London: But before he had finished that work, he went into the
holy Land with King Richard the first, and dyed without return, in which
mean while, the Chapel of Hakington, being destitute of her Patron, was
quite and clean demolished.

Hubert succeeded Baldwine in the Sea, and put his hand to perform the
building at Lambhithe, that his predecessor had begone, but the Monks
(fearing still the former inconvenience) intercepted the whole profits of
Saint Thomas offering, renewed their suite at Rome, and (feeding the Pope with
that which should have maynteined the building) made his holy ears so
attentive, that he became wholly of the Monks devotion, and compelled Hubert at
his own dispense, and to his great dispight, to (Mauger his Myter) race that
Chapel also, and to make it equal with the ground.

And thus you may see how the envious Monks hindered the felicity of
Hakington, which otherwise by this kind of spiritual robbery, might in time
have proved as famous as Boxley, Walsingham, or any other Den of Idolatry,
whereas then it was with much a do, and great difficulty obtained, that a
poor Chapel (served with a single Sir John, and destitute, both of Font, and
Churcheyard) might remain standing in the place. Howebeit since that time, it
is become the Parish Church there.

Harbaldowne, by Canterbury.
The vanity of Man, and the subtilty of the Devil, be the cause of Idolatry.
SVche has been the nature of man, even from that time (in which not
contenting himself to abide man, but aspiring by knowledge of good and evil to
become God, he defaced the Image of his Creator, to the similitude of whom he
was created) that he has continually ever since, and that in matters
concerning God, more trusted his own wit, then the wisdom of God him
self, better liked his own invention, then Gods holy institution, and
preferred will worship, devised of his own brain, before reverent religion
enjoined by the mouth of the Almighty. And such also has been the
continual craft of Satan, his sworn enemy, that (seeing him thus addicted to
vanity and rebellion) he has labored from time to time to feed his evil
humor, suggesting innumerable (and those most subtle) sleightes to withdraw
him from God, and draw him to Idolatry and superstition: So that in time by
policy of the one, and pronesse in the other, it was by degrees brought to
pass, that not only the excellent and glorious creatures of God, the Angels,
and men (I mean) the Sun and Moon, the Stars and Elements, were worshipped
as Gods, But also, divine honor and reverence, was transferred from the
highest God, to the most inferior, and basest parts of all his woorkmanship,
the world at the length becoming so mad, that it would crouche and kneel,
kiss, and knock, bow, bend, and make all signs of honor and reverence, not
only to stocks and stones (that represented the bodies of mortal men) but to
whatsoever trifle, trumperie, or bagage besides, that the Devil or his
Ministers would have preferred as a monument, or relic of them.

And therefore, no marvel was it, if God (seeing the world to abuse it self
after a most froward and perverse kind of superstition) did by his just
vengeance bereave unbelievers of al understanding and judgment, so that
without any further doubt, or inquisition) they sticked not to embrace
devoutly, whatsoever was commended, were it never so lewdly. For example
whereof, behold here at Harbaldowne (an Hospital builded by Lanfranc the
Archbishop, for relief of the poor and diseased) the shameful Idolatry of
this latter age, committed by abusing the lips (which God has given for the
sounding forth of his praise) in smacking and kissing the upper leather of an
old shoe, reserved for a Relic, and irreverently offered to as many as
passed by. Erasmus, setting forth (in his Dialogue entitled, Saint Thomas
Beckets Relic.
Peregrinatio religionis ergo) under the name of one Ogygius, his own
travail, to visit our Lady of Walsingham, and Saint Thomas Becket, shows
that in his return from Canterbury toward London, he found (on the high way
side) an Hospital of certain poor folks: of which, one came out against him
and his company, holding a holy water sprinkle in the one hand, and bearing
the upper leather of an old shoe (fair set in Copper and Crystal) in the
other hand: This doting father, first cast holy water upon the^, and then
offered the^ (by one and one) the holy shoe to kiss, Whereat as the most part
of the company (knowing the manner) made no refusal: So amongst the rest one
Gratianus (as he faineth) offended with the folly, asked half in anger what
it was: Saint Thomas Shoe, quoth the old man: with that Gratianus turned him
to the company, and said: Quid sibi volunt hae pecudes, vt osculemur calceos
omniu^ bonorum Virorum? Quin eadem opera porrigunt osculandu^ sputum, aliaque
corporis excrementa? What mean these beasts, that we should kiss the shoes of
al good men? why do they not, by the same reason offer us their Spittle, and
other excrements of the body to be kissed? This to the wiser sort, and such
as have any light, may suffice for the understanding of Erasmus opinion and
judgment touching such vnreuere^t Relics: but yet lest some blind and
wilful worshipper should think it but merrily spoken of him, and in another
man's person, (as in deed Erasmus had many times Dextru^ pedem in calceo
sinistrum in pelui, according to the old Proverb) I will likewise add a few
words, used in the end of his book, for explication of his own full mind in
that matter. Notantur, qui reliquias incertas pro certis ostendunt, qui his
plus tribuu^t quam oportet, and qui questum ex his sordide faciunt. In this
Dialogue all such are taxed, which show unto the people uncertain relics,
for true and certain: or which do ascribe unto them more then of right is
due: or which do raise filthy gain and lucre by them.

But peradventure the authority of D. Erasmus is now (since the late
Tridentine Counsel) of no weight with them, since by the sentence of the same,
his works without choice be condemned as Heretical. Truly, that Counsel showed
it self, more hasty to suppress al yt good works of Godly men, then ready
to correct or abolish any of their own fabulous books, or superstitious
follies. And therefore let indifferent men judge whether the opinion of any one
true speaking man, be not worthily to be preferred, before the determination of
such a whole unadvised Synod. And as for such as in this light of the
truth, wll show themselves mainteiners of such Mawmetrie, I deem the^ like
the Sabees, whose senses, (as Strabo writes) are offended with sweet smelling
savors, and delighted with the filthy smoke of burned goats hair, and
therefore I say unto them, Sordescant adhuc, and so leave the^.

Norwood, that is to say, the North wood.
IN the days of King Edward the confessor, one hundredth Burgesses of the City
of Canterbury, ought their suite to the Manor of Norwood, as in that part of
the book of Domesday which concerns Kent, may yet most evidently appear.
The building is now demolished, but the Manor was long time in the possession
of certain Gentlemen of the same name, (of which race, one lies buried in
the body of the church at Adington, in the year a thousand four hundredth and
sixeteene. And hereby it is probably (as me thinks) to be coniectured, The
old manner of nameing men.
that in ancient time, men were usually named of the places of their dwelling:
For whereas before the coming in of the Conqueror, places (for the most part)
had their appellatio^s, either of their situation, or of some notable accide^t,
or noble man, as Northwood in regard of Southwood, Anglefford by reason of the
flight of the Englishmen, and Rochester because of Rof. And whereas persons
also, had their callings (most commonly) either of some note of the body, as
Swanshalse, for the whitenes of her neck: or for some property of ye mind,
as Godred, for his good counsel, and that by one single Surname only and no
more, now immediately after the arrival of ye Normanes (which obtained those
lands, and which first brought into this Realm, ye names of Thomas, John,
Nicholas, Fraunces, Stepha^, Henry and such like, that now be most usual) men
began to be known and surnamed, not of their conditions and properties, but of
their dwellings and possessions: So that the Norman that was before Thomas, and
had gotten the Towneship of Norton, Sutton. Inglefield, or Comb, was
thencefoorth called, Thomas of Norton, of Sutton, of Inglefield, of Comb, or
such like, al which be undoubtedly) the names of places and not of persons.
Neither did the matter stay here, but in further process of time, this Thomas
of Norton, of Sutton, or of Comb, was called Thomas Norton, Thomas Sutton, or
Thomas Comb, leaving out the particle (of) which before denoted his dwelling
place: And thus (the Norman manner prevailing) the ancient custom of the
Saxons and English men vanished quite out of ure. This whole thing, is best
discerned by ancient evidences, and by the names of our Chesshyre men yet
remaining: For, old writings have commonly, Ioannes de Norton, Wilmus de
Sutton, For such as we call now, John Norton, and William Sutton: and amongst
the Gentlemen of Chesshyre (even to this day) one is called (after their manner)
Thomas a Bruerton, another John a Holcrost, and such like, for Thomas
Bruerton, John Holcrost. etc. as we here use it. Thus much shortly of mine
own fantasy, I thought not unmeet to impart, by occasion of the name of
Norwood, and now forward to my purpose again.

Leedes, in Latin of some Lodanum, of others Ledanum Castrum.
RObert Creuequer, was one of the eight, that John Fynes elected for his
assistance in the defense of Dover Castle (as we have already showed) who,
taking for that cause the Manor of Leedes, and undertaking to find five
Warders therefore, builded this Castle, or at the least, an other, that stood
in the place. For I have read, that Edward (the^ Prince of Wales, and afterward
the first King of that name) being Wardein of the Five Ports, and Constable of
Dover, in the life of Henry the third his Father, caused Henry Cobham (whose
ministry he used, as substitute in both those offices) to race the Castle
that Robert Creuequer had erected, because Creuequer (that was then owner of
it, and Heir to Robert) was of the number of the Nobles that moved and
maintained war against him. Which, whether it be true, or no, I will not
affirm, but yet I think it very likely, both because Badlesmere (a man of
another name) became Lord of Leedes shortly after (as you shall anon see) and
also for that the present work at Leedes pretends not the antiquity of so
many years, as are passed since the age of the conquest. But let us leave the
building, and go in hand with the story.

King Henry the first, having none other issue of his body then Maude (first
married to Henry the Emperor, Maude the Empress, true Heir to the Crown.
whereof she was called the Empress, and after coupled to Geffray Plantaginet
the Earl of Angeow) and fearing (as it happened in deed) yt after his death,
trouble might arise in the Realm, about the inheritance of ye Crown, because
she was by habitation a stranger and far of, so that she might want both
force and friends to atchieue her right: And for that also, Stephan (the Earl
of Boloine, his sisters son) was then of great estimation amongst the noble
men, and abiding within the Realm, so that with great advantage, he might
offer her wrong: he procured (in full Parleament) the assent of his Lords and
Commons, that Maude, and her heirs, should succeed in the kingdom after
him: And to the end, that this limitation of his, might be the more surely
established, he took the fidelity and promise by oath, both of his Clergy
and Laytie, and of the Earl of Boloine him self.

Howbeit, immediately after his decease, Stephan (being of the opinion, that Si
ius violandum est, certe regnandi causa violandum est.

If breach of laws, a man shall undertake:
He must them boldly break, for kingdoms sake.)
Invaded the Crown, and by the advice of William the Archbishop of Canterbury
(who had first of al given his faith to Maude) by the favor of the common
people, which adheared unto him) and by the consent of the holy father of Rome
(whose will never wants to the furtheraunce of mischief) he obtained it,
which nevertheless (as William of Newborowe well notes) being gotten by
pattern, he held not past two years in peace, but spent the residue of his
whole reign in dissension, war, and bloodshed: to the great offense of God,
the manifest injury of his own cousine, and the grievous vexation of this
country and people.

For soon after the beginning of his reign, sundry of the Noble men, partly
upon remorse of their former promise made, and partly for displeasure
(conceived because he kept not the oath taken at his Coronation) made
defection to Maude, so soon as ever she made her challenge to the Crown: So
that (in the end, after many calamities) what by her own power, and their
assistaunce, she compelled him to fall to composition with her, as in the
story at large it may be seen.

Now during those his troubles, amongst other things that much annoyed him,
and furthered the part of Maude his adversary, it was upon a time sounded (by
his evil willers) in the ears of the common sort, that he was dead: And
therewithal soudenly diverse great Robert, the Earl of Gloucester, and
bastard brother to Maude, who entered this Castle of Leedes, mynding to have
kept it. But King Stephan used against Edward the second, that for the love
of the two Spensers, Bartholmew Badelesmere.
incurred the hatred of his wife and Nobility, gave this Castle (in exchange
for other lands) to Bartilmew Badelesmere (then Lord Steward of his
household) and to his heirs for ever: who shortly after (entering into that
troublesome action, in which Thomas, the Duke of Lancaster with his accomplices,
maugre the King, exiled the Spensers) both lost Thomas Colpeper, Thomas
Colpeper.
and left not only his chief treasure in money, but also his wife and
children within it for their security: It chanced, that Isabell the Kings
wife, mynding a Pilgrimage toward Canterbury, and being ouertake^ with might,
sent her Marshal to prepare for her lodging there. But her officer was proudly
denied by the Captain, who sticked not to tell him, that neither the Queen,
ne any other, should be lodged there, without the commandment of his Lord the
owner. The Queen, not thus answered, came to the gate in person, and required
to be let in, But the Captain most malepertly repulsed her also, in so much
that she complained greauously to the king of the misdemenour, and he
forthwith levied a power, and personally sumoned and besieged the piece so
straightly, that in the end, through want of rescue and victual, it was
delivered him. Then took he Captain Colpeper, and houng him up: The wife and
children of the Lord Badelesmere, he sent to the Tower of London: The treasure
and munition, he seized to his own use: and the Castle he committed to such as
liked him. But, as the last act of a Tragedy is always more heavy and
sorrowful the^ the rest: so (calamity and woe increasing upon him) Badelesmere
him self was the year following, in the company of the Duke of Lancaster and
others, discomfited at Borowbrig, by the Kings army, and shortly after sent to
Canterbury, and beheaded. I might here justly take occasion, to rip up the
causes of those great and tragical troubles, that grew between this King and
his Nobility, for Peter Gaueston, and these two Spensers, the rather, for that
the common sort of our English storiers, do lay the whole burden of that fault
upon the King, and those few persons: But because the matter is not so plain
as they make it, and withal requires more words for ye manifestation thereof,
then I may now afoorde, and for that also there is hope, that a special
history of ye reign (penned by S. Thomas Delamore, which lived in ye very
time it self) may be hereafter imprinted and made common, I will only exhort
the Reader (for his own information in the truth, and for some excuse of such
as be ouercharged) to peruse that work, wherein (I assure him) he shall find
matter, both very rare, and credible.

The Pryory at Leeds.
As touching the Pryorie at Leedes (which was a house of Regular Chanons, and
valued in the Records of the late suppression at three hundredth, three score
and two pounds of yearly revenue) I find, that one Robert Creuequer (the
author of the Castle peradventure, for this was done in the reign of Henry,
son to the Conqueror) and Adam his son and heir, first founded it.
Which thing might probably have been coniectured, although it had never
been committed to History. For in ancient time, even the greatest
personages, held Monks, Friars, and Nonnes, in such veneration and liking,
that they thought no city in case to flourish, no house likely to have long
continuance, no Castle sufficiently defended, where was not an Abbay, Pryorie,
or Nonnerie, either placed within the walls, or situate at hand and near
adjoining.

And surely (omitting the residue of the Realm) hereof only it came to pass,
that Dover had S. Martines, Canterbury Christ's Church, Rochester S. Andrews,
Tunbridge the Friars, Maydstone the Chanons, Grenewiche the obseruants, and
this our Leedes her Pryorie of Chanons at hand. Howbeit, I find in a Heralds
note (who belike made his conjecture, by some coat of Arms lately apparent)
that one Leybourne, an Earl of Salisburie, was the founder of it. In deed, it
is to be seen in the Annals of S. Augustines of Canterbury, that a noble man
(called Roger Leybourne) was sometime of great authority within this Shyre,
notwithstanding that, in his time he had tasted of both fortunes: for in the
days of King Henry the third, he was first one of that coniuration, which
was called the Barons war, from which faction, Edward the Kings son,
won him, by fair means to his part, and made him the bearer of his privy
purse.

Afterward they agreed not upon the reckoning, so that the Prince (charging
him with great arrearage of account) seized his living for satisfaction of the
debt, by which occasion Roger once more, became of the Barons devotions: But
after the pacification made at Kenelworth, he was eftsoon received to favor,
and was made Wardein of the Five Ports, and Lieuetenant of this whole Shyre.
Now, though it can not be true, that this man was the builder of this Pryorie
(for the same Annals say, that it was erected long before) yet if he did but
marry the heir, he might truly be termed the Patron or founder thereof, for
by that name, not only the builders themselves, but their posterity also (to
whom the glory of their deeds did descend) were wont to be called, as well as
they.

The description, and history, of the, See and Diocese of Rochester.
THE learned in Astronomy, be of the opinion, that if Jupiter, Mercury, or
any other Planet, approach within certain degrees of the Sun, and be burned
(as they term it) under his beams, That then it has in manner no influence at
all, But yealdeth wholly to the Sun that ouershineth it: And some men
beholding the nearenesse of these two Bishoprics, Canterbury and Rochester,
and comparing the bright glory, pomp, and primacie of the one, with the
contrary altogether in the other, have fansied Rochester so ouershadowed and
obscured, that they reckon it no See or Bishopric of it self, But only a place
of a mere Suffragan, and Chaplain to Canterbury. But he that shall either
advisedly weigh the first institution of them both, or ^ut indifferently
consider the estate of either, shall easi^^ find, that Rochester has not only
a lawful, and ca^onicall Cathedral See of it self, But the same also ^ore
honestly won and obtained, then ever Canterbury ^d: For, as touching Rochester,
Augustine (whom ^e Monks may not deny to be the English Apostle) or^ined
Iustus Bishop there, Ethelbert (the lawful king ^f Kent) both assenting
thereto by his presence, and confirming it by his liberal beneficence. By what
means the Archebishops chair came to (...).
But, how Canterbury came to have an Archebishops Chair, if you think that
it has not in that title already so sufficiently appeared, as that it therefore
needs not now eftsoon to be rehearsed, then read (I pray you) Garuas.
Tilberiens. and he (in his book De otijs Imperialibus) will tell you, in
Sanguine sanctorum, Dorobernensis ecclesia primatiam obtinuit. The Church of
Canterbury obtained the Primacie, by the sheading of the blood of Saints.
Rochester moreover, has had also a continual succession of Bishops, even from
the beginning, which have governed in a distinct Diocese, containing four
Deanries, and therefore wants nothing (that I know) to make it a complete
and absolute Bishopric. In deed, the yearly value is but small, the
slenderness whereof (joined with some ceremonial duties to the Archbishop)
happily have been the cause of abasing the estimation of it. Beda, and others,
to say, that the Bishops See at Rochester was at the first instituted by
Augustine, That a Cathedral Church was builded there, by King Ethelbert, to
the name of S. Andrewe, and that he endowed it with certain land for
liuelyhood, which he called Priestfield, in token (as I think) that Priests
should be sustained therewithal. This Bishopric may be said to be severed
from Canterbury Diocese (for the most part) by the water of Medway, and it
consists (as I said) of four distinct Deanries, namely, Rochester,
Malling, Dartford, and Shorham: Howbeit, with this latter, the Bishop medleth
not, the same being a peculiar (as they term it) to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who holds his prerogative wheresoever his lands do lie, as in
this Deanrie he has not only had of old time certain mansion houses, with
Parkes and Demeanes, but diverse other large territories, rentes, and revenues
also. In it therefore are these Churches following.

Shorham, with the Chapel of Otford. Eynesford, with the Vicarage there. The
Deanrie of shor^ham.
Dernth, and the Vicarage there. Fermingham, and the Vicarage. Bexley, and the
Vicarage. Eareth, alias Eard. Northfleete, and the Vicarage. Mepham, and the
Vicarage. Clyue. Grean, with the Vicarage. Farleigh, with the Vicarage.
Huntington, alias, Hunton. Peckam, with the Vicarage. Wrotham, with the Chapel
and Vicarage. Eightam. Seuenocke, with the Vicarage. Penshurst. Chydingstone.
Heuer. Gillingham, with the Vicarage. Brasted. Sundriche. Cheuening, Orpington,
with the Chapel and Vicarage. Hese. Kestan. Halstede. Woodland. Eastmalling,
with the Vicarage. Ifeild.
A Popish miracle.
As touching the Bishops of this See, Iustus, (one of the same, that Pope
Gregory sent hither from Rome) was the first, that sat in the chair, who
was afterward translated to Canterbury, and of whom they report this for a
singular miracle: That when his body (many years after the interrement) was to
be removed, it yealded a most pleasant savor, in the senses of all that were
present: Which thing, how marvelous it was, when they had (after the common
manner then used) before his burial, enbaulmed his body with most precious,
delectable, and odoriferous spices, I dare make any man Judge, if he be not
more then a pore blind Papist, given over to believe al manner (be they never
so gross, and beastly) illusions.

In the whole race of the Bishops succeeding Iustus in this See, three amongst
others, be read of, most notable, Paulinus Gundulphus, and Gilbertus: of which
the first after his death was there honored for a Saint:

The second, was in his life the best benefactor that ever their Church found:
The third was so hateful and injurious to the Monks, yt they neither esteemed
him while he was on live, nor wailed him at all, after that he was dead. But of
all these, we shall have place to speak more largely, when we shall come to
the Church and Monastery: In the mean time therefore, it shall be fit to
show, with what cowrage this church vpheld her rightes and privileges, not
only against the Monks of Canterbury (which labored much to bring it under)
but also against the Sea of the Archbishops it self, which was (for the most
part) the chief patron and promose^ Henry the third, Monks contend for the
election of the Bishop.
and after the death of Benedicte. (the Bishop of Rochester) the Monks made
choice of one Henry Sanford (that great Clearke, which afterward preached at
Sedingburne) whearof when ye Monks of Christ's Church had gotten
understanding, they resisted the election, challenginge that the pastoral
staff or crosyer of Rochester ought of very right to be brought to their
house, after the decease of the Bishop, and that the election ought to be made
in their Chapter. The Monks of Rochester maintained their own choice and so
(the matter waxing warm between them (it was at the length referred to the
determination of the Archebishope: he again posted it over to certain
delegates, who hearing the parties, and weighing the proofs, gave sentence
with the monks of Rochester, and yet lost (as they thought) good love and
amity among them: But (as the Poet says) Male sarta gratia, nequicquam coit,
and rescinditur, Favor, that is, evil peeced, will not join close, but
falls a sunder again. And therefore this their opinion failed them, and that
their cure was but patched: for soon after the sore brake out of new, and the
Canterbury Monks revived their displeasure with such a heat, that Hubert of
Borrow (the chief Justice of the Realm) was driven to come into the Chapter
house to cool it, and to work a second reconciliation between them. Neither
yet for all that (as it may seem) was that flame clean extinguished. For not
long after, the Monks Christ's Church, seeing that they themselves could not
prevail, entitled their Archbishop Edmund with whom also the Rochester Monks
waged law at Rome before the holy Father, (as touching the election of one
Richard Wendene, or Wendeouer, whom they would have had to Bishop) by the space
of three whole years together, Sa^int Cuthbertes feast why holde^ double.
and at the length, either through the equity of their cause, or the weight of
their purse, ouerthrewe him upon Saint Cuthberts day, in joy whereof, they
returned home withal have, and enacted in their Chapter house, that from
thencefoorth for ever, Saint Cuthbertes feast (as a Tropheum of their victory)
should be holden double, both in their Church and Kitchen.

And not thus only, but otherwise also, has the Sea at Rochester, well holden
her own: for during the whole succession of threescore and three Bishops,
which in right line, have followed Iustus, she has continually maintained her
Chair at this one place, whereas in most parts of the Realm besides, the
Sees of the Bishops have suffered sundry translations, Bishops Sees, are
translated from Villages to Cities.
by reason that in the Conquerours time, order was taken, that such Bishops,
as before had their Churches in Country towns and Villages, should forthwith
remove, and from thence forth remain in walled Towns and Cities: which
ordinance could not by any means touch Rochester, that was a walled City
long time before King Williams government. But now, to the end ye I may pursue
the order that I have prescribed, I will set forth a Catalogue of the Bishops
of Rochester by name, referring recital of their acts and doings, to their
peculiar and proper places, as I have in Canterbury before.

Iustus. The Catalogue of Rochester Bishops.
Romanus. Paulinus. Ithamarus. Damianus. Putta. Cuichelmus. Gibmandus. Tobias.
Aldulphus. Duime, or Duno: Eardulphus. Diora. Permundus, alias, Wermundus.
Beornmodus. After him, these be inserted in a Catalogue that is before the
Chronicle of Rochester. Tathnodus, Batenodus, Guthwulfus, Swithulfus, Buiricus,
Chuelmundus, and Kyneferdus. Burhricus. Alstanus. Godwinus. Godwinus, the
second Siwardus. Before, and at the time of the Conquest. Arnostus, 1077.
Gundulphus. 1108. Radulphus. 1114. Aernulphus. Ioannes. After whom, in the
former Catalogue, one other Ioannes follows. Ascelimus, or Anselimus: and
hitherto they were all Monks. Guelterus. Gualeramus. Gilebertus Glanuille.
Benedictus. Henricus Richardus Wendene, or Wendeouer. 1250, Laurentius de
Sancto Martino. Gualterus de Merton: Chancellor of England. Ioannes de
Bradfield. Thomas de Inglethorp. 1291 Thomas de Wuldham. Hamo de Heth. Ioannes
de Sepey. Wilmus Witlesey. Thomas Trelege. Thomas Brynton, or Braton. Richardus
Barnet, elected, and not consecrated. Willelmus de Botelesham. Ioannes de
Botelesham. elected only. Ghelyndon. elected only. Richardus Young: he made the
windows at Frendsbury, and there it is to be seen in picture. 1418. Ioannes
Kempe. Ioannes Langdon. Thomas Broune. Willielmus Wellis. Ioannes Low.
Richardus Peckam. Elected only. Thomas Rotheram. Ioannes Alcocke. Ioannes
Russel. Eadmundus Audeley. Thomas Savage. Richardus Fitz James. 1504. Ioannes
Fisher. Ioannes Hylsey. 1539. Nicholaus Hethe. 1544. Henricus Holbeache. 1547.
Nicholaus Rydley. 1549. Ioannes Ponet. 1550. Ioannes Skorey. Mauritius Griffin.
1559. Eadmundus Allen. Elected only. 1559. Eadmundus Gest. 1571. Eadmundus
Freake.
And thus much shortly being said, touching the Sea, and Bishops of Rochester
in generality, it follows, that I enter into the particular description of
the Diocese, wherein I mean to follow the order that I have taken in
Canterbury before: Namely to begin at the Northeast corner, and from thence
(first descending along the banks of Medwey, and then passing by the Frontiers
of Sussex and Surrey, and lastly returning by the Thamise shore to the same
point) to enuiron the whole Bishopric: which done, I will peruse what it
contains in the inner parts also, and then betake me to rest.

Gillingham.
The Harborowe of the Navy Royal.
EVen at our first entry into the Diocese of Rochester, on the Northeast part
thereof, the Harborowe of the Navy Royal at Gillingham presents it self
unto us, a thing of al other most worthy the first place, whether you respect
the richesse, beauty, or benefit of the same. No town, nor City, is there
(I dare say) in this whole Shyre, comparable in value with this our Fleet: Nor
shipping any where else in the whole world to be found, either more artificially
moalded under the water, or more gorgeously decked above: And as for the
benefit that our Realm may reap by these most stately and valiant vessels,
it is eue^ the same yt Apollo by ye mouth of Aristonice promised to Greece, when
his Oracle was consulted against the invasion of Xerxes, and that his wonderful
army (or rather world of men in arms) saying, Jupiter e ligno dat moenia
facta Mineruae,
Quae tibi sola tuisque ferant inuicta salutem.
High Jove does give thee walls of wood.
appointed to Minerue,
The which alone invincible,
may thee, and thine, preserve.


And therefore, of these such excellent ornaments of peace, and trusty aides
in war, I might truly affirm, that they be for wealth, almost so many
rich treasuries, as they be single ships: for beauty, so many princely
Palaces, as they be several pieces: and for strength, so many moving Castles,
as they be sundry sailing vessels. They be not many (I must confess, and you
may see) and therefore in that behalf nothing aunswerable, either to that
Navy which fought against Xerxes at Salamis, or to many other ancient
Fleetes of Foreign Kingdoms, or of this our own Island: howbeit, if their
swiftnes in sailing, their fury in offending, or force in defending, be duly
weighed, they shall be found as far to pass all other in power, as they be
inferior to any in number. For look what the armed Hawk is in the air
amongst the fearful Birds, or what the courageous Lion is on the land amongst
the cowardly Cattle of the field, the same is one of these at the Sea in a
Navy of Common vessels, being able to make havoc, to plume, and to pray
upon the best of them at her own pleasure. Which speech of mine, if any man
shall suspecte as Hyperbolical, let him call to mind how often, and how
confidently (of late years) some few of these ships (incertaine of their
interteineme^t) have boorded mighty Princes Nauies of a great number of Sail,
and then I doubt not but he will change his opinion. But what do I labor to
commend them, which not only in show, and all reason, do commend
themselves, but also are like in deeds and effect to perform more, then I,
in word or writing can promise for them. Yea rather, I am provoked, at the
contemplation of this triumphant spectacle, first to thank God our merciful
Father, and then to think duetifully of our good Queen Elizabeth, The
benefits that God has given this Realm in the Reign o^ Queen Elizabeth.
by whose vigilant ministry, care, and providence, (drawing as it were, the
net for us, whylest we sleep) not only the dross of superstition, and base
moneis were first abolished, the fear of outward war removed, rustie armor
rejected, and rotten Shipping dispatched out of the way: But also, in place
thereof, religion and coin restored to purity, the Domestical and foreign
affairs of the Realm managed quietly, the land furnished with new armor,
shot, and munition, abundantly, and this River fraught with these strong and
serviceable Ships sufficiently. Which so apparent and inestimable benefits,
the like whereof this Realm never at any one time, (and much less so long
time together) has enjoyed, if any man perceive not, he is more then
blockishe: if he consider not, he is exceeding careless: and if he acknowledge
not, he is to to unkind, both to God to her Majesty, and to his own
Country. But here again, for as much as it neither stands with my present
purpose, to depainte out her Majesty's praises, neither it lies at all in my
power, to set them forth in their true colors (for it requires an Apelles,
to have Alexander well counterfaited) I will contain my self within these
narrow terms, and tell you the names of these Ships, as they lie in order.

The names of the Queen's Majesty's Ships and Galleys.
The Bonaduenture. The Elizabeth Jonas. The White Bear. The Philip and Marie.
The Triumph. The Bull. The Tygre. The Antelop. The Hope. The Lion. The
Victory. The Marie Rose. The Foresight. The Cadishe. The Swift suer. The Aid.
The Handmaide. The Dread not. The Swalowe. The Iennet. The Bark of Bulloigne.
Amongst all these (as you see) there is but one that bears her Majesty's
name, and yet all these (the Philip and Marie which bears her sisters name,
only excepted,) has she (as it is said) since the beginning of her happy
reign over us, either wholly built upon the stocks or newly reedified upon the
old moaldes. Her highness also knowing right well, that, Non minor est
virtus, quam querere, parta tueri:
Like virtue it is, to save that is got:
As to get the thing, that erst she had not.


Has planted Vpnor Castle for the defense of the same. But besides these great
ships, three good Galleys lie here on the side, which be thus called,

The Speedwell. Try Right. Black Galley.


Thus much of the Navy: As touching the harborowe it self, I have heard some
wish, that for the better expedition in time of service, Some part of this
Navy might ride in some other haven, the rather because it is many times very
long before a ship can be gotten out of this River into the Sea: Indeed I
remember, that I have read in Vegetius, that the Romans divided their Navy,
and harbored the one part at Miseno (near Naples) upon the Tyrrhene Sea, and
the other part at Rauenna, upon the Sea Adriaticque, to the end, that when
occasion required, they might readily sail to any part of the world without
delay, or windlassing: Because (says he) in affairs of war, celeritie does
as good service, as force it self. But for all that, whether the same order be
necessary for us, or no, who though we have the use of sundry Seas, yet we
enjoy not so large and distant dominions as they held, it is not our parts to
dispute, but their office to determine, who for their great wisdom and good
zeal, both can and will provide things convenient, as well for the safety of
the Navy, as for the service of the Realm. And therefore leaving all this
matter to the consideration of them that are well occupied at the helm, let us
apply our oars, that we may now leave the water, and come to the land at
Gillingham.

After the soudaine departure of king Hardicanutus Lambhith) the English
Nobility thought good to take hold of the opportunity then offered, to restore
to the royal dignity, the issue of King Ethelred, which he in his life had
for fear of ye Danes, conveyed into Normandy. For which purpose, they
addressed messengers to Richard the Duke of Normandy, requiring him to send
over Edward the only son (then left) of king Ethelred, and promising to do
their endeavor to set him in his fathers seat, So that he would agree to come
accompanied with a small number of strangers: The which condition was devised,
both for their own Canutus, they had likewise sent for the same Edward, and
Alfred (his elder brother yt then was on live) putting them in like hope of
restitution, to which request, the duke their grandfather asse^ted, and for the
more honorable furniture of their journey, gave them to company, diverse young
Gentlemen, of his own Country, whom he meant to make from thenceforth parteners
of their prosperitye, A barbarous cruelty executed upon Strangers.
as they had before time been companions of their misfortune: But when they
were come into the realm, the Earl Godwine (who sought more the advancement
of his own house to honor, then the restitution of the English blood to the
crown,) perceiving that by no means he could make a marriage between Alfrede
(the elder of the two) and Edgith his daughter, and yet, having hope, that
Edward the younger would accept the offer, if he might bring to pass to set
the garlande upon his head, he quarelled at the company which came over with
them, insinuating to the peers of the Realm, that Alfrede meant (so soon as
he should obtain the crown) to place in all rooms of honor, his Normane
Nobility, and to displace the English, his own country men. Which
suspicion, he bet so deeply into the heads of many of the Noble men, and
especially of his nearest friends and allies, that forthwith (upon his
persuasion) they fell upon the strangers at Gillingham, and first killed nine
throughout the whole number of the company, reserving on live each tenth man
only: And afterward, (thinking the remainer to great) tythed the number also,
sleaing in the whole, about six hundred persons: As for Alfred (the elder of
the young Princes) they apprehended, and conveyed him to the Isle of Ely, where
first they put out his eyes, and afterward, most cruelly did him to death.
But this Edward, fearing their fury, escaped their hands, and fled into
Normandy: Howbeit, being now eftsoons (as I said) earnestly solicited by
Godwine, and more faithfully assured by the Noble men, he once again
adventured to enter the Realm, and taking Godwines daughter to wife, obtained
the Crown, and enjoyed it all his life long.

I am not ignorant, that Simeon of Durham, and diverse other good writers,
affirm this slaughter to have been committed at Guylford in Surrey, and some
other (of late time, and of less note) at Guild down, a place near
Lamberhirst in the edge of this Shyre: but because I find it expressly
reported by Thomas Rudborne, and also the author of the Chronicle of
Couentrie, to have been done at Gillingham, Iuxta Thamesim, I stick not (being
now come to that place) to exemplify it, giving nevertheless free liberty
to every man, to lay it, at the one, or the other, at his own free will and
pleasure: Only my desire is to have observed, that in this one Story, there
do lie folded up, both the means of the delivery of this realm of England
from the thraldom of the Danes, and the causes also of the oppression and
conquest of the same by the Normanes: For, as touching the first, it pleased
the Almighty (now at length) by this manner of King Hardicanutus death,
(which I have showed) to break in sunder the Danish whip, wherewith he had
many years together, scourged the English nation, and by the mean of drink
(the Danishe delight) to work the delivery of the one people, and the
exterminion of the other, even in the midst of all their security, and
pleasaunce: In which behalf, I can not but note the just judgment of God,
Excessive drinking, and how it came into England.
extended against those deep drinkers, and in their example to admonish all
such, as do in like sort most beastly abuse Gods good creatures, to his great
offense, the hurt of their own souls and bodies, and to the evil example of
other men: For, whereas before the arrival of these Danes, the English men,
or Saxons, used some temperaunce in drinking, not taking thereof largely, but
only at certain great feasts and chearings, and that in one only wassailing
cup, or boule, which walked round about the boorde at the midst of the meal,
much after that manner of intertainment, which Dido sometime gave to Aeneas,
and is expressed by Virgil in these verses.

Hic Regina grauem, auro gemmisque poposcit
Impleuitque mero pateram, quam Belus, and omnes
A Belo soliti: Tum facta silentia tectis,
Jupiter (hospitibus nam te dare iura loquuntur)
Et vos O caetum Tirij celebrate fauentes,
Dixit: Et in mensam laticum libauit honorem,
Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore. etc.
The Queen commands a mighty Bolle,
Of gold and precious stone
To fill with wine: whom Belus King
And all King Belus line
Was wont to hold: than through them all
Was silence made by sign,
O Jove (quoth she) for thou of hosts
And gestes both great and small
(Men say) the laws haste put: give grace
I pray, and let us all
O you my Moors now do our best,
These Trojans for to chere,
Thus said she, and when grace was done,
The Bolle in hand she clipped,
And in the liquor sweet of wine
her lips she scantly dipped.
But now after the coming in of the Danes, and after such time as King Edgar,
had permitted them to inhabit here, and to have conversation with his own
people: Quassing and carowsing so increased, that Didoes sipping was clean
forsaken, and Bitias bowsing came in place, of whom the same Poet writes,
Ille impiger hausit
Spumantem pateram, and pleno se proluit auro.
And he anon,
The fomie bolle of gold vpturnd,
And drew till all was gone.


So that King Edgar him self, seeing (in his own reign) the great outrage
whereunto it was grown, was compelled to make law therefore, and to ordain
drinking measures (by public Proclamation) driving certain nails into the
sides of their cups, as limits and bounds, which no man (upon great pain)
should be so hardy as to transgress. But this vice in that short time had
taken such fast root, as neither the restraint of law, nor the expulsio^ of
the first bringers in thereof, could supplant yet.

For William of Malmesburie (comparing the manners of the English men, Great
troops of serving men, came in with the Normanes.
and Normanes together) complained, that in his time, the English fashion was,
to sit bibbing, hole hours after dinner, as the Normane guise was, to walk
and iet up and down the streates, with great trains of idle Serving men
following them. And I would to God, that in our time also we had not just cause
to complain of this vicious plant of unmeasurable Boalling: which whether it
be sprung up out of the old root, or be newely transported, by some Danish
enemy to all godly temperaunce and sobriety, let them consider, that with
pleasure use it, and learn in time (by the death of Hardicanute, and the
expulsio^ of his people) to forsake it: which if they will not, God in time
either grant us the law of the Heluetians, which provided that no man
should provoke other in drinking, or else if that may for courtesy be
permitted, because (as the proverb is,) Sacra haec non aliter constant, yet
God (I say) stir up some Edgar, to strike nails in our cups, or else give
us the Greekishe (...) Potandi arbitros, Cup Censors, as I may call them, that
at the least we may be driven to drink in some manner of measure: For it is
not sufferable in a Christian Country, that men should thus labor with great
contention, and strive, for the maistrie (as it were) to offend God, in so
wilful waste of his gracious benefits,

In this History is couched also (as I have already told you) the first
cause of the displeasure received by the Normanes against this Realm, and
consequently the cause of their invasion succeeding the same: The cause of the
Conquest of Enlande.


For, whereas (after this cruelty, executed by the instigation of Godwine) it
happened Harolde (his son) to arryue at Pountion, against his will, by
occasion of a soudaine perry or contrary wind, that arose while he was on
seaboorde, whether for his own disporte only, as some write: or for the
execution of the Kings message, as others say: or of purpose to visit Wilnote
and Hacun, his brother and kinseman (as a third sort affirm,) or for what so
ever other cause, I will not dispute: But upon his arrival, taken he was, by
Guy the Earl of Pountion: and sent to William the Duke of Normandy, where,
being charged with his fathers fault, and fearing that the whole revenge
should have lighted upon his own head, he was driven to devise a shifte for
his deliverance: He put the Duke in remembrance therefore of his near
kindred, with Edward the King of England, And fed him with great hope and
expectation, that Edward should dye without issue of his body, by reason that
he had no conversation with his wife: So that, if the matter were well and in
season seen unto, there was no doubt (as he persuaded) but that the Duke
through his own power, and the aid of some of the English Nobility, might
easily after the Kings death, obtain the Crown. For the atchieuing whereof,
he both vowed the uttermost of his own help, and undertook that his brethren,
his friends, and allies also, should do the best of their endeavor: The wise
Duke, knowing well, Quam malus sit custos diuturnitatis metus, How evil a keeper
of continuance fear is. And therefore reposing much more surety in a friendly
knot of alliance, the^ in a fearful offer, proceeding but only of a
countenance, accepted Haroldes oath for some assurance of his promise, but
yet withal, for more safety, Harold, the King.
affied him to his daughter, to be taken in marriage: And so, after many
princely gifts, and much honorable enterteinement bestowed upon him, he gave
him license to depart: But Harolde, being now returned into England,
forgets clean, that ever he was in Normandy, and therefore so soon as
King Edward was dead, he (violating both the one promise and the other)
rejects Duke Williams daughter, and sets the Crown upon his own head:
Hereof followed the battle at Battle in Sussex, and consequently, the
Conquest of this whole Realm and Country. In contemplation whereof, we have
likewise to accuse the old (...), or rather (...), the inueterate fierceness,
The vncurtesie of the English nation, toward strangers.
and cancred cruelty of this our English nation against foreignes and
strangers: which joining in this butcherly sacrifice with bloody Busyris,
deserved worthily the revenging club of heavenly Hercules: which fearing
(without cause) great harm, that these few might bring unto them, did by
their barbarous immanitie, Busyris, was a tirant that sacrificed strangers:
and was therefore slain by Hercules.
give just cause to a great army to ouerrunne them: And which dreading that
by the arrival of this small troop of Norman Nobility, some of them might
lose their honorable rooms and offices, provoked the wrath of God, to send in
amongst them the whole rabble of the Norman slavery, to possess their goods
and inheritances.

It were worthy the consideration, to call to memory, what great Tragedies
have been stirred in this Realm, by this our natural inhospitalitie and
disdain of strangers, both in the time of King John, Henry his son, King
Edward the second, Henry the sixte, and in the days of later memory: But,
since that matter is parergon, and therefore the discourse would prove tedious
and wearisome, and I also have been too long already at Gillingham: I will
rather abruptly end it, only wishing, that whatsoever note of infamy we have
heretofore contracted, amongst Foreign writers, by this our ferocitie against
Aliens, that now at the least (having the Light of Gods Gospel before our
eyes, and the persecuted parts of his afflicted Church, as Guestes and
Strangers in our Country) we so behave our selves toward them, as we may
both utterly rub out the old blemishe, and from henceforth stay the heavy
hand of the just Jupiter Hospitalis, which, otherwise, must needs light upon
such stubburne and uncharitable churlishness.

Chetham.
Our Lady, and the Rode of Chetha^ and Gillingham.
Although I have not hitherto at any time, read any memorable thing recorded in
history, touching Chetham it self yet, for so much as I have often heard (and
that consta^tly) reported, a Popish illusion done at the place, and for that
also it is as profitable to the keeping under of fained and superstitious
religion, to renew to mind, the Priestly practices of old time (which are
declining to obliuio^) as it is pleasant to retain in memory, the Monuments
and antiquities of whatsoever other kind, I think it not amiss, to commit
faithfully to writing, what I have received credibly by hearing, concerning the
Idols, sometime known by the names, of our Lady, and the Roode of Chetham, and
Gillingham. It happened (say they) that the dead Corpse of a man, (lost through
shipwreck belike) was cast on land in the Parish of Chetham, and being there
taken up, was by some charitable persons committed to honest burial within
their Churchyard: which thing was no sooner done, but our Lady of Chetham,
finding her self offended therewith, arose by night, and went in person to the
house of the Parish Clearke, (which then was in the Street a good distance
from the Church) and making a noise at his window, awaked him: This man at the
first (as commonly it fares with men disturbed in their rest) demanded
somewhat roughly, who was there: But when he understood by her own answer,
that it was the Lady of Chetham, he changed his note, and most mildely asked
ye cause of her coming: She told him, that there was lately buried (near to
the place where she was honored) a sinful person, which so offended her eye
with his ghastly grinning, that unless he were removed, she could not, but (to
the great grief of good people) withdraw her self from that place, and
cease her wonted miraculous working amongst them. And therefore she willed
him, to go with her, to the end that (by his help) she might take him up, and
cast him again into the River: The Clerk obeyed, arose, and waited on her
toward the Church: but the good Lady (not wonted to walk) waxed weary of the
labor, and therefore was enforced for very want of breath to sit down in a
bushe by the way, and there to rest her: And this place (forsooth) as also the
whole track of their journey, (remaining ever after a green pathe) the Town
dwellers were went to show: Now after a while, they go forward again, and
coming to the Churchyard, dug up the body, and conveyed it to the water
side, where it was first found.

This done, our Lady shrancke again into her shryne, and the Clerk peaked
home to patche up his broken sleep, but the corpse now eftsoons floted up and
down the River, as it did before. Which thing being at length espied by them
of Gillingham, it was once more taken up and buried in their Churcheyard. But
see what followed upon it, not only the Roode of Gillingham (say they) that a
while before was busy in bestowing Miracles, was now deprived of all that his
former virtue: but also ye very earth and place, where this carckase was laid,
did continually, for ever after, setle and sink downward.

This tale, received by tradition from the Elders, was (long ones) both
commonly reported and faithfully credited of the vulgar sort: which although
happily you shall not at this day learn at every man's mouth (the Image being
now many years sithe^ce defaced) yet many of the aged number remember it well,
and in the time of darkness, Haec erat in toto notissima fabula mundo.

But here (if I might be so boulde, as to add to this Fable (...), or Fabula
significat) I would tell you, that (I thought) the Moral and mind of the tale
to be none other, but that this Clerkly (...), this Talewriter, (I say) and
Fableforger, being either the Fermer, or Owner, of the offerings given to our
Lady of Chetham, and envying the common haunte and Pilgrimage to the Roode of
Gillingham, (lately erected Ad nocumentum of his gain) devised this
apparition, for the advancement of the one, and the defacing of the other. For
no doubt, if that age had been as prudent in examining spirits, as it was prone
to believe illusions it should have found, that our Ladies pathe was some such
green trace of grass, as we daily behold in ye fields, proceeding in deed of
a natural cause, though by old wives, and superstitious people, reckoned to
be the dau^cing places of night Spirits, which they call Fayries:) And that
this sinking grave, was nothing else, but a false filled pit, of Master
Clearks own digging.

The man was to blame, thus to make debate between our Lady and her Son, but
since the whole Religion of Papistrie it self, is Theomachia, and nothing else,
let him be forgiven, and I will go forward.

Alfred of Beuerley, and Richard of Ciceter, have mention of a place in East
Kent, where Horsa (the Brother of Hengist) was buried, and which even till
their days did continue the memory of his name. We have in this Shyre a
Town called Hor smundene, which name resolved into Saxon Orthographie, is
Horsgemyndene, and sounds as much as, the Valley of the monument (or
memorial) of Horsa.

But for as much as that lies in the Southe part of this Country toward
Sussex, and for that I read that Horsa was slain at Ailesford, as you shall
see anon) in an encounter wherein he joined with his Brother Hengist again the
Britons, Horsted borne in Ailesford.
which at that time inhabited Kent, it is ye most reasonable to affirm, that
he was buried at Horsted a place lying in this Parish, toward Ailesford, and
now yet known by the same name, which signifies, the place or steed of
Horse. Hengist and Horsa two famous Capitaines.


This Horsa, and his Brother Hengist (both whose names be Synonuma, and
signify a Horse) were the Capitaines, and chief leaders of the first Saxons
that came in aid of King Vortiger, as we have before showed: And after the
death of Horsa, his Brother Hengist never ceased to war upon the Brittons,
till he had driven them out of Kent, and made himself King, as hereafter in
fit place we will further declare.

Frendsbury, in some Saxon copies freondesbyrig, that is, the Friends Court:
in others, frinondesbyrig.
A religious Skirmish between the Monks of Rochester, and the Brethren of
Stroude.
It befell in the reign of King Edward the first, by occasion of a great and
long drought of the air, that the Monks of Rochester were agreed amongst
themselves, to make a solemn procession from their own house through the
city, and so to Frendsbury on the other side of the water, of a special
intent and purpose to pray to God for rain. And because the day of this their
appointed journey happened to be vehemently boisterous with the wind, the
which would not only have blown out their lights, and tossed their ba^ners,
but also have stopped the mouths of their Synging men, and have toiled
themselves in that their heavy and masking attire, they desired license of the
Master of Stroud Hospital, to pass through the Orchyard of his house, whereby
they might both ease their company, and save the glory of their show, which
otherwise through the injury of the weather must needs have been greatly
blemished. The Master assented easily to their desire, and (taking it to be a
matter of no great consequence) never made his brethren of the house privy
thereunto. But they, so soon as they understood of this determination, called
to mind that their Hospital was of the foundation of Gilbert Glanuille,
(sometime a Bishope of Rochester) between whom and the predecessors of these
Monks, there had been great heates for the erection of the same: and therefore
fearing that the Monks (pretending a procession) intended to attempt somewhat
against their privileges (as in deed all orders in Papistrie, were exceeding
ielous of their prerogatives) they resolved with all their might to resist
them. And for that purpose, they both furnished themselves, and procured
certain companions also (whom the History calls Ribaldes) with clubbes and
battes to assist them, and so (making their ambushe in the Orchyard) they
awaited the Monks coming. It was not long, but the Monks (having made all
things ready) approached in their battle array, and with banner displayed, and
so (minding no harm at al) entered boldly into the house, and through the
house passed into the Orchard, merely chaunting their latin Letaine. But when
the Brethren and their Ribaldes had espied them within their danger, they
ran upon them, and made it rain such a shoure of clubbes and coulestaues
upon the Monks Copes, cowles, and Crowns, that for a while the miserable men
knew not what way to turn them. After a time, the Monks called their wits
and spirits together, and then (making virtue of the necessity) they made
each man the best shift for himself, that they could: some, traversing their
ground, declined many of the blows, and yet now and then bare off with head
and shoulders: others, used the staves of their crosses, behauing themselves
like pretty men: others made pykes of their banner poles: And others (flying in
to their adversaries) wrested their weapons out of their hands: amongst the
rest, one (saving his charity) laid lode upon a married Priest, absoluing him
(as mine author says) A culpa, but not A paena: Another, drove one of the
Brethren into a deep diche: and a third (as big as any Bull of Basan) espied
(at ye length) ye postern, or back door of ye Orchyard, whereat he ran so
vehemently with his head and shoulders, yt he bare it clean down before him,
and so both escaped him self, and made the way for the rest of his fellows
who also, with all possible haste conveyed them selves out of the jurisdiction
of the Hospital, and then (shaking their ears) fell a fresh to their Orgia, I
should have said to their former Orisons. After this storm thus blown (or
rather born) over, I do not meruail if the Monks (as ye reporter says) never
sought to carry their procession through Stroud Hospital for avoiding of ye
wind, for indeed it could not lightly blow more boisterously out of any
quarter. And thus out of this tragical history, arose the bywoord of
Frendsbury Clubs Friendsbury clubbes.
(a term not yet forgotten. Eslingham.
The land of Frendsbury, was long since given by Offa the King of Middle
England, to Eardulph then Bishop of Rochester, under the name of Eslingham cum
appendicijs, although at this day this other bears countenance, as the more
worthy of the twain: The benefice of Frendsbury (together with that of
Dartford) was at the suite of Bishop Laurence, Appropriations of benefices.
and by grant of the Pope, converted to an appropriation, one (amongst many)
of those monstrous byrthes of covetousness, begotten by the man of Rome, in the
dark night of superstition, and yet suffered to live in this day light of the
Gospel, to the great hinderance of learning, the empouerishment of the
ministry, and the infamy of our profession,

Rochester is called in Latin, Dorobreuum, Durobreuum, Dorubernia, and
Durobriuis, in Brittishe, Dourbryf, that is to say, a swift stream: in Saxon,
Hrofesceastre; that is, Rofi ciuitas, Rofes city, in some old Chartres, Rofi
breui.
SOme men, desirous belike, to advance the estimation of this City, have left
us a far fetched antiquity, concerning one piece of the same, affirming that
Julius Caesar caused ye Castle at Rochester (as also that other at Canterbury,
and the Tower at London) to be builded of common charge: But I, having not
hitherto read any such thing, either in Caesar's own Commentaries, or in any
other credible History, dare not avow any other beginning of this city or
castle then that which I find in Beda, least if I should adventure as they do, I
might receive as they have, I mean, The just note of more reading and
industry, the^ of reason or judgment. And although I must, The City.
(and will freely) acknowledge, that it was a City, before that it had to name
Rocester (for so a man may well gather of Beda his words) yet seeing that by
the injury of the ages between the monuments of the first beginning of this
place, and of innumerable such other, be not come to our hands, I had rather
in such cases use honest silence, then rash speech, and do prefer plain
vnskill and ignorance, before vain lying and presumptuous arrogance. For
truly, the credit of our English History, is no one way somuche empayred,
as by the blind boldness of some, which taking upon them to commit it to
writing, and wanting (either through their own slothfulness, or the
iniquity of the time) true understanding of the original of many things, have
not sticked (without any modesty or discretion) to obtrude new fantasies and
folies of their own forgerie, for assured truths, and undoubted antiquity.
As for examples of this kind, although there be at hand, many in number, and
the same most fond and ridiculous in matter, yet because it should be both
odious for the authors, tedious to the readers, and grievous for my self, to
enter into them, I will not make enumeration of any: But staying my self upon
this general note, I will procead with the treatise of the place that I have
taken in hand, the which may aptly (as me thinks) be broken into four
several portions. The City it self, The Castle, the Religious buildings, and
the Bridge.

The City of Rochester, took ye name (as Beda writes) of one Rof (or rather
Hrof, as the Saxon book has it) which was sometime the Lord and owner of the
place.

This name, Leland supposes, to have continuance in Kent till this our time,
meaning (as I suspect) Rolf, a family well enough known. What so ever the
estate of this City was, before the coming in of the Saxons, it seems, that
after their arrival, the mayntenaunce thereof, depended chiefly upon the
residence of the Bishop, and the religious persons: And therefore no marvel
is it, if the glory of the place were not at any time very great, Since on the
one side the ability of the Bishops and the Chanons (inclined to advance it)
was but mean, and on the other side, the calamity of fire and sword (bent to
destroy it) was in manner continual. For I read, that at such time as the
whole Realm was sundred into particular kingdoms, and each part warred for
superiority, and inlarginge of bounds with the other, Eldred (then King of
Mercia) Lothar the king of this Country, and findinge him unable to resist,
spoiled the whole Shyre, and laid this City waste.

The Danes also, which in the days of king Alfred came out of France sailed
up the river of Medwey, to Rochester, and (beseiging the town) fortified over
against it in such forte, that it was greatly distressed, and like to have been
yielded, but that the king (Paeonia manu) came speedely to the reskewe, and not
only raised the siege, and delivered his subjects, but obtained also an
honorable booty of horses and captives, that they besiegers had left behind
them.

The fame people, having miserably vexed the whole Realm in the days of King
Ethelred, came at the last to this City, where they found the inhabitaunts
ready Ethelred him self (not long before) upon a displeasure conceived against
the Bishop, Rochester received before the time of king William the Conqueror,
in whose reign it was valued in ye book of Domesday at.100. s^. by the year,
and after whose days (besides sundry particular damages done to the city,
during ye sieges laid to the castle, (as shall appear anon) it was much
defaced by a great fire yt happened in the reign of King Henry ye first,
Andrews, the which was even then newly finished: And it was again in manner
wholly consumed with Henry the second, at which time that newely builded
Church was sore blasted also: But after all these calamities, this City was
well repaired and ditched about, in the reign of King Henry the third. As
touching the castle The Castle.
at Rochester, although I find not in writing any other foundation thereof,
then that which I alleged before, and recon to be mere fabulous, yet dare I
affirm, that there was an old Castle above eight hundredth years ago, in so
much as I read, that Ecgbert (a king of Kent) gave certain lands within the
walls of Rochester castle, to Eardulfe, then Bishop of that See: And I
conjecture, Odo (the bastard brother to king William the Conqueror) which was
at the first, Bishop of Borieux in Normandy, and then afterward, advanced to
the office of the chief Justice of England, and to the honor of the
Earldom of Kent, was either the first author, or the best benefactour to
that which now stands in sight: and hereunto I am drawn, somewhat by the
consideration of the time it self, in which many Castles were raised to keep
the people in awe, and somewhat by the regard of his authority, which had
the charge of this whole Shyre, but most of all, for that I read, that about
the time of the Conquest, the Bishop of Rochester received land at Ailesford,
in exchange for ground to build a Castle at Rochester upon. Not long after
which time, when as William Rufus (our English Pyrrhus, or Readhead) had
stepped between Robert and the crown of this realm, and had given experiment
of a fierce and unbridled government: the Nobility (desirous to make a
change) arose in arms against him, and stirred his brother to make invasion:
And to the end that the King should have at once many yrons (as the saying
is) in the fire to attend upon, some moved war in one corner of the Realm,
and some in another, But amongst the rest, this Odo betook him to his castle
of Rochester, accompanied with the best, both of the English and ye Norman
nobility: This when the king understood, he solicited his subjects, and
specially the inhabitants of this country, by all fair means and promises to
assist him, and so (gathering a great army) besieged the Castle, and
strengthened the Bishop and his accomplices the defendants in such wise, that in
the end, he and his company were contented to abjure the Realm, and to lead
the rest of their life in Normandy. And thus Odo, that many years before had
been (as it were) a Viceroy, and second person within this realm, was now
deprived of al his dignity, and driven to keep residence upon his benefice,
till such time as Earl Robert (for whose cause he had incurred this danger
(pitying the cause, appointed him governor of Normandy his own country.
After this, the Castle was much amended by Gundulphus, the Bishop, who (in
consideration of a Manor given to his See, by King William Rufus) bestowed
three score pounds in building that great Tower, which yet stands. And from
that time, this Castle continued (as I judge) in the possession of the Prince,
until King Henry the first, by the advice of his Barons, granted to William
the Archbishop of Canterbury and his successors, the custody, and office of
Castle at Rochester was much in the eye of such as were ye authors of
troubles following within the realm so that from time to time it had a part,
almost in every Tragedy.

For, what time King John had war, with his Barons, they got the possession
of this Castle, and committed the defense thereof to a noble man, called William
whom the king immediately besieged, and (through the cowardice of Robert Fitz
Walter, that was sent to rescue it) after three months labor, compelled him
to render the piece: The next year after, Jews (the French Dolphine) by the
aid of the English Nobility, entered the same Castle, and took it by force:

And lastly, in the reign of King Henry the third, Simon Mountford, (not
long before the battle at Jews in Sussex) girded the city of Rochester
about with a mighty siege, and setting on fire the wooden bridge, and a Tower
of timber that stood thereon, wanne the first gate (or ward) of the Castle
by assault, and spoiled the Church and Abbay: But, being manfully resisted
seven days together, by the Earl Warren that was within, and hearing
soudainly of the Kings coming thitherwarde, he prepared to meet him in
person, and left others to continue the siege, all which were soon after put
to flight by the kings army. This war (as I have partly showed before) was
specially moved against strangers, which during that kings reign, bare such
a sway (as some write) that they not only disdayned the natural borne
Nobility of the Realm, But did also (what in them lay) to abolishe the
ancient laws and customs of ye same. In deed, the fire of that displeasure
was long in kindeling, and therefore so much the more furious, the least, that
upon a time it chanced a Torneament to be at Rochester, in which the English
men, of a set purpose (as it should seem) sorted them selves against the
strangers, and so ouermatched them, that following the victory, they made them
with great shame, to fly into the Town for covert: But I dwell to long (I
fear) in these two parts: I will therefore now visit the Religious building,
and so pass over the bridge to some other place.

The foundation of the Church of S. Andrews in Rochester, S. Andrews Church
in Rochester.
was first laid by King Ethelbert (as we have touched before) at such time as
he planted the Bishops chair in the City, and it was occupied by Chanons,
till the days of Gundulphus, the Bishop, who because he Lanfranc the
Archbishop, and by his aid and authority, both builded Priests had wives, in
England, of old time.
that William of Malmesburie ascribes to Lanfranc, the whole thank of all
that matter, for in deed both he and Anselme his successor, were wonderfully
busied in placing Monks, and in diuorcing Chanons, and Secular Priests from
their wives, the which (in contempt) they called, Focalia, no bettter then
White kerchiefes, or kitchenstuffe: although both the law of God makes the
acco^plement honorable amongst al me^, and the law of this country had
(without any check) allowed it in priests, til their own time: For Henry of
Huntingdon writes plainly, that Anselme in a Synod, at London, Prohibuit
sacerdotibus vxores, ante non prohibitas Forbad Priests William of Malmesburie
affirms, that he there decreed, Ne inposterum filij presbyterorum sint
haeredes ecclesiarum patrum suorum, That from thencefoorth Priests sons
should not be heirs to their fathers benefices. Which I note shortly, to the
end, that men should not think it so strange a matter (in this Realm) for
Priests to have wives, as some peuishe Papists go about to persuade. But to
return to Gundulphus, from whom I am by occasion digressed: he (as I said)
reedified the great Church at Rochester, erected the Pryorie, and where as he
found but half a dozein secular Priests in the Church at his coming, he
never ceased, till he had brought together at the least three score Monks
into the place. Then removed he the dead bodies of his predecessors, and with
great solemnity, translated them into this new work: and there also Lanfranc
was present with his purse, and of his own charge incoffened the body of
Paulinus (the third Bishop of Rochester, who had left there the Palle of the
Archebishopricke of York, that was not recovered long after) in curious work
of clean silver, to the which shryne there was afterward (according to the
superstitious manner of those times) much concourse of people, and many
oblations. Besides this, they both joined in suite to the King, and not only
obtained restitution of sundry the possessions withholden from the Church, but
also procured by his liberality and example, new donations of many other
lands and privileges besides. To be short, Gundulphus (ouerliuing Lanfranc)
never rested building and beging, tricking and garnishing, till he had
aduau^ced this his creature, to the just wealth, beauty, and estimation, of a
right Popish Pryorie. But God (who moderating all things by his divine
providence) showed him self always a severe visitour of these irreligious
Synagogues) God (I say) set fire on this building twice with in the compass of
one hundredth years after the erection Gilbert Glanuille, the Bishop of
Rochester, Rome for remedy, and were driven (for maintenance of their
expenses, to coin the silver of Paulinus his Shryne into ready money

By this means therefore, Gilbert became so hated of the Monks, that when he
died, they committed him obscurely to the ground without ringing of Bell,
Celebration of service, or doing of any other funeral Obsequies. John, who in
his siege against the Castle of Rochester,

It was now high time therefore, to devise some way, whereby the Pryorie and
Church of Rochester, might be, if not altogether restored to the ancient
wealth and estimation, yet at the least somewhat relieved from this penury,
nakedness, and abiection. And therefore, Laurence of Saint Martines, the Bishop
of Rochester, perceauing the common people to be somewhat drawn (by the fraud
of the Monks) to think reuere^tly William, that lay buried in the Church, and
knowing well that there was no one way so compe^dious to gain, Saint William of
Rochester.
as the advancement of a Pilgrimage procured at the Popes Court, the
canonization of that man, with indulgence to all such as would offer at his
Tumbe, underpropping by mean of this new Saint, some manner of reverent
opinion of the Church, which before, through defacing the old Bishops shryne,
was declined to naught. But to the end that it may appear, to what hard shift
of Saints these good Fathers were then driven, and how easily the people were
then deluded, you shall hear out of Noua Legenda it self, what great man this
Saint William of Rochester was. He was by birth, a Scot, of Perthe (now
commonly called Saint John's Town) by trade of life a Baker of bread, and
thereby got his living, in charity so abundant, that he gave to the poor the
tenthe loaf of his workmanship, in zeal so fervent, that in vow he
promised, and in deed attempted, to visit the holy land (as they called it)
and the places where Christ was conversant on earth: in which journey, as he
passed through Kent, he made Rochester his way, where, after that he had rested
two or three days, he departed toward Canterbury: But ere he had gone far
from the City, his servant that waited on him, led him (of purpose) out of the
high way, and spoiled him both of his money and life. This done, the servant
escaped, and the Master (because he died in so holy a purpose of mind) was by
the Monks conveyed to Saint Andrews, laid in the quyre, and promoted by the
Pope, as you heard from a poor Baker, to a blessed Martyr. Here (as they say)
showed he miracles plentifully, but certain it is, that mad folks offered
unto him liberally, even until these latter times, in which, the beams of
Gods truth, shining in the hearts of men, did quite chase away, and put to
flight, this and such other gross clouds, of will worship, superstition, and
idolatry. Besides this Pryorie (which was valued by the Commissioners of the
late suppression, at.486. pounds by year) there was none other religious
building in Rochester) only I read, that Gundulphus (the Bishop before
remembered) builded there an Hospital without the East gate, which he called
Saint Bartilmewes. Saint Bartholmewes Hospital
Now therefore am I come to the Bridge over Medway, not that alone which we
presently behold, but an other also, much more ancient in time, though less
beautiful in work, Rochester Bridge both the old, and the new.
which neither stood in the self place where this is, neither yet very
far off, for that crossed the water over against Stroud Hospital: and this
latter is pitched some distance from thence toward the South, and somewhat
nearer to the City wall, as to a place more fit, both for the fastnes of
the soil, and for the breaking of the swiftnes of the stream, to build a
Bridge upon. That old work, (being of timber Building) was fyered by Simon
the Earl of Leycester, in the time of King Henry ye third, as has already
appeared: and not fully twenty years after, it was borne away with the Ise,
in the reign of King Edward his Son. Wherefore, least that as the Frost and
flame, has already consumed the thing it self: So the canker of time should
also devour all memory thereof, I have thought meet to impart such
antiquities, as I have found concerning that bridge, whereof the one was taken
out of a book (sometime) belonging to the late worthy and wise Counselour,
Doctor Nicholas Wotton, and which he had exemplified out of an ancient
monument of Christ's Church in Canterbury, bearing this Title.

Memorandum de Ponte Roffensi. etc.










Stokebery.2. sull. de Eilnothington.2, sull. de Bicknore.i sull. de
Widneselle.i. sull, de Holingeburne 6. sull, de quibus Godinton debet 2. sull
and Bocton Archiepiscopi dimid sull: de Heberton cum Frensted.i. sull: de Lhed.
s 3. sull, de Herietesham cum Litlewrotha 2 sull: de Wrenstede dimid sull, de
Wytheling cu^ Eastelne.i. sull, de Lenham 4. sull. and dimid. de Longele cum
Otringdene 2. sull and dimid. de Eastlenham 2. sull, de Boctone Bauelingham.i.
sull, de Hulecumb 2. sull, and dimid. quam contradicunt. de Farburn dimid.
sull, and dimid. quam contradicunt. de Suthone 7. sull, and dimid. de Otteham
1. sull, de Witherinton dimid. sull. Notandum, quod ad 6. sull, de Holingehorne
debet Boctone dimid. sull, Godinton 2. sull, Buccherst dimid. Iug. Wibendene
and Hok^bery dimid. Iug. Wythyherst 1. Iuger, Herindene dimid. Iuger. Hallebroc
and Herebertest dimid. Iuger. Bresing 3. Iug. Beauerepair dimid. Iuger.
Stanburne and Thrumsted dimid. Iug. Riple dimid. Iuger. Bradestrete dimid.
Iuger. Brechedene quartam partem vnius Iuger. Simon de porta 5. acras,
Gilebertus de Thrumstede 15. acras. Terra Ospeck 5. acras. Thomas supra montem
10. acras. Sara de Dene, Robertus de Swandene cum socijs 45. acras. Bradherst
4. Iuger. Huking dimid. Iug. Wodaeton. i. Iug. Herst. i. Iuger. Heyhorne dimid.
Iug. Lareye dimid. Iug. Grenewey. i. Iug. Southgrenewey. i. Iug. Gerin cum
socijs dimid. Iug. Terra Iacobi de Hannye dimid. Iuger. Cotenetun dimid. Iug.
Nutemannestowe, and terra Bellardi, dimid. Iug. Sheldesbourn dimid. Iug. Snade
quartam partem. Worham 3. acras. Bode 5. acras. Simon Cockel 25. acras.
Haeredes Thomae de la Dane. 5. acras. Walterus Larsone 5. acras. Wilhelmus
Cliue 10. acras.

Sep^ima, and octaua pera, pertinent ad homines de Hoo. Et debent sex sull: and
plantare 4. virgat, and dimid.

Nona pera pertinet ad Archiepiscopum, and debet 3. sull and plantare 4.
virgat. Et hoc debetur de and Cliue, Heigham, Deninton, Melton, Hlidesdon,
Mepeham, Snodeslond, Bearlinges, Peadelesworthe, and de omnibus hominibus in
eadem valle,

The other antiquity I found in an old volume of Rochester Library,
collected by Ernulsus the Bishop, and entitled, Textus de Ecclesia Roffensi:
in which, that which concerns this purpose, is to be read both in the
Saxon, (or ancient English) tongue, and in the Latin also, as hereafter
follows.

THis This is is thaers the bricaegeeorc Bridgewoorke on at Hrofecaestre;
Rochester. Her Here syndon be genamod named tha the land. lands, thE for man
the Hi which of scael men shall eorcan; work. Aerest First the thaer^
burgebiscop faeHth on Bishop of the City takes on begins the one that earm
end to to ercene work tha the land land peran. peer: and and threo three
gyrda yardes to to thillianne. plancke: and and iij. sylla to 3. plates to
lyccanne; lay: that that is is, of from of borcstealle. Borstall, and and of
Cucclestane. from Cuckstane, and of and from frinondesbyrig. Frendsbyry, and of
Stoce; and Stoke, THanne Then seo the othres second per peer gebyrath
belongs to to gyllingeHam. Gyllingham, and to CaetHam. and to Chetham, and an
gyrde to and one yard to thillianne. plancke, and iij. and 3. sylla plates to
to leccanne; lay. THonne Then seo the thridde third peer per gebyrath eft
tham biscope. belongs again to the same Bishop, and thridde He^lf gyrd and
two yardes and a half, and three yardes lacking a half, to to thillianne.
planke, and.iii. sylla and 3. plates to to leccenne. lay, of of from
Healingan. halling and of trotescliue and of Trosclif: and of meallingan. and
of malling, and of fliote. and of Fleet, and of Stane. and of Stone. and and
of pundene. of pyndene, and of and of falcHenHam; falkenham. Fakham

THonne Then is is seo the feorthe fourth paer thaes cinges. peer the Kings
and and fiorthe 3. Half gyrd to thillanne. yardes and a half to planke,
and.iii. sylla to leccanne. and 3. plates to lay, of of aeglesforda.
Atlesford, and and of of eallan all tham that laethe the thereto that Lathe
Hundredth that thereunto lith. lies, and of ufanHylle. and of the vphille. men
upon the hill, and of Aclea. and of Acley, Okeley, and of tham and of
Smalanland. Smalland, and and of of Cusintune. Cosyngton, and of dudeslande.
and of Dudslande, and of Gysleardeslande. and of Gisleardsland, and of uldeHam.
and of Woldham, and of and of burHHam. Burham, and and of of Acclesse.
Acclesse. and and of of Horstede. Horstede, and of fearnlege. and of Farley,
and of terstane. and of Teston, and of Cealce. and of Chalk, and of HennHyste.
and of Henhyrst, and of and of Aedune; Edon.

THonne Then is is seo the fifte fifte per paes peer the Arcebiscopes.
Archebishops, to roteHam. to Wrotham, and to Maegthanstane. and to Maydstone,
and to and to othringebyran. Wateringbyrie, and to Netlestede. and to
Nettlested, and to tham and to the tam PeccHam. two Peckams, and to
HaeselHolte. and to Haselholte, and to Maeranyrthe. and to Mereworth, and to
Lillanburnan. and to Layborne, and to Sanatune. and to Swanton, and to OffaHam.
and to Ofham, and to Dictune. and to Dytton, and to esterHam. and to Westerham,
and iiij. gyrda to thillanne. and four yardes to plancke, and iij. Sylle to
and 3. plates to leccanne; lay.

THonne Then is is syo the seoxte sixte per peer to to Holingaburnan.
Holingborne, and to and to eallan all tham laethe. that Lath, and iiij. gyrda
to thelliene. And four yardes to plancke: and iiij. sylla to leccenne; and
four plates to lay.

THonne Then is is syo the syouethe. seuenthe, and syo eaHtethe per. and the
eight peer to Hoaran land to the men of Hoo to to yrcenne. work: and fyfte
And four Healf gyrd to thillanne. yardes and a half to plancke: and vj. sylla
to and six plates to lyccanne. lay.

THonne Then is is syo the nigatha nynthe per peer thaes the Aercebiscopes.
Archebishops, that is syo land per aet tham that is the land peer at the est
West aende; end: to to fliote. Fleet: and to His clyfe. and to his cliffe:
Bishops cliffe and to HeHHam. and to Higham: and to and to denetune. Denton:
and and to to Melantune. M^lton: and and to to Hludesdune. Ludsdowne: and and
to to MeapeHam. Mepham: and and to to Snodilande. Snodland: and and to to
berlingan. Berling, and and to to peadlesyrthe. Paddelsworthe: and and ealla
tha daenearu; to all that valley men: and iiij. gyrda to thillianne. and four
yardes to plancke: and and thryo three sylle plates to leccanne; to lay;

Haec descriptio demonstrat aperte, vnde debeat pons de Rouecestra restaurari,
quotiens fuerit fractus.



Tertia pera pertinet iterum ad Episcopum eiusdem ciuitatis, qui debet 2.
virgatas and dimid. plancas ponere: and 3. suliuas supponere: and hoc fiet de
Heallinges, Trottescliue, Meallinges, Suthfleotes, Stanes, Pinnendene, and
Falceham.

Quarta pera pertinet ad Regem, and debet 3. virgat. and dimid. plancas ponere:
and 3. suliuas supponere: Et hoc fiet de Eilesforda, and de toto illo laesto
quod ad illud maneriu^ pertinet: and de supermontaneis, and de Aclea, and de
Smalaland, and de Cusintune, and de Dudesland, and de Gisleardes land, and de
Wul^cham, and de Burham, and de Aclesse,

Horsteda, Fearnlega, Terstane, Cealca, Henhersta, and de Hathdune.









Et sciendum est, quod omnes illae suliuae quae in ponte illo ponentur, tantae
grossitudinis debent esse, vt been possint sustinere, omnia grauia pondera
superiacentium plancarum, and omnium desuper transeuntium rerum. By these it
may appear, that this ancient bridge consisted of nine Arches, or peers, and
contained in length, about twenty and six rods, or yardes, as they be here
termed, Toward the reparation and maintenance whereof, diverse persons, parcels
of lands, and townships, (as you see) were of duty bound to bring stuff, and
to bestow both cost and labor in laying it: This duty grew, either by tenure,
or custom, or both: and it seems, that according to the quantity and
proportion of the Land to be charged, the carriage also was either more or
less.

For here is express mention, not of Towns and Manors only, but of Yokes and
Acres also, which were contributorie to the aid of carrying, pitching, and
laying of piles, plankes, and other great timber. And here (by the way) it is
to be observed, that so much of the work as arises of stone and earth, is
called, Pera, of the Latin word, Petra: that the great ground posts, plates,
or beams, be termed (Sulliuae) of the old Saxon word (Sylle) which we yet
every where know by the name of a Ground Sille: And that the Tables, or
Boordes, which are laid over them, are named (Plancae) or Plankes, as we yet
also in our vulgar language do sound it. But now in our time, by reason that
diverse Lands are purposely given to maintain the new Bridge, all this
ancient duty of reparation is quite and clean forgotten, although by the
statute 21. and 2. the forenamed lands remain liable, as before, yea and the
new Bridge it self also (for want of the execution of that, or some other
such politic way of maintenance) both presently lacks help, and is like
hereafter (if remedy in time be not applied) to decline to great ruin and
decay: Which thing is so much the more to be foreseen, and pittyed, as that
the work is to the founder a Noble monument, to this City a beautiful
ornament; and to the whole Country a great benefit, commodity, and easement.

Of this latter work (being not much above eight score years of age) Sir
Robert Knolles (a man advanced by valiant behavior, Sir Robert Knolles a
valiant Captain.
and good service under King Edward the third, from a common Soldier, to a
most commendable Captain) was the first Author: who after that he had been
sent General of an army into France, and there (in despite of all their
power) had driven the people like sheep before him, wasting, burning and
destroying, Towns, Castles, Churches, Monasteries, and Cities, in such wise
and number, that long after in memory of his act, the sharp points and Gable
ends of overthrown Houses and Mynsters, were called Knolles Miters: he
returned into England, and meaning some way to make himself as well beloved of
his Country men at home, as he had been every way dread and feared of
Strangers abroad, by great policy maistred the River of Medwey, and of his
own charge made over it the goodly work that now stands, with a chapel and
Chauntrie at the end, and died full of years in ye midst of ye Reign of King
Henry the fourth.

Stroude, aunciently called Strodes, of the Saxon word (Strogd) which
signifies Scattered, because it was a Hamlet of a few houses, that lay
scattered from the City.
ABout the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the third, The Hospital.
Gilbert Gla^uille, the Bishop of Rochester, (of whom you have already heard)
founded an Hospital at Stroude, which he dedicated to the name of the blessed
Virgin, and endowed with liuelyhode to the value of fifty and two pounds by
year.

A name, or family of men, The beginning of this scoffing by word, Kentishe
tails.
sometime inhabiting Stroude (says Polydore) had tails clapped to their
breeches by Thomas Becket, for revenge and punishment of a dispite done to him,
in cutting of the tail of his horse: The Author of the new Legend says, that
after Saint Thomas had excomunicated two Brothers, (called Brockes) for the
same cause, that the Dogs under the table would not once take Bread at their
hands. Such (belike) was the virtue of his curse, that it gave to brute
beasts, a discretion and knowledge of the persons, that were in danger of it.
Boethius (the Scotishe Chronicler) writes, that the like plague lighted upon
the men of Midleton in Dorsetshyre: Who, because they threw Fish tails in
great contempt at Saint Augustine, were both themselves and their posterity,
stricken with tails, to their perpetual infamy and punishment. All which
their Reports (no doubt) be as true, as Ouides History of Diana, that in
great anger bestowed on Acteon a Deares head, with mighty browe anthlers.

Much are the Western men bound (as you see) to Polydore, who taking the
miracle from Augustine, applies it to S. Thomas, and removing the infamous
revenge from Dorsetshyre, lays it upon our men of Kent. But little is Kent, or
the whole English Nation beholdding, either to him, or his fellows, who
(amongst them) have brought upon us this ignominy and note with other Nations
abroad, that many of them believe as verily, yt we have long tails, and be
monsters by nature, as other men have their due parts and members in usual
number. Polydore (the wisest of the company) fearing that issue might be taken
upon the matter, Angle Queen.
ascribes it to one special stock and family, which he names not, and yet
(to leave it the more uncertain) he says, that, that family also is worn out
long since, and shows not when: And thus affirming, he cannot tell of whom,
nor when, he goes about in great earnest (as in sundry other things) to make
the world believe he cannot tell what: he had forgotten the Law whereunto an
Hystorian is bound, Ne quid falsi audeat, ne quid very non audeat. That he
should be bold to tell the truth, and yet not so bold as to tell a lie.
Howbeit his History (without all doubt) in places not blemished with such
folies, is a worthy work, but since he inserteth them many times without all
discretion, he must of the wiser sort be read over with great suspicion, and
wearines: For, as he was by office Collector of the Peter pence to the Popes
gain and lucre, so shows he himself throughout by profession, a covetous
gatherer of lying Fables, fained to advance the Popish Religion, Kingdom, and
Myter.

Halling, in Saxon Haling, that is to say, the wholesome low place, or Meadowe.
I Have seen in an ancient book containing the donations to the Sea of
Rochester, Many kings at once, in Kent.
collected by Ernulphus the Bishop there, and entitled Textus de Ecclesia
Roffensi) a Chartre of Ecgbert (the fourth christened King of Kent) by the
which he gave to Dioram, the Bishop of Rochester, ten ploughlandes in Halling,
together with certain Denes in the Weald, or common wood. To the which
Chartre, there is (amongst others) the subscription of Ieanbert the Archbishop,
and of one Heahbert, a King of Kent also, as is in that book termed. Which
thing I note for two special causes, the one to show, that about that age
there were at one time in Kent, more Kings then one: The other, to manifest and
set fourth the manner of that time in signing and subscribing of Deeds and
Charters, a fashion much different from the insealing that is used in these our
days: and as touching the first, I my self would have thought, that ye name
King, had in that place been but only the title of a second Magistrate (as
Prorex, or viceroy) substituted under ye very King of the country for
administration of justice in his aid or absence: saving that I read plainly in
an other Chartre, of another donation of Eslingham made by Offa the king of
Mercia, Eardulfe, the Bishop of the same See) that he proceeded in that his
gift, by the consent of the same Heahbert, the king of Kent, and that on
Sigaered also (by the name of Rex dimidiae partis prouinciae Cantuariorum) both
confirmed it by writing, and gave possession by the delivery of a clod of
earth, after the manner of seison that we yet use. Neither was this true in
Heahbert only, for it is evident by sundry Chartres, extant in the same
Book, that Ealbert the King of Kent, had Ethelbert, (another Eardulfe, that is
called, Rex Cantuariorum, as well as he. So that, for this season, it should
seem, that either the kingdom was divided by descent, or else, that the title
was litigious, and in controversy, though our hystories (so far as I have
seen) have mention of neither. The old manner of Signing, and Sealing, of
deeds.
This old manner of signing and subscribing, is (in my fantasy) also not
unworthy the observation: wherein we differ from our ancestors, the Saxons, in
this, that they subscribed their names (commonly adding the sign of the
cross) together with a great number of witnesses: And we, for more suertie,
both subscribe our names, put our seals, and use ye help of testimony
besides. That former fashion continued throughout, until the time of the
conquest by the Normans, whose manner by little and little at the length
prevailed amongst us. For the first sealed Chartre in England, that ever I read
of, is that of King Edward the confessors to the Abbey of Westminster: who
(being brought up in Normandy) brought into this Realm, that, and some other
of their guises with him: And after ye coming of William the Conqueror, the
Normans, liking their own country custom (as naturally all nations do)
rejected the manner that they found here, and retained their own, as
Ingulphus, the Abbat of Croyland, which came in with the conquest, witnesses,
saying: Normanni, cheirographoru^ confectione^, cum crucib. aureis, and alijs
signaculis sacris, in Anglia firmari solitam, in cerae impressionem mutant,
modumque scribendi anglicum reijciunt. The Normans, do change the making of
writings, which were wont to be firmed in England with Crosses of gold, and
other holy signs into the printing with wax: and they reject also the manner
of the English writing. Howbeit, this was not done all at once, but it incresed
and came forward by certain steps and degrees, so ye first and for a season, the
King only, or a few other of ye Nobility besides him, used to seal: Then the
Noble men (for the most part) and no^e other, which thing a man may see in
the History of Battle Abbie, where Richard Lucy chief Justice of England,
in the Henry the second, is reported to have blamed a mean subject, for yt he
used a private seal, when as that perteined (as he said) to the King, and
Nobility only. At which time also (as John Rosse notes it) they used to
ingraue in their seals, their own pictures, and counterfeits, covered with a
long coat over their armours. But after this, the Gentlemen of the better
sort took up the fashion, and because they were not all warriors, they made
seals of their several cotes, or sheelds of arms, for difference sake, as the
same author reports. At the length, about the time of King Edward the third,
Seals became very common, so that not only such as bare arms, used to
seal, but other men also fashioned to them selves, signetes of their own
devise, some taking the letres of their own names, some flowers, some knots,
and flowrishes, some birds, or beasts, and some other things, as we now yet
dailye behold in use.

I am not ignorant, that some other manner of sealings besides these, has
been heard of amongst us, as namely that of King Edward ye third, by which he
gave, To Norman the Hunter, the hop and the hop town,
with all the bounds up side down:
And in wittnes, that yt was soothe,
He bitt the wax with his fong toothe.
And yt of Alberie de veer also, containing the donation of Hatfield, to ye
which he affixed a short black hafted knife, like unto an old halpeny whitle,
in stead of a seal: and such others, of which happily I have seen some, and
heard of more. But all that notwithstanding, if any man shall think, that these
were received in common use and custom, and that they were not rather the
devises and pleasures of a few singular persons, he is no less deceived, then
such as deem every Chartre and writing, that has no seal annexed, to be as
ancient as the Conquest: whereas (indeed) sealing was not commonly used till the
time of King Edward the third, as I have already told you.

Thus far, by occasion of this old Chartre, I am Halling, of which I find
none other report in writing, save that in the reign of king Henry the
second, Richard ye Archbishop of Canterbury, and imediat successor to Thomas
the Archtraytour of this Realm, ended his life, in the mansion house there,
which then was, and yet continues, parcel of the possessions of the Sea of
Rochester: The circumstaunce and cause, of which his death and departure, I
will reserve till I come to Wrotham, where I shall have just occasion to
discover it.

Ailesforde, or Eilesforde, called in some Saxon copies, Egelesford, that is
the Foorde, of passage over the River Egle, or Eyle: In others Angelesford,
which is, the passage of the Angles, or English men. It is falsely termed of
some, Alencester, Allepord, Aelstrea, by deprauation of the writers of the
sundry copies (as I suspect) and not otherwise.
WIthin a few years after the arrival of the Saxons, the Britons (perceiving
that Vortiger their King was withdrawn by his wife from them, and drawn to
the part of their enemies) made election of Vortimer his son, for their
Lord and leader: by whose manhood and prowess, they in short time so
prevailed against the Saxons, that (sleying Horsa, one of the Chieftaines, in
an encounter given at this place, and discomfiting the residue) they first
chased them from hence, as far as Tanet, (in memory of which flight,
happily this place, was called Anglesford, that is the passag^ of the Angles or
Saxons) and after that compelled them to forsake the land, to take shipping
toward their country, and to seek a new supply: And truly, had not the
untimely death of King Vo^timer immediately succeeded, it was to be hoped,
that they should never have returned.

But the want of that one man, both quayled the courage of the Britons, gave
new matter of stomach to the Saxons to repair their forces, and brought upon
this Realm an alteration of the whole Estate and Government.

There landed within the Realm in the time of Alfred, two great swarms of
Danish Pirates, whereof the one arrived near Winchelsey, with two hundredth
Apledore, as we have showed before: The other entered the Thamise, in a fleet
of eighty sail, whereof part encamped themselves at Midleton on the other side
of Kent, and part in Essex over against them.

These latter, King Alfred pursued, and pressed them so hardly, yt they gave
him, both oaths and hostages to depart the Realm, and never after to unquiet
it. That done, he marched with his army against those other also.

And because he understood, that they had divided themselves, and spoiled the
Country in sundry parts at once, he likewise divided his army, intending
(the rather by that mean) to meet with them in some one place or other, which
when they hard of, and perceived that they were unmeet, to encounter him in
the face, they determined to pass over the Thamise, and to join with their
countremen in Essex, of whose discomfiture they had as yet received no
tideings. But when they came at a place in this parish, called both now and
aunciently Fernham, Fernham.
that is the ferny Town or dwelling, one part of the Kings power courageously
charged them and finding them given to flight, The Danes compelled to take the
Thamise.
followed the chase upon them so fercely, that they were compelled to take the
Thamise without Boat or Bridge, in which passage there were a great number of
the^ drowned, the residue having enough to do to save their own lives, and to
convey over their Captain, that had received a deadlye wound.

No less notable was that other chase, wherein (many years after) Edmond
Ironside, most fiercely pursued Danes from Otforde to this town: in which
also (as some write) he had given them an irreparable overthrow, had he not (by
fraudulent, The Danes, are chased from Otforde.
and traiterous persuasion of one Edric, then Duke of Mercia, or middle England,
and in the Saxon speech surnamed, for his covetousness Streona, that is to
say, the Getter, Earl Edrie an infamus traitor.
or gatherer) withdrawn his foot, and spared to follow them.

No doubt, but that it is many times a part of good wisdom, and warlyke
policy, not to pursue over fiercely thine enemy that has already turned his
back toward thee, least thou compel him, to make virtue of that necessity,
and he (turning his face again) put thee in d unger to be overcome thy self,
which before had in thine own hand assurance to overthrow him: In which
behalf, it was well said of one, Hosti fugienti pons aureus faciendus, If
thine enemy will fly, make him a bridge of Gold. Nevertheless, for as much
as this advice, proceeded not from Eadric, of any care that he had to preserve
King Edmonds power out of peril, but rather of fear, least the whole army of
Canutus should be ouerrunne and destroyed: he is justly taxed for this, and
other his treasons by our ancient historians, who also make report of the
worthy reward, that in the end he received, for all his treachery. For, this
was he (as William Malmsb. writes, A noble example of King Edmunde Ironside
though some others ascribe it to his son) that afterward (when these two
Kings had by composition divided the Realm between them) most villanously
murdered King Edmonde at Oxford, and was therefore done to death by King
Canutus: who, in that one act showed singular arguments, both of rare justice,
and of a right noble heart: Of justice, for that he would not wink at the
fault of him, by whose means, he obtained the Monarchy of the whole Realm,
and of great Nobility of mind, in that he plainly declared himself, to
esteem more of his own honor, then of another man's Crown and Scepter, and
to have digested quietly, that impatiencie of a partener in kingdom, which
great Alexander thought as intolerable as two suns in the world at once: and
which Romulus could in no wise brook, since he would not suffer one kingdom
to content him and Remus, whom one belly had contained before.

There was sometime at Eilefford, a house of Carmelite Friars: of the time of
the foundation, or name of the founder whereof, I have not yet learned any
thing.

Mallinge, in Saxon, Mealing of Mealuing, that is, the Low place flourishing
with meal, or Corn, for so it is every where accounted.
THis Town, The names of Towns, ending in ing.
(the name whereof having his termination in, ing, betokens plainly, that it
is situate along the water, even as Yalding, Berming Halling, and others
thereby) was first given to Burhricus, the Bishop of Rochester by King Edmund
the Brother of Athelstane, under the name of three Plough lands in Mealinges.

About one hundredth and fifty years after which time, Gundulphus (a
successor in that See, as you have The Abbay
which (being dedicate to the name of the Blessed Virgin) during all his life
he governed himself, and lying at the point of death, he commended to the
charge of one Auice, (a chosen woman) to whom notwithstanding he would not
deliver the Pastoral staff, before she had promised Canonical Obedience,
fidelity, and subjection, to the Sea of Rochester, and protested by oath, that
there should neither Abbasse nor Nonne, be from thenceforthe received into the
house, without the consent and priuitie of him, and his successors. Now,
whether this Rus propinquum, The Solaces, of Sol^ life.
were made of a blind zeal that the man had to advance superstition, or of a
vain glory to increase authority in his succession, or else of a foresight
that the Monks, (which were for the most part called Monachi, of Sole
living, by the same rule, that Montes have their name of removing) might have a
convenient place to resort unto, and where they might ( Caute, at the least)
quench the heates, kindled of their good cheer and idleness, God knows,
and I will not judge. But well I wot, that this was a very common practice in
Papistrie: for as Saint Augustines had Sepulchers, Saint Albans Sopewell, Shene
Sion, the Knights of the Rodes, the Nonnes of Clerkenwel, all adjoining, or
subject to such obedience: so Sempringham, and some other of that sort, had
both Male and Female within one house, and wall together, the world being (in
the mean while) borne in hand, that they were no men, but Images, as Phryne
said sometime of Xenocrates. This house was valued in the Records, at two
hundredth and eighteen pounds of yearly reuenewe.

Tunbridge, called of Mat. Par. Th^^ebrugge, corruptly for tonebrycge, that is,
the Bridge over Tone: but if it be truly written tunbrycge, the^ it signifies,
the town of Bridges, as in deed it has many.
ALthough I find no mention of Tunbridge in that copy of Domesdaye book,
which I have seen, The Castle.
concerning the description of this Shyre: yet read I in history, that there
was a castle at Tunbridge sone after the conqueste, if not even at the same
time when that book was compiled: For omitting that which Hector Boethius
writes, concerning a battle at Tunbridge, wherein the Conqueror (as he says)
should prevail against Harold, because it is evidently false and untrue,
unless he mean it of the continuance of the chase after the fight even to
Tunbridge, I have read, that at such time, as Odo (joining with others of the
Nobility) made defection William Rufus, to Robert his elder brother, the King
besieged at Tunbridge, one Gilbert, then keeper of the Castle, and compelled
him to yield it.

Happily this Odo (being the Kings Uncle, and of great authority within the
Shyre, as we have before showed) had erected this Castle, and given the charge
to Gilbert, but howsoever that were, certain it is, that the Castle was long
time holde^ of the Archbishops of Canterbury, and continued many years
together in the possession of the Earls of Clare, afterward called of
Gloucester.

Henry the second, Thomas the Archbishop, required homage of Roger, then Earl
of Gloucester, for his Castle of Tunbridge, who knowing the King to be half
angry with the Archbishop, and wholly on his own side, shaped him a short
answer, affirming stoutly that it was none of his, but the Kings own, as a
Lay Fee. Falcasius, (a hired Soldier, that was enterteined by King John,
during Gloucester, and kept it for a season to the Kings behoof:

King Henry the third also, after the death of Gilbert the Earl of
Gloucester, scised the Wardship of his Hubert of Burghe: But Richard the
Archbishop, (surnamed the great) being offended thereat, came to the King in
great haste, and made his claim, by reason, that the Earl Gilbert died in his
homage: the King gave answer, that the whole Earldom was holden of him, and
that he might lawfully commit the custody of the Lands to whom soever it
liked himself. Hereat the Bishop waxed warm, and told the King plainly, that
since he could not have right within the Realm, he would not spare to seek it
abroad: and forthwith hasted him to ye holy Father at Rome, where he so used ye
matter, that he obtained judgment for his part, but he for all that never had
execution, by reason that he died in his return toward home: yet you may here
see, by the way, that in those days, The Clergy was law less.
there was no Law in England to rule the proud Prelacie withal, no not so
much, as in things mere Lay and temporal: To be short, the same He^rie, not
long before ye battle at Jews in Sussex, burned the City of Rochester, and
took this Castle by a soudaine surprise, wherein he found (amongst other) the
Countess of Gloucester: But it was not long before he stored the Castle with
men of war, and restored the Lady to her former liberty.

There was sometime near to this Castle a Pryorie, The Pryorie at Tun-Bridge.
whereof the Earls of Gloucester, and their Heirs, were reputed the first
Authors, and Patrones: And in our memory, there was erected a fair Free
School, by the honest liberality of Sir Androw Iudde, a Citizen, and Mayor of
London, which submitted ye same

Round about the Town of Tunbridge, The Low ye of Tunbridge.
lies a territory, or compass of ground, commonly called, the Lowy, but
written in the ancient Records and Hystories, Pencata, or Lenga, and being
(in deed) a French League, of ground, which (as I find in the Chronicles of
Normandy) was allotted at the first upon this occasion following. There was in
Normandy, a Town (and land thereunto adjoining) called Bryonnie, which was
of the ancient possession of the Dukedom, and had continually remained in the
hands of the Dukes there, till such time as Richard (the second Duke of that
name) gave it amongst other Lands to Godfrey, his natural brother, for his
advancement in living. This Godfrey enjoyed it all his life, and left it to
one Gislebert his Son (which happily was Gilbert, the Capitain of Tunbridge
Castle, of whom we had mention before) who also held it so long as he lived.
But after the death of Gislebert, Robert (the Duke of Normandy, and Eldest
Son to King William the Conqueror) being earnestly labored to bestow it
upon on Robert, Earl Mellent, (whose offspring were sometimes Earls of
Leycester within this Realm) seized it into his own hands, pretending to
unite it to the Dukedom again. But when Richard (the Son of Gislebert)
understood of this, he put to his claim, and making his title by a long
continued possession, (even from Godfrey his graundfather) so encountered the
suite of Earl Mellent, that to stop Richards mouth withal, it was by the
device of the Earl, and by the mediation of Duke Robert, which he made to his
Brother William Rufus, brought to pass, that Richard should receive in
recompense, the Town of Tunbridge in England, and so much land about it, as
Bryonnie it self contained in circuit: And to the end that the indifferency
of the dealing might appear, and his full satisfaction be wrought, they caused
Bryonnie, and the land about it, to be measured with a line, which they
afterward brought over with them into England, and applying the same to
Tunbridge and the land adjoining, laid him out the very like in quantity: in
so much that long time after, it was a common and received opinion in
Normandy, that the Leagues of Bryonnie and Tunbridge, were all one in measure
and compass. This, together with the Town and Castle, came at the length (as
you have seen) to the Gloucester, between whom, and the Archebishops of
Canterbury, 42. H. 3.
there arose oftentimes contention, both for the limits of this league, and
for the preeminence of their privileges. At the last, Boniface the Archbishop
(next but one in succession after Richard, of whom we spoke before) and
Richard the Earl (and Heir to Gilbert) agreed in the reign of King Henry
the third, upon a perambulatio^ to be made between them, and so the strife for
their bounds was brought to an end. But as touching their privileges, and
jurisdiction in the place, it fell out by inquisition in the time of King
Edward following, that the Archbishop had nothing to do within the league,
that the Earl had return of writtes, creation of certain Officers, an
especial sessions in Eire. etc, most of which things the Town has not these
many years enjoyed: But yet it was agreed, after the perambulation so made
between Boniface and the Earl Richard, that the Earl and his heirs should
hold the Manors of Tunbridge, Vielston, Horsmund, Melyton, and Pettys, of ye
Archbishop and his successors, by the service of 4. Knights fees, and to be
high Stewardes, and high Butlers, to the Archebishops, at the great feast of
their inthronizations, taking for their service in the Stewardship, seven
competent Robes of Scarlet, thirty gallons of wine, thirty pound of wax for
his light, livery of Hay and Oats for fourscore Horse by two nights, the
dishes and salt which should stand before the Archebishops in that Feast, and
at their departure the diet of three days at ye costs of the Archbishops at
four of their next Manors, by the four quarters of Kent, wheresoever they
would, Ad minuendum sanguinem, So that they repaired thither, but with fifty
Horses only: And taking also for the Office of Butlership, other seven like
Robes. 20 Gallons of wine, fifty pound of wax, like livery for threescore
Horses by two nights, the cup wherewith the Archebishops should be served,
all the empty hogsheads of drink, and for six tun of wine, so many as
should be drunk under the bar also. The Archbishop has an Earl to his
Butler.


The Articles of which their composition, were afterward accordingly
performed, first between Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, and Robert Winchelsey
the Archbishop, next between the same Earl, and the Archbishop Reignoldes:
Then between Hughe Audley the Earl of Gloucester, and the Archbishop John
Stratford: After that between the Earl of Stafford, (to whom the Lordship of
Tunbridge at the length came) and Simon Sudbury Archbishop, in that See: and
lastly between William Warham the Archbishop, and Edward the late Duke of
Buckingham, who also executed the Stewardship in his own Thomas Burgher
Knight: ye whole pomp, and Ceremony whereof, I have seen at greater length
set forth, and described, then is meet for this time and place to be recounted.

Asherst, in Saxon, Acsehyrst, that is, the Wood consisting of Ashes.
IN the Southwest corner of this Shyre, toward the confines of Sussex and
Surrey, lies Asherst, The Roo^^ of Asherst was a growing Idol
a place now a days so obscure (for it is but a Town of two houses) that it
is not worthy the visiting: but yet in old time so glorious for a Roode that
it had of rare property, that many vouchsafed to bestow both their labor
and money upon it. It was beaten (forsooth) into the heads of the common
people (as what thing was so absurd, which the Clergy could not then make
the world to believe?) that the Roode (or Crucifix) of this church, did by
certain incrementes continually wax and grow, as well in the bush of hair,
yt it had on the head, as also in the length and stature of the members, and
body it self. By means whereof it came to pass, that whereas the fruits of
the Benefice wear hardly able to sustain the Incumbent, now by the benefit
of this invention (which was in papistrie, Nouum genus aucupij) the Parson
there was not only furnished by the offering to live plentifully, but also
well aided toward the making of a Hoorde, or increase of Wealth and Riches.

But as Ephialtes, and Octus, the Sons of Neptune who (as the Poets feign,
waxed nine inches every month) being heaued up with opinion, and conceits
ceipt of their own length and hantines, assaulted heaven, intending to have
pulled the Gods out of their places, and were therefore shot through, and
slain with the arrows of the Gods: Even so, when Popish Idolatry was grown
to the full height and measure, so that it spared not to rob God of his due
honor, and most violently to pull him (as it were) out of his seat, then this
growing Idol and all his fellows, were so deadly wounded, with the heavenly
arrows of the word of God (Qui non dabit gloriam suam sculptilibus) that
soon after they gave up the ghost, and least us.

Between this Town and Depeforde (which is the whole bredthe of the Shyre, on
the west end) I find nothing committed to history: and therefore let us
have, and take our next way thither.

Depeforde, in Latin Vadum profundum, and in ancient Evidences West
Greenewiche.
THis town, being a frontier between Kent and Surrey, was of none estimation
at all, until that King Henry the eight, advised (for the better preservation
of the Royal Fleet) to erect a Storehouse, and to create certain officers
there: these he incorporated by the name of the Master and Wardeines of the
Holy Trinity: for the building, keeping, The masters of the navy Royal.
and conducting of the Navy Royal.

There was lately reedefied a fair Bridge also, over the Brook, called
Rauensbourne, which ryseth not far of in the Heath above Bromley.

Greenewiche, in Latin, Viridis finus: in Saxon, grenapic; that is to say, the
Green Town. In ancient evidences, Eastgreenewiche, for difference sake from
Depforde, which in old Instruments is called westgreenewiche.
IN the time of the turmoyled King Ethelred, the whole fleet of the Danish
army, lay at road, two or three years together before Greenewich: And the
Soldiers, for the most part, were encamped upon the hill above the town,
now called Blackhealth: Duringe this time, they pierced this whole Canterbury,
and brought from thence to their ships, Aelphey, ye Archbishop: Alphey, the
Archbishop was cruelly slain.
And here, a Dane (called Thrum) whom the Archbishop had confirmed in
Christianity the day before, struck him on the head behind, and slew him,
because he would not condescend to redeem his life with three thousand
pounds, which the people of the City Diocese were contented to have given
for his ransom: Neither would the rest of the Soldiers suffer his body to
be committed to the earth, A popish mind.
after the manner of Christian decency, till such time (says William of
Malmsb.) as they perceived that a dead stick, being anointed with his blood,
waxed green again, and began the next day to blossom.

But referring the credit of that, and such other unfruitful miracles
(wherewith our ancient monkish stoaries do swarm) to the judgment of the
godly and discreet Readers, most assured it is, that about the same time,
such was the storm and fury of the Danish insatiable rauine, waste, spoil,
and oppression, 32. Shyres in England.
with in this Realm besides, that of two and thirty Shyres (into which number
the whole was then divided) they herried and ransacked sixteen, so that the
people being miserably vexed, the King himself (to avoid the rage) first
sent over the Seas his wife and children: afterward Normandy himself also.

They received (besides daily victual) forty eight thousand pounds in
ready coin, Great su^m^ of money paid to the Danes.
of the subjects of this Realm, whilst their King Swein lived: and twenty
one thousand after his death under his son Canutus: upon the payment whereof,
they made a corporal oath, to serve the King (as his feodaries) against al
strangers, and to live as friends and allies without endamaging his subjects.
But how little they performed Canutus their own countrieman to the honor of
the Crown, were sufficient witnesses.

In memory of this Camp, certain places within this parish, are at this day
called Combs, namely Estcombe, Westcombe, and Midlecombe almost forgotten:
For Comb and Compe in Saxon (being somewhat declined from Campus in Latin)
signifies a field or Camp, for an Army to soiourne in.

And in memory of this Archbishop Aelpheg, the parish Church at Greenewiche
(being at the first, dedicated to his honor) remains known by his name even
till this present day. Thus much of the antiquity of the place: concerning the
latter history, I read, that it was soon after the conquest, parcel of the
possessions of the Bishop of Lysieux in France, and that it bare service to
Odo, then Bishop of Baieux, and Earl of Kent: After that, the Manor belonged
to the Abbat of Gaunt in Flaunders, till such time as King Henry the fifth,
seizing into his hands (by occasion of war) the lands of the Priors Aliens,
bestowed Lewsham, and many other lands also, The Priorie of Shene.
upon the Priorie of the Chartrehouse Monks of Shene, which he had then newly
erected: to this it remained, until the time of the reign of King Henry the
eight, who annexed it to the Crown, whereunto it now presently belongs.

The Obseruant Friars, yt sometime lived at Greenewiche (as John Rosse writes)
came thither about the latter end of ye reign of king Edward ye fourth, The
frierie.
at whose Chauntrie with a little Chapel Lilley says) King Henry the seventh
builded for them that house adjoining to ye Palaice, which is there yet to be
seen. But now least I may seem to have said much, of small matters: and to
have forgotten the principal ornament of the town: I must (before I end with
Greenewiche) say somewhat of the Princes Palaice there.

Humfrey therefore (the Duke of Gloucester, and Protector of the Realm, The
Palaice
a man no less renowned for approved virtue, and wisdom: then honored for
his high estate and parentage) was the first that laid the foundations of the
fair building in the town, and tower in the Park, and called it, his Manor
of pleasance: After him King Edward the fourth bestowed some cost to enlarge
the work: Henry the seuenthe followed, and beautified the house with the
addition of the brick front, toward the water side: but King Henry the eight,
as he exceeded all his progenitors in setting up of sumptuous housinge, so he
spared no cost in garnishing Greenewiche, til he had made it a pleasant,
perfect, and Princely Palaice. Marie his eldest daughter Queen Elizabeth his
other daughter, our most gracious and gladsom Governor, was likewise borne in
this house: And his dear son King Edward (a miracle of Princely towardness)
ended his life in the same house.

One accident more touching this house, and then an end: It hapened in the
reign of Queen Marie, that the Master of a Ship, passing by, whilst the
court lay there, and meaning (as the manner aad duty is) with sail and shot
to honor the Princes presence, unadvisedly gave fire to a piece, charged with
a pellet in sted of a tampion, the which lighting on the Palaice wallranne
through one of the privy lodginges, and did no further harm.

Blackheathe.
ADioyninge to Greenewiche, lyethe the plain, called (of the color of the
soil) Blackheathe, the which, besides the burden of the Danishe Camps
(whereof we spoke even now) has borne three several rebellious assemblies: The
rebellion of Jack Straw.
One in the time of King Richard the second, moved (as it shall appear anon in
Dartford) by Jack Straw, whom William Walworth, London, slow with his Dagger,
in Smithfielde: in memory whereof, the City had given them (for increase of
honor) a Dagger, to be borne in their shield of arms. The rebellion of Jack
Cade.


Jack Cade (that counterfeit Mortimer) and his fellows, were leaders of the
second: who passing from hence to London, did to death the Lord Say, and others
in the time of King Henry the Sixth.

These two (besides other harms, that usually accompany the mutinic and
uproar, of the common and rascal sort) defaced foully the Records and monuments
both of the law, and Armourie: The parts of Rolls remaining yet half brent,
do witness the one: And the Heraldes vnskill, (coming through the want of
their old Books) is sufficient testimony of the other.

The third insurrection was assembled by Michael Joseph (the black Smith) and
the Lord Audley, The rebellion of the black smith
under the reign of King Henry the Seventh: at which time they and their
accomplices, received their just deserte, the common number of them being slain
and discomfited, and the leaders themselves taken, drawn and hanged.

Of this last, there remains yet to be seen upon the Heathe, the places of
the Smithes Tente, called commonly his forge: And of all three, the grave
hills of such as were buried after the overthrow: These hillockes in the
West Country (where is no small store of the like) are called Barowes, of the
old English word BurgHer; which signifies Sepulchers, or places of burying,
which word, (being a spring of that old stock) we do yet retain alive.

The first and last of these commotions, were stirred of a grief that the
common people conceived, for the demand of two subsidies, of which the one
was unreasonable, because it was taxed upon the Polls, and exempted none, were
he never so poor: The other was unseasonable, for that it was exacted, when
the heads of the common people were full of Parkin Warber.

The third and midlemoste, grew upon a grudge, that the people took, for
yielding up the Duchy of Ang^ow, and Maynie, to the King of Sicil: The coming
in of whose daughter (after that the King would needs have her to wife,
notwithstanding his precontract made with the Earl of Armenac) was not so
joyfully embraced by the Citizens of London upon Blackheathe, wearing their red
Hoodes, Badges, and blewe gowns: as in sequel, the Marriage, and whole
government it self, was known to be detested of the country Commons, by
bearing in the same place, Harness, Bows, Bills, and other Weapon: But
because I cannot (without pain and pity) enter into the consideration of
these times, and matters, I will discourse no farther thereof, but cross over
the next way to Lesnes, and prosequute the rest of the bounds of this
Bishopric.

Lesnes, mistaken, as I think for Leses (Leswes) which signifiethe, Pastures.
I Could easily have believed, that the name Lesnes, had been derived out of
the French, and that it had been first imposed at the foundation of the Abbay,
saying that I find the place registered in the Book of Domesday, by the very
same, and none other calling. And therefore I am the rather led to think that
the name is Saxon, and there miswritten, (as many other be, by reason that the
Normans were the penners of that book) Lesnes, for Leswes, the word which (in
the Saxon tongue) signifies Pastures, and is not as yet utterly forgotten,
forasmuch as till this day Pastures be called Lesewes in many places: This is
my fantasy touching the name, wherein if I fail, it forces not greatly,
since the matter is no more weighty: Concerning the History of the place,
only I find, Richard Lucy a privy Counselour of the State, and chief Justice
of the Realm, in the time of King Henry the second, Lord Richard Lucy.
founded an Abbay there: the temporalties whereof amounted (as I find) to seven
pounds six Shillings and eight pence: But as for the extent of the whole
yearly value, I have not learned it.

Earethe, in some old evidences, Eard, derived (as I guess) of Aerre Hythe,
that is the old Haven.
FOr plain example, that our Elders before the conquest, The ancient manner,
of the trial of right to Lands.
had their trialles for title of land, and other controversies, in each shire,
before a Judge, then called Alderman, or Shyreman, of whom there is very
frequent mention in the Laws of our ancestors the Saxons, the which some
years since were collected and published in one volume: and for assured proof
also, that in those days they used to proceed in such causes, by the oaths
of many persons (testifying their opinion of his credit, that was the first
swearer, or party) after the manner of our daily experience, as in the oath
yet in ure, and called commonly Wager of Law, is to be seen: I have made
choice of one History, containing briefly the narration of a thing done at
this place, by Dunstanc, the Archbishop of Canterbury, almost a hundredth years
before the coming of King William the Conqueror.

A rich man (says the text of Rochester) being owner of Cray, Earithe,
Ainesford, and Woldham, and having Dunstane, and others) to a kinswoman of his
own, for life, the Remainder of the one half thereof, after her death, to
Christ's Church at Canterbury, and of the other half to Saint Androwes of
Rochester, for ever: he died, and his wife took one Leofsun to husband, (who
ouerliuing her) retained the Land, as his own, notwithstanding that by the
form of the devise, his interest was determined, by the death of his wife:
Hereupon complaint came to one Wulsie, for that time the Scyreman (or Judge of
the County, (as the same book interprets it) before whom, both Dunstane
the Archbishop, the parties them selves, sundry other Bishops, and a great
multitude of the Lay people, appeared, all by appointment at Eareth: and there
in the presence of their whole assembly, Dunstane (taking a cross in his hand)
made a corporal oath upon the book of the Ecclesiastical laws, unto the
Shyreman, Wager of Law.
(which then took it to the Kings use, because Leofsun himself refused to
receive it) and affirmed that the right of these lands, was to Christ's
Church, and to Saint Androwes.

For ratification and credit of which his oath, a thousand other persons
(chosen out of East, and West Kent, Eastsex, Midlesex, and Sussex) took their
oaths also, upon the Cross, after him. And thus, by this manner of judgment,
Christ's Church, and Saint Androwes were brought into possession, and Leofsun
utterly rejected for ever. The town of Eareth, is an ancient corporatio^, but
whether it has been at any time, of greater account, I find not: and
therefore, having already declared in manner, whatsoever it has note worthy,
I will set down Henry the sixth, there were taken at this Town, four very
great and rare fishes, of which one was then named to be Mors Marina, another
a sword fish, and the rest were supposed to be Whales.

Crayforde, in Saxon Creccanford, that is, the Ford, or passage over the water
Crecca, now called Cray.
AFter the death of Horsa, Hengist. and Horsa.
(of whom we have spoken in Ailesford before) The Saxons made his brother
Hengist their only King and leader. And he, minding forthwith to show
himself worthy of his newely attained Honor, and willing to supply in
himself the defect of his deceased Brother, pursued the Britons fiercely, and
gave them sundry great encounters: in diverse of which, although he sped
doubtfully, yet at the last meeting with them at Crayford, he slew four of
their chief capitaines, and Britons quite abandoned this Country, and with
great fear fled to London before him. After this fight, the Britons not only
never invaded Hengist (as Ralfe Higden writes) but fled him like fire, The
beginning of the Kentishe Kingdom.
as the Saxon History reports: so that even then, and not before, it might
truly be said, that he had gained the possession of the Kentish Kingdom. The
place is named of the water Cray, which beginning at Orpington (untruly so
termed for Dorpendun, which signifies the head, Orpenton, and the course of
Cray water.
or spring of the Hille water) runs by Saint Marie Cray, Poules Cray,
Fotescray, and Crayford (to all which it likewise gives name) and comes at
length to Dartford, where it mingleth with the River Darent, and so opens
into the Thamise.

Dartforde, in Saxon, Derentford; in latin, Derenti vadu^tit signifies, the
ford, or passage over the River Derent.
Mesopotamia signifies a country encompassed with rivers
NOw be we returned into Mesopotamia, for so me thinks that this country,
lying between the Rivers of Darent and Medwey may well be termed. And here you
must call to mind that, which you heard in Rochester before: namely, that
King John wan the Castle of Rochester from William Dalbyney, through the faint
heart and cowardice of Robert Fitzwalter, whom the Nobility had sent of
purpose, to rescue it: and now (the place so requiring) you shall understand the
whole manner of the thing, and how it happened.

Rochester castle beseiged
The Noble men, that maintained the war against King John, understanding that
he laid siege to the Castle at Rochester, and fearing that William Dalbiney
(or Dalbinet) the Captain thereof, could not long defend it without supply
of such things as he wanted, and they could not well minister: determined to
give some adventure to raise the siege. And for that Robert Fitzwalter general
of a great army: This man, when he came to Dartford, met with a Gentleman
of the order of the Temple, of who^ he demanded sundry questions, for
intelligence of the number of the Kings camp: Who (finding him to be afraid)
told him (of set purpose) that the Kings army was much greater then his,
whereas in deed his power was thrice so big as the Kings: Here upon Robert,
(being with this false terror stricken into an exceeding great fear, whose
companion is flight, as Homer well says,) without further inquisition, sought
to save him self by the swiftnes of his feet, and so through fainte heart
left Rochester to the uttermost adventure.

If King John had followed, I think it would have become of him, as it
sometime chanced of a certain white liuered man: who, hearing great praise of
Hercules strength, forthwith conveyed himself into a cave, and when he had
spied him (by chance) passing that way, he died out of hand for extreme
fear. I read, Henry the third, Frederic the Emperor, sent hither the
Archbishop of Colein, Princes, may woo by picture and marye by proctor.
accompanied with sundry Noble personages, to demand Isabell the Kings
sister to be given him in marriage: the which (for as much as the Ambassadors
liked the young Lady well) was (after such a solemnization, as in absence may
be performed) married unto him at this Town, and then delivered to the
Orators to be carried over. Whereby I make conjecture, that although there be
not in story, mention of any great building at Dartford, before the time of
the Abbay, which was raised long after this marriage, yet there was some fair
house of the Kings, or of some others, even at this time there: For otherwise I
know not how to make it a meet place, for so honorable an appointment. But
leaving all conjecture, The Abbay
certain it is, that afterward King Edward the third, founded there a fair
Monastery for women, which at the general dissolution, was found to be worth
three hundredth: and eighty pounds by year, and of which King Henry the
eight (not without great cost) made a fit house for himself and his
successors.

The same King Edward the third, The old manner of Tourneament.
at one time in his return from France, proclaimed a general Torneament, or
Iustes, to be holden at Dartford, which he and his Nobles performed most
honorably.

This manner of exercise, being then used, not at the Tilte (as I think) but
at Randon, and in the open field, was accounted so dangerous to the persons
having to do therein, that sundry Popes had forbidden it by decree, and the
Kings of this Realm (before King Stephan) would not suffer it, to be
freque^ted within their land: so that, such as for exercise of that feate in
arms, were desirous to prove themselves, were driven to pass over the Seas,
and to perform it in some indifferent place in a foreign Country: But
afterward, King Stephan in his time permitted it: and then after him King
Richard the first, not only allowed it, but also encouraged his Nobility to
use it: And so by little and little, the danger being sufficiently provided for,
and the men waxing expert, it grew in the time of the Kings that followed
(especially in the reign af this Edward the third) to a most pleasant,
usual, and familiar pastime.

But, to return to Dartford again: The first motive of the rebellious
assembly of the Common people of this Shyre, The occasion, of Jack Strawes his
rebellion.
that chanced in the time of King Richard the second (whereof you heard some
what in Blackheath before) was given at this Town, by occasion that a naughty
fellow (being appointed to leuye the groates, that were by Parleament taxed
upon every Polle) dishonestly entreated a young Damosel (Daughter to one John
Tyler) that dwelt in Dartford, which thing when the Father heard of, he fell at
words with the Officer, and from words to worse, so that in the end he slew
him: This done, the Common people of the Town, partly for grudge at the
imposition, partly for maintenance of the thing, which they thought well done:
and partly to eschew the punishment that by execution of Justice might fall
upon them, assembled their neighbors, and growing to some number, made this
Tyler their Captain, named him Jack Straw: and did further, as you in part
heard before, and may at more large read almost in every English Chronicle.

This Town (as Crayford before) has the name of the water running by,
commonly called Derent, The cour^^ of the river of Derent.
but corruptly, after the opinion of Lelande, who thinks the true name to be
Dorquent, which in British sounds the Clear water: It springs at Titsey
in the edge of Surrey, and takes in the way Westram, where John Frith was
borne, Otford, Ainsford, and Darent (whereto it leaves the name) and coming to
this Town, carries Craye with it into the Thamise.

Grauesende, in Saxon, Gerefesend: in Latin, Limes Praetorius.
THe original cause of the name of this place, lies hid in the usual name
of the officer, lately created in the Town: He is commonly called Portreue,
but the word (aunciently and truly sounded) is Portgereue, The name of
Portreue whereof it comes.
that is to say, the Ruler of ye Town. For Port (descending of the Latin
word Portus) signifies a Port Town, and Gereue (being derived of the Saxon
verb gereccan to rule) was first called gerecfa, and then gerefa, and
betokens a Ruler: So that, Portreue, is the Ruler of the Town, and
Greuesend, is as much to say, as the Limit, Bound, or Precinct of such a Rule
or Office.

Of the very same reason, they of the low and high Germany (whence our
language first descended) call one ruler, Burgreue, another Margreue, and the
third Landsgreue: The name of Sheriff.
And of the same cause also, our Magistrate now called a Sherif, or (to speak
more truly, Shyrereue) was at the first called (Shyre gereue) that is to say,
Custos Comitatus, the Reave, or Ruler of the Shyre. The head officer of
Maydston, long since had this name: yea the chief governor of the city of
London likewise, before the time, either of Mayor, or Baylife there, was known
by the name of Portreue, as in the Saxon Chartre of King William the
Conqueroure (sundry examples whereof be yet extant) may appear. London had a
Portreue.
It began thus, pilliam cyng greit illiam bisceop. and godfreges portgerefan.
and ealle tha burHaren the on lunden beon; William the King, greeteth William
the Bishop, and Godfrey the Portreue, and all the Citizens that in London be.
etc.

To make short, in ancient time, almost every Manor had his Reave, The office
of a Reave.
whose authority was, not only to levy the Lords rents, to set to work his
servant, and to husband his Demeasnes to his best profit and commodity: but
also to govern his tenants in peace, and to lead them forth to war, when
necessity so required. And although this name, and so much of the authority
as remained, was (after the coming in of the Normanes) transferred to another,
which they called Baylife: yet in sundry places of the Realm (especially in
Copiholde Manors, where old custom prevails) the word, Reave, is yet well
inoughe known and understood: Neither ought it to seem any what the more
strange, because I call now Reave, that which in old time was Gereue, for as
much as this particle (Ge) was in process of time, in some places changed in
sound to (y) and in some other parts clean lost and forgotten: As for
example, whereas the Saxons used to say, he was Geboren, they of the West
country pronounce it, he was yborne, and we of the countries nearer London, he
was borne.

Thus far the Etymon of the name (Greues end) has carried me out of the
History, whereto I did the rather yealde, because I had not much to write
concerning the place it self. Howbeit I read, that in the beginning of the
reign of King Richard the second, Neuel was by the Kings appointment, entered
into France, with a great company of English soldiers, the Frenchmen entered
the Thamise with their Galleys, and brent diverse towns, and at the last,
(coming to Grauesend) spoiled and set it on fire also: The fear of the like
harm to follow, caused the noble King Henry the eight, to build a platform
at the same town, and three or four others, in places adjoining, even at
such time as he fortified along all the coasts of the Realm, upon such cause
as we have already opened.

Cliffe at Hoo, written commonly in ancient Books, Cloueshoo, for CliofesHoo,
which is as much to say, as Clifs hoo, or Cliffe at Hoo.
THeodore the seventh Archebisshop of Canterbury, and the first (in the
opinion of William Malmsb) that exercised the authority of an Archbishop, which
appeared (as others say) in that he took upon him to depose Wilfrid of York,
called together a Synod of bishops at Hereford: in which it was agreed amongst
them, that for the more speedy reformation of abuses that might creep into
the Church, they should all assemble once every year at Cloueshoo upon the
Kalends (or first day) of August: By virtue of which decree, Cuthbert, ye
eleventh Archbishop, somoned the bishops of his Province to ye same place, and
there (amongst other things worthy note) it was enacted, that priests
themselves should first learn, and then teach their parishoners, the Lords
prayer, and the Articles of their belief in the English tongue: A learned age
in which priests had more latin the^ english, and yet almost no latin at all.
To which decree, if you list to add ye testimony of King Alfred, who in his
preface upon the Pastoral of Gregory, that he translated, says, yt when he
came first to his kingdom, he knew not one priest on the South side of the
river of Humber, that understood his service in Latin or could translate an
Epistle into English. And if you Alfric writes in his Proeme to the Grammar,
that is to say, that a little before ye time of Dunstane ye Archbishop, there
was never an english priest ye could other endite, or understand a latin
epistle, Then I doubt not but you shall evidently see, how easy it was for
the Devil and the Pope to creep into the Church of England, when (whole
ages together) the Clergy was so well fed, and so evil taught. But to our
matter again. By virtue of the same decree and ordinance also, two other
Councelles were holden at Cliffe at Hoo: one under Kenulph, the King of Mercia,
or middle England, and the other in the reign of Beornwulfe England, both
because it seems Mercia, which I fear not to call middle England. But, for
as much as I once read a note, made by one Talbot (a Prebendarie of Norwiche,
and a diligent trauayler in the English history) upon the margin of an
ancient written copy of William Malmsburies book De Pontificibus, in which
he expounded Clouesho, to be Cliffe at Hoo near Rochester: and for that I do
not find the express name (Cloueshoo) in all the catalogue of that precinct
which was sometime the kingdom of Mercia (although there be diverse places
therein that bear the name of Cliffe, as well as this) I am contented to
subscribe to Talbots opinion: but with this protestation, that if at any time
hereafter I find a better, I will be no longer bound to follow him.

And thus have I now visited the places of chief note that lie in the skirtes
of the Diocese, whereunto if I had added a few other that be within the body of
the same, The order of this description.
I would no less gladly, then I must necessarily, finishe and close up this
winters travail.

Swanscombe, called in Saxon, Spegenscomb, that is, the camp of Sweyn, the
Dane, that encamped at Grenehithe hard by.
AS the whole Shyre of Kent owes to Swanscomb everlasting name, for the
fruition of her ancient franchises obtained there: So I for the more
honorable memory of the place, can gladly afoord it room, both at the
beginning, and toward the end of my labor.

The matter for the which it is especially renowned, is already bewrayed in
the discourse of the ancient estate of this Shyre, whereunto I will refer
you: And at this time, make note of a thing, or twain besides, and so pass
over to the residue.

The Manor The Manor.
of Swanscombe, is holden of Rochester Castle, and owes service toward the
defense of the same, being (as it were) one of the principal Captains to
whom that charge was of ancient time committed, and having subject unto it,
sundry Knights fees, as petie Captains, or inferior soldiers, bound to
serve under her banner there.

The church of S. Hildeferthe.
The Church at Swanscombe, was much haunted in times past, for Saint
Hildeferthes help (a Bishop, by conjecture of his picture yet standing in the
upper window of the Southe I Will, although his name is not read in all the
Catalogue of the Sarons) to whom such as were distracted, ran for
restitution of their wits, as thick as men were wont to sail to Anticyra, for
Hell^borus.

This cure was performed, by warmth, close keepeing, and good diet: means not
only not strange, or miraculous, but mere natural, ordinary, and
reasonable. And therefore, as one the one side, they might truly be thought mad
men, and altered in their wits, that frequented this pilgrimage, for any
opinion of extraordinary woorking: So on the other side, S. Hildeferth (of all
the Saints that I know) might best be spared, seeing we have ye keeper of
Bethleem, who cease not (even till this day) to work mightily in the same
kind of Miracle.

Mepham, aunciently written MeapaHam.
SImon Mepham (the Archbishop that performed the solemnities at the
inauguration of King Edward the third) had both his name and nativity of this
town, although Polydore Virgil, has no mention of the man at all, in his
history, or catalogue of Archebishops, either not finding, or forgetting, that
ever there was any such. It is probable also, that the same Bishop built the
church at Mepham, for the use of the poor, which William Courtney (one of his
Successors) repaired four score years after, and annexed thereunto four new
houses for the same end and purpose.

Besides these notes, it has chanced me to see an antiquity of Mepham, The
ancient form of a Testament.
which both for the profit and pleasure that I conceived thereof, I think
meet to insert, though happily some other man may say, that I do therein,
and in many others also, nothing else but Antiquiora Diphtera loqui:
Nevertheless, to the end that it may appear, what the ancient form and
phrase of a Testament was, how the Husband and the wife joined in making their
Testamentes, how lands were deuisable by testament in old time, by what
words estates of inheritance were wont to be created, how the Lords consent
was thought requisite to the testament of the tenant, and how it was procured
by a gift of Heriot (which as Bracton says, was done at the first, Magis de
gratia, quam de iure) Furthermore, that you may see how this Town of Mepham,
and sundry others came at the first to Christ's church, Saint Augustines, and
Rochester: and finally, that you may know, as well what advancement to Gentry
was then in use, as also what weapons, jewels, and ornaments were at that time
worn and occupied, I will set before your eye, the last will and testament of
one Byrhtric and his wife, which was a man of great wealth and possessions
within this Shire, and had his abideing at Mepham more then six hundredth
years ago.

THis This is is ByrHtrices Birtricks and and Aelfsythe Elfswithes His his ifes
wives niHsta last cide. the Hi caedon on MeapaHam. on Heora maga testament,
declaration, which they declared at Mepham, in their kinsfolks geitnesse;
hearing: witness: that aes ulfstan Vcca. that was, Wulstan Vcca, and and
ulfsie Wulfsie His his brothor. brother, and and sired Syred Aelfrides Elfrides
suna. son, and and ulfsie Wulfsie se the blaca. black, and and ine wine
preost. the priest, and and Aelfgar Elsgar on of MeapaHam. Mepham. and and
ulfeH Wulfey ordeges Ordeys suna. son, and and AelfeH Elfey His his brothor.
brother, and and byrHtara Birtwar Aelfrices laf. Elfrices widow, and and
bryHtric Britric Hise maeg. and her cousine, and Aelfstan bisceop. Elfstane the
Bishop.

Aerest His cyne Hlaford aenne First to his natural Lord, beaH on
HundeaHtotigan one bracelet of four score mancysen Marks of goldes. gold,
and and ane one Handsecs hatchet dagger handknife of on as eal sa miclan.
much: and and feoer Horse. and four horses, ta geraedede. two of them
trapped: and and ta two srd swords gefetelsode. trimmed, and and tegen two
Hafocas. hawks, and and ealle all His his Heador Hundas; hounds. hedgehoundes
And thaere And to the Lords wife Hlaefdian Lady aenne one beaH bracelet on of
thrittigan thirty mancusan marks of goldes. gold: and and aenne one stedan.
horse stead palfrey to to forespraece entreat that se cyde standan most. that
this testament stand may. And And for for His his sale. soul, and and His
his yldrena. elders ancestors into Sct. Andree. to Saint Androes Rochester ta
two sulung plowland aet at denetune; Dentun. And Hio for Hire sale. and Hyre
yldrena. And they both for their souls and their elders, ta aet langafelda;
two at Longfield. ploughlande And And thider in for Hy thrittig to the thither
same place, for them thirty mancys goldes. marks of gold, and and aenne one
seor collar neckbracelet beaH on of feoertig forty mancysan. marks, and and
a ane cuppan Cup seolfrene. of silver, and and Healfne a half head band
covered with gold baend gyldenne; bend gilden. And And caelce every gear
year to at Heora their gemynde. mind years mind tegra two daga feorme days
ferme from rent corn and victual of of HaeslHolte. Haselholte: and and tegra
of othringaberan. and ij. of baerlingan, two days of from Watringbery: and two
days out of Berling, and ij. of HaeringeardesHam; and two days out of
Hertesham. And to cristes circan And to Christ's church lx. 60. mancys goldes.
marks of gold, xxx. tham biscope. thirty to the Bishop Archbishop and and
xxx. tham Hirode; thirty to the Covent: And And aenne a seor neck beaH
bracelet collar on of lxxx. 80. mancys. marks: and and ta two cuppan cups
seolfrene. of silver, and and thaet the land aet land at MeapaHam. Mepham, And
And to to Sct. Saint Augustine. Augustine xxx. 30. mancys marks goldes. of
gold, and and ij. two cuppan cups seolfrene. of silver, and and Healfne
half a baend bend gyldene; gilt, And And thaet the land land aet at derentan
Darnt byrHara to Byrware His for daeg; his life days: And And aefter after
Hire his daege days into to Sct. Saint Andree. Androes, for for unc. us, and
and uncre our yldran; elders auncetors And And barl^ngas Berling to ulfeHe
Wulfee, and and He he selle.x. shall give a Hund peninga thousand pence into
Sct. to Saint Andree Androes for for unc. us, and and uncre our yldran;
elders. And And ulfsie to Wulfsie othringabiras. Wateringbyrye, innon within
that that gecynde; kindred. And And syrede HeselHolt innon that gecende; to
Syred Haselholt, within that And ulfege. and Aelfege And to Wulfei, and Elfey
His his brether brother HerigeardesHam Hartesham, innon within that that
gecynde. kindred, to to ulfege Wulfee that the inland. inland, demeanes and and
Aelfege to Elfey that utland; the outland. tenancie And And ulfstane to
Wulfstane uccan. Vcca. olcnestede Walkenstede, innon within that that gecynd;
kindred: And And an a Hanthsecs hatchet dagger on of thrym three pundan; pounds.
And tha tyn Hyda on Straettune And those ten plowlands at Streiton into to
thaem the mynstre mynster church to at olcnestede. Walkenstede. And that land
aet fealcanHam And the land at Falcham, aftre after byrHara Byrwares daege,
days, into to Sct. Saint Angree. Androes, for for Aelfric Elfrices Hire soul
Hlaford. their Lord, and His yldran. and his auncetors, sa even Heora as their
cide will aes; was. And And bromleaH Brumley aeftre after briHtara Britwares
daege into days to life Sct. Saint Andree. Androes, sa as Aelfric Elfric Hyre
their Hlaford Lord it Hit becaeth. bequeathed, for for Hine him and and His
yldran; his elders. auncetors And And Snodingeland Snodland eac also into to S.
Andree aeftre Hire daege. sa Aelfere Hit becaeth Saint Androes, after their
days, even as Elfere it bequethed, Aelfrices faeder. and He seothan on
geitnesse Eadgife being Elfrices father, and he afterward in the witness
hearing presence of Edgiue thaere the Hlaefdian. Lady, and and Odan of Odo
Aercebisceopes. the Archbishop, and and Aelfeges of Elfey Aelfstanes Elfstanes
sunu. son, and and Aelfrices of Elfric His his brothor brother, and and
Aelfnothes pilian. of Elfnothe pilia, and godines aet faecHam. and of Godwine
of Facham, and and of Eadrices Eadric aet of Ho. Hoo, and and Aelfsies of
Elfsie the preostes priest on of Crogdaene; Croyden. And And ulfstane to
Wulfstane lx. 60. mancas marks goldes of gold to to daelanne deal for for unc
us and and uncre our yldran. and elders: and other other sile such, 60. m^rkes
ulfsige to Wulfsie to to daelanne; deal, between God and them be it and and
Haebban have Heom they ith with god God gemaene. together, gif if Hy they Hit
it ne do don; not. And And ulfsige tydices eg. to Wulfsie, Titaesey, and and
tham boc. the writing innon within that that gecynde. kindred: and ij. spuran
on iij punda^; And ic bid and two spurs of three pound. And I pray for for
gods Gods lufan love, minne my dear leofan leefe Hlaford. that He ne Lord,
that he do not thafige suffer that aenig man uncerne cide aende; that any man
our testament do break, turn aside And And ic I bid pray ealle all gods
Gods freond. friends that Hi Hrto filstan; that they thereto help Haebbe ith
god gaemaene e Hit brece. and god Have they it with God together, Between them
and God be it that it do break, and God sy Him symle mild the Hit Healdan be
to them always mylde, merciful that it hold keep ille; will.

It shall suffice, for the most part of the matters (worthy observation) in
this Testament, The ancient estate of a Gentleman, and by what means gentle
was obtained in the old time.
that I have already poynted at them with the finger (as it were) for that they
appear, and show themselves manifestly at the first sight: Only therefore,
touching the estate and degree of this Testator, I will (for the more light,
and discovery thereof) borrow a few words of you. He himself here calls
Aelfric, his Lord, and natural Lord, and says further, that Aelfere was
Father to this Aelfric: Now, what Aelfere and Aelfric were, it is not hard to
find: for all our ancient Hystorians tell us, that in the days of King
Edgar, of King Edward the Martyr, and of King Ethelred, these men were by
birth, cousines of the blood royal: by state (Eorles) which word we yet
retain in English, and which we commonly call (Comites) in Latin, for that at
the first they were parteners and companions (as I may say) with the King, in
taking the profits of the Shyre, or County: that they were also by dignity
(Ealdormen) that is, Senators, and Governors of all Mercia, or middle England:
And finally that they were of such great power and credit, that Alfer the
Father, immediately after the death of King Edgar, restored al such priests
thorowout middle England, to their houses, as the King (by advice of Dunstane
the Monk) had in his life expulsed, for the placeing of his Monks: And that
Aelfric the son, resisted king Ethelred in that siege of Rochester, whereof
you heard when we were there, For as much therefore, as Aelfric was Hlaford, or
Lord, to our Testator, and that Hlaford and THegn, that is to say, Lord and
Seruiteur, be words of relation, I gather that he was THegn, which signifies
properly a Minister, or free Seruiteur, to the King, or some great personage:
but usually at those times taken for the very same, that we call now of the
Latin word (Gentilis) a Gentleman, that is ((...)) a man well borne, or of a
good stock and family.

Neither does it detract any thing from his Gentry at al, that I said he was a
Minister, or Seruiteur: For I mean not thereby, that he was (Seruus) which
word (straightly construed) does signify a servant, or slave, whom they in
those days called theoe: but my mind is, that he was a seruitour of free
condition, either advanced by his own virtue and merit, or else descended of
such Ancestors, as were never degraded: And that name, the Prince of Wales,
or eldest Son of our King of this Realm, does not, in the life of his
Father, disdain to bear: For, out of the very same olde-woord (THenian) to
serve, is framed his Poesy, or word upon his arms (ic Dien) I serve. And thus
I suppose that it is manifest, that Byrthryc our Testator was by condition a
Noble man, or (which in common acceptance abroad is all one with it) a
Gentleman. Howbeit, to the end, that both this thing may have the more
authority and credit, and that it may withal appear, what degrees of
Nobility and Gentry there were in this Realm before the coming in of the
Normanes, and by what merits men might ascend, and be promoted to the same, I
will reach a little higher, and show you another English (or Saxon)
antiquity, which I have seen placed, in diverse old copies of the Saxon
laws, after the end of all, as a note or advertisement.

Hit es Hilum on Englalagum that leod and lagum It was sometime in the English
laws, that the people and for begethincthum; And tha aeron leod itan
eorthscipes the laws were in reputation: And then were the wisest of the
yrtha. aelc be Hismaethe. Eorl and ceorl people woorship woorshipfull worthy,
every one after his degree: Earl, and Ceorl. THegn and THeoden; And gif Ceorl
getheaH. that churl, Thein, and under Thein. and if a churl thriued so that
He Hefde he had fullice fully fif Hida agenes land. Cirican. five hides of his
own land, a Church, and cycenan. belHus. and burHgeat. setl. and sundernote
and a kitchen, a belhouse, and a gate, a seat, and a several office on Cynges
in the kings Healle. halle, thonne then aes was He he thanonforth THegenrigHtes
thencefoorth the Theins eorthe; And gif THegn getheaH. that He thenode right
worth. worthy And if a Thein did so thrive, that he served the Cynge. king,
and His radstefne and on his message journey progress rad on His Hirede. ryd
in his household, gif se If he thonne Hefde THaegen the Him filigde. the to then
had a Thein that followed him, served him, the which to the toward Cynges kings
utfare journey expedition fif Hida Hafde. five hydes had, plowlandes and on
Cynges and in the kings setl His Hlaford seat his palaice thenode. Lord.
served, and and thria thrice mid with His aerend his errand message gefo ra had
gone to to Cynge. Se most siththan mid His forathe His Hlaford the king, He
might Such an one afterward with his foreothe his Lords aspelian. aet
mislican neodan; part play at any great need. And gif THegn getheaH. And if a
Thein did th^ue so, that He earde to Eorle. that he became an Earl, thonne aes
He sithth an EorlriHtes then was he afterward an Earls worthy eorthe; right
worthy. the rightes of an Earl. And gif Massere getheaH. that he ferde And if
a Merchant so thriued that he passed thrige ofer id Sae. be His thrice over the
wide broad Seas, of his agenum own craefte. craft, science cunning se aes he
was thonne syththan thencefoorth THegn riHtes a Theins right eorthe; worthy.
And And gif if leornere getheaH. thurH lare. that He Had Haefde. and a Scholar
so prospered thriued through learning, that he degree had, and thenode served
xpe. se aes thonne siththan maethe and munde Christ, he was then afterward of
dignity and peace privilege sa so micelre much yrthe. sa thaerto gebyrede.
worthy, as thereunto belonged: buton unless He he fororHte. forfaited so,
trespassed that He thaes Had note notian ne most; that he the use of his
degree use ne might might not use

By this you see, first, that in those days there were but three estales of
free men (for bondseruants, The degres of Freemen Earl, Thein and Churl
which we now sense call by a strained word (Villains) are not here talked
of, that is to say, an Earl, or Noble man, the highest: a Theyn, or Gentleman,
the midlemost: And a Churl, or Yeoman, the lowest: for as touching that which
is here spoken of the servant of the Theyn, or Gentleman, I deem it rather
meant for a prerogative belonging to the master, then mentioned as a several
degree in the man. Neither does it make against me in this division, that you
shall many times read, of Ealdorman, Scyrma^, Heretoga, Sethcundma^, Alderman,
Shirema^ etc were names of offices.
telfHyndman, tyHindeman: for these be not names of difference in degrees, but
do either denote the offices and dignities, or else the estimation and values
of those to whom they be attributed: as Alderman and Shyreman, do signify
that Earl or Noble man, to whom the government and charge of a Shyre, or other
Precinct, was committed: Hertoga, that Earl or great man, that was (Imperator
Belli) the Lieutenant of the field: Sythcundman, that Gentleman, that had the
manred (as some yet call it) or the office to lead the men of a Town, or
Parish: And as for telfHindman, it was given to the Theyn, or Gentleman,
because his life was valued at Twelve hundredth shillinges (as in those days
the lives of all sorts of men were rated at certain sums of money) And
tyHindman, to the Churl or Yeoman, because the price of his head was taxed at
two hundredth shillings: which thing (if it were not expressly set forth in
sundry old laws yet extant) might well enough be found in the Etymology of
the words themselves, the one called a Twelfhynd, as it were, a Twelfe hundred
man, and the other a Twyhind, for a man of Two hundredth.

Furthermore, you may here behold, with what discretion and equity, our
elders proceeded in bestowing these promotions: for where as all Nobility and
Gentry, comes either by Descent, or by Purchase, whereof the first, if it be
not accompanied with virtue, is but an empty sign, and none other thing, then
(as one well said) Nobilitatem in Astragulis gestare.

But the latter (being both the maker and maintener of the first) as it ought
by all reason to be rewarded with due enseignes of honor, to the end that
virtue may be the more desirously embraced: So have they here appointed three
several pathe ways to lead men straight unto it, that is to say, Service,
Riches, and Learning, or (to speak more shortly) Virtue and Riches, in which
two (as Aristotle confesses) all the old Nobility consisted, Wisdom is more
profitable, when it is joined with riches.
and which two as ye Ecclesiast. or Preacher teaches) make a good
accomplement, for (says he) Vtilior est sapientia, cum diuitijs coniuncta. And
in this part, you may lastly perceive also, that out of all those trades of
life, which be ((...)) that is to say, conversant in gain, they admitted to
the estate of Gentry such only, as increased by honest Husbandry, and
plentiful Merchandise: Of the first of which Cicero affirms, that there is
nothing meeter for a Freeborne man: Merchandise, and Husbandry
And of the other, that it is praise worthy also, if at the length being
satisfied with gain, as it has often come from the Sea to the Haven, So it
change from the Haven into lands and possessions. And therefore (in my
fantasy) where as Geruas. Tilber. (in his observations of the Eschequer)
accompteth it an abasing for a Gentleman to occupy Publicum mercimonium,
common buying and selling, it ought to be referred to the other two parts of
Merchandise, that is, to Negotiatio^, which is retayling, or keeping of a
standing shop, and to Inuection (which is to exercise Mercerye, or (as some call
it) to play ye Chapman: and not to Navigations, which (as you see) is the only
laudable part of all buying and sellinge. And again, whereas in our law it is
reputed a Disparagement for a ward in Chivalry (which in old time was as much
to say as a Gentleman) to be married to the daughter of one that dwelt in a
Borowe, I think that it also ought to be restrained to such only as
professed handicrafts, or those baser Arts of buying and selling, to get their
living by. But of all this matter, my Masters the Heraldes can better infourme
you, to whom (least I be blamed for thrusting my Sicle into an other man's
Harvest) I will without any more, refer you. Tunbridge, Wrotham, this town,
and Northfleete, do lie North and Southe one from another: and it is a
commune and received opinion amongst the Country people, that you may be
conveyed from the Thamise side, to the edge of Sussex in these four Parishes:
So that the whole Shyre by that reckoning, should be but four Parishes broad,
and yet.19. or 20. miles over, on this part. If any man doubt of the truth,
let himself make the trial, for I dare not warrant it.

Wrotham, in Latin Vaginacae: It is in the Domesday book corruptly written
(Brotcham) for I suppose, that yrHam, is the very right name, given for the
great plenty of woorts or good herbs that grow there.
THere was in Wrotham, of ancient time, a Manor house, perteining to the Sea
of the Archebishops. For Geruasius witnesses, that one Richard (the
Archbishop that succeeded Thomas Becket) lay there: And that after such time
as he had, by great largition and bribery, prevailed at Rome both against King
Henry (the Son of the second of that name) in his own consecration: against
Roger the Bishop of York in the quarrel of preeminencie, and against other in
other vain suits, (so that it might never be more truly said of that City in
Paganism it self Romae omnia ire venum, then in that time of Papistrie) he had
a most terrible dream or vision in in his sleep at Wrotham, the manner
whereof, (as he reports) was this. It seemed to him, that a very grave and
reverend personage, came to his bed side by night, and demanded of him in a
loud voice, who art thou? with which noise, when the Archbishop awaked, and
for fear answered nothing, it added moreover, Thou art he that have scattered
the goods of the Church committed to thy charge, and therefore I will scatter
thee: and so with the word vanished out of sight. The Archbishop arose in the
morning, and having intended a journey to Rochester, addressed him self
thitherward: but this vision continually presented it self before the eye of
his mind, and so troubled him, that for ease of his inward grief, he began to
disclose the whole order of it to such as were in his company: whereof he had
no sooner made an end, but he was forthwith stricken with such a horror, and
chille cold, that he was driven of necessity to alight at Halling in his way,
where in great torment he ended his life, the next day following. This house
continued here until the time of Simon Islip, the Archbishop: who having a
desire to finishe the Palaice at Maidston, which John Vfford his predecessor
had begone, and wanting wherewith to accomplish it, not only pulled down the
building at Wrotham, and conveyed the stuff thither, but also obtained of the
Pope, license to levy a Tenthe throughout his whole Province, to perform his
work withal.

Kemsing.
1. The worship of many Gods.
IN the late time of the Popish (...), the Image of Edithe (the Daughter of King
Egdar, and sometime Prioresse of Wylton in the West Country) was religiously
frequented in the Churcheyarde at Kemsing, Saint Edith, and her offering.
for the preservation of Corn and Grain, from Blasting, Myldewe, Brandeare,
and such other harms as commonly annoy it: The manner of the which sacrifice
was this: Some seely body brought a pecke, or two, or a Bushel of Corn, to
the Church: and (after prayers made) offered it to the Image of the Saint: Of
this offering, the Priest used to retain the greatest portion, and then to
take one handful, or little more of the residue (for you must consider he would
be sure to gain by the bargain) the which after aspersion of holy water, and
mumbling of a few words of coniuration, he first dedicated to the Image of
Saint Edithe, and then delivered it back, to the party that brought it, who
then departed with full persuasion, that if he mingled that hallowed handefull
with his seed Corn, it would preserve from harm, and prosper in growthe, the
whole heap that he should sow, were it never so great a mass.

I remember, that I have read in Terentius Varro, that the old Romans (amongst
innumerable others) had in great veneration, one God, which (of Robigo, a
canker in Corn) they called Robigus, and to whom they made devout
intercession and solemn sacrifice, for the preservation and delivery of their
grain, from the self same annoyances, that ours is subject unto. How much
that God of the Romans, and our Godesse of Kemsing, differed in profession,
let some Popish gadder after strange Gods make the account, for I my self can
find no odds at all. And truly, The old and new Romans, agree in many
points of religion.
were it not that I am loathe to anticipate now before time, that which I shall
( God granting) have both fit place, and meet time to utter hereafter, I
could easily show, that the old Romans, and our new Romanistes, agreed in
manner throughout, both in the property and number of their Gods (if at the
least they be numerable) in the manner and multitude of their sacrifices, in
the times and forms of their solemnities, in the report of their false and
feigned miracles: and finally, almost in yt whole heap and dunghill of their
filthy and superstitious Idolatries, But I will awayt convenient seasons, and
at this time give to every man the same, and none other counsel, then
Plautus, (a heathen Poet in deed, and yet in this behalf more heavenly then
any Papiste) sometime gave in the like case, saying: Vnus dum tibi propitius
est Jupiter, tu hosce minutos Deos flocci feceris. While Jupiter is thy friend,
set not thou a straw by these petie Gods.

Otforde, in Saxon, Ottanford.
WE have mention in ancient history of two famous battles foughten at Otford,
whereof the one happened amongst the Saxons them selves, contending for glory
and supreme souereigntie. The other, between ye Danes and Saxons, striving for
lands lives, and liberty. In the first, Offa the King of Mercia (having
already joined to his dominion, the most Westsex, and Northumberland, and
seeking to have added Kent also) prevailed against the inhabitants of this
country, not without great slaughter of his own subjects, and after the
victory, he transferred (as it were in triumph) the Archebishops Chair into
his own kingdom, as you heard in the beginning.

In the other fight, King Edmund (surnamed for his great strength, Ironside)
obtained against King Canutus Dane, a most honorable victory, and pursue* him
(flying toward Shepey) until he came to Ailesford committing upon the Danes
such slaughter, and bloody havoc, that if Edric the traitor, had not by
fra^dulent counsel withholden him, (as we have before declared) he had that day
made an end of their whole army.

These be the written antiquities that I find of Otford, S. Thomas Beckets
spiteful miracles.
which happily some men will esteem less, then the unwritten vanities of
Thomas Becket, sometime owner of the place: And therefore, least any should
complain of wrong, you shall hear what they be also. It was long since
fancied, and is yet of two many believed, that while Thomas Becket lay at the
old house at Otford, (which of long time belonged to the Archebishops, and
whereof the hall and chapel only do now remain) and saw that it wanted a
fit spring to water it: that he struck his staff into the dry ground, (in a
place thereof now called Saint Thomas Well) and that immediately water
appeared, the which running plentifully, serves the offices of the new house
till this present day: They say also, that as he walked on a time in the old
Park (busy at his prayers) That he was much hindered in devotion, by the
sweet note and melody of a Nightingale that sang in a bushe besides him, and
that therefore (in the might of his holiness) he enjoined, that from
thencefoorth no bird of that kind should be so bold as to sing there
aboutes: Some men report likewise, that for as much as a Smithe (then dwelling
in the town) had cloyed his horse, He enacted by like authority, that after
that time no Smithe should thrive within the Parish. Inumerable such toys,
false Priests have devised, and fond people (alas) have believed, of this
jolly Martyr, and Pope holy man: which for the unworthiness of the things them
selves, and for want of time (wherewith I am straightened) I neither will, nor
can, now presently recount, but must pursue the residue, that pertayneth to
this place.

For besides this Thomas, S. Bartilmew of Otford, and his offering.
there was holden in great veneration at Otford another Saint, called Bartilmew
the Apostle (as I trow) for his feast day was kept solemn, both with a
fair, and good fare there. This man served the person as Purueyour of his
poultrie, and was frequented (by ye parishioners, and neighbors about) for a
most rare and singular property yt he professed. For ye manner was, yt if any
woman (conceived with child) desired to (...) forth a male, she should offer
to Saint Bartholmewe a Cock chicken, and if her wish were to be delivered of
a female, she should then present him with a Hen.

This Saint, was as good as Manci pera, whereof the common Adage grew: and he
differed not much from the Priests of old Rome, called Luperci: For a little
of the water of the one, and the doing of a certain Ceremony by the other,
was (at pleasure) as able as Saint Bartholmew, to make barreine women become
fruitful.

Assuredly, through the fraud of this fox, the Country people (as wise as
capons) were many years together robbed of their Hens and Cocks: til at the
length it chanced King He^rie the eight (after exchange made with the
Archbishop for this Manor of Otford) to have conferrence with some of the
Town, about the enlarging of his Park there: Amongst the which, one called
Master Robert Multon (a man, whom for the honest memory of his godly zeal
and virtuous life, I stick not to name) detesting the abuse, and espying the
Prince inclined to hear: unfolded unto him the whole pack of the idolatry,
and prevailed so far in favor, that shortly after, the King commanded Saint
Bartholmewe to be taken down and delivered him.

Thus have you heard, the contention of the Saxons, the overthrow of the
Danes, the fraud of Popish Priests, the folly of simple folks, and the fall
of deceitful idolatry. Now a few words for example of the prodigality of
a proud Prelate, and then to the residue.

The Palaice at Otford.
William Warham the Archbishop, minding to leave to posterity, some glorious
monument of his worldly wealth, and mis begotten treasure, determined to have
raised a gorgious Palaice for himself and his successors in the City of
Canterbury, but (upon occasion of a difference that arose between him and the
citizens for the limits of his soil there) he changed his former purpose, and
in displeasure toward them, bestowed at Otford, thirty and three thousand
pounds, upon the house that is now to be seen, notwithstanding that him self,
and Cardinal Morton Cardinal Morton.
his immediate predecessor, had not long before liberally builded at Knolle, a
house little more than two miles from it. For, that house also (so called of the
situation, which is upon the knap or Knoll of a hill,) had Cardinal Morton in
his time purchased of the Lord Say, Erasmus does misreporte the cause of the
contention, between the King, and Thomas Becket.
and appropriated to the Sea of the Archebishopricke. But now before I can
depart from Otford, I am to beg license, for a word or two more, as well for
the satisfaction of mine own promise heretofore made, as also for the
direction of my Reader, which otherwise by the countenance of a certain
famous and learned writer, might be quight and clean carried from me. Des.
Erasmus taking occasion, in the Preface to Frauncis the French King (prefixed
before his Paraphrase upon S. Marks Gospel) to discourse upon ye great
troubles and wars that were in his time between the Princes of Christendom,
declares, that it were a laudable labor for some man of the Clergy (eue^
with the hazard of his life) to become the instrument of their reconciliation:
And amongst other examples of times passed, he brings in Thomas Becket, who
(as he speaks) spared not to exercise the Evangelical liberty (meaning
excommunication, belike) upon the King him self, and that for a very small
matter: wherein, although he profited little in his life (says he) yet by his
death he purchased both gain and glory, to him self, and the whole Clergy.
Which said, he adds in effect as follows: They contended (says he) not for
reconciling Princes one to another, but the controversy was only for a
certain withdrawing house, called Otforde, a place more meet for a religious
man's meditation, then for a Princes pleasure, with the which (says Erasmus) I
my self could not have been greatly in love, till such time as Willam Warham
the Archbishop, bestowed so great cost upon it, that he might be thought rather
to have raised a new house in the place, then to have repaired the old: for he
left nothing of the first work, but only the walls of a hall, and a
chapel: Thus far out of Erasmus. Wherein first (by the way) you may epsy
the reason that moved King Henry the eight, to take that house by exchange
from the Archbishop, namely, because Warham (not contented to continue it a
plain house, fit to withdraw him self unto for contemplation and prayer) had
so magnificently enlarged the same, that it was now become meet, to make a
Palaice for a Kings habitation and pleasure. But let us come to our matter. You
see here that Erasmus makes this house, the matter, and motive of all the
contention, that was between the King and the Archbishop: which if it be so,
then have not I faithfully dealt, in laying the cause thereof to be such, as
appears in Canterbury before, and consequently, I have too too much abused
the Reader. But for a short answer hereto, I do eftsoons auowe, that not
only William of Newburgh, Roger Houeden, and Mat. Parise, (whom chiefly I
have followed in this story, and which al, were, either me^ living when the
matter was in hand, or borne immediately after) do plainly testify with me,
that the ordinances made at Clarendune, were the very subject and motive of
all that strife: but also the whole number of our hystoriens following, yea and
the very authors of the Quadriloge it self (or song of four parts, for they
yealde a concent, though it be without Harmony) do all, with one pen and
mouth, acknowledge the same. Amongst the r^ste, Polydore shows him self
exceeding angry, with some that had blown abroad some such like sound, of the
cause of this great hurley burley: for he says plainly, that they were
Amentiae pleni, qui deblaterabant, Thomam conseruandarum possessionum causa,
tantum iniuriarum accepisse. stark mad, which babbled that Thomas did
receive so many injuries, for saving of his possessions. But for all this, to
the end that it may fully appear, both that Erasmus has said somewhat, and
also from whence (as I suppose) this thing was mistaken, I pray you hear the
Quadriloge or story of his life it self: for that only shall suffice to close
up the matter. It appears by the authors of that work, that after such time
as the King and the Bishop had long contended (and that with great heat) about
the Statutes of Clarendune, and that the Bishop, upon great offense taken, had
made three several attempts to cross the Seas toward the Pope, and was
always by contrary wind repulsed, and driven to the land again: The King
in his just indignation, sought by all possible means to bridle his immoderate
peevishness: and therefore, first resumed into his own hands, al such honors
and castles of his own as he had committed to ye Bishops custody: The^ called
he an assembly of al his Nobility and bishops to Northa^pton castle, where
before them all, he first charged Thomas with.500. l. that he had long before
lent him: for the repaiment whereof, he there compelled him to give five several
sureties: This done, he called him to an account for.30000. Marks, received of
the revenues of the crown, during the time that he was Chancelour. Now, whiles
the Archbishop was much troubled with this matter (sometime denying to yeald any
account at al, sometime craving respite to make a resolute answer, but always
delaying the time, and meditating how to shifte the place) there comes (on a
time) into his lodging, the Bishops of London and Chichester: who, finding him
at supper, said unto him (word for word of the Quadriloge) as follows,
that is, That they had found out a way for peace: and when the Archbishop had
required, under what form, they answered: There is a question for money
between you, The Manor of Wingha^.
and the King: If therefore you will assign unto the King, your two Manors,
Otford and Wingham in the name of a pledge, we believe that he being therewith
pacified, will not only resign you the Manors again, and forgive you the
money, but also a great deal the sooner receive you to his favor. To this,
the Archbishop replied, The manor of Heche was sometime belonging to the Church
of Canterbury (as I have hard) which the King now has in demean: And albeit
that the only challenge of the thing is sufficient cause to have it restored to
the Church of Canterbury, yet I do not look that it will be done in these
times: Nevertheless, rather then I will renounce the right, which the church of
Canterbury is said to have in that Manor, either for the appeasing of any
trouble whatsoever, or for recovery of the Kings favor, I will offer this
head of mine (and touched it) to any hazard or danger, what soever it be: The
Bishops being angry with this, went out from him, and told the King of all,
and his indignation was sore kindled with it. Thus much out of the Quadriloge
faithfully translated. Now, upon the whole matter it appears: first, that
the quarrel was for the laws of Clarendune (which yet depended) and then,
that, even as a fire, being once kindled, the flame seeks all about, and
imbraceth whatsoever it finds in the way: So the King being offended with the
rebellion of this Bishop, left no stone untaken up, that might be hurled at
him, and therefore brought in against him, both debts, accounts, and
whatsoever other means of annoyaunce. Moreover, that this matter of Otford and
Wingham (for as you now see it was not Otford alone) was not at all tossed
between the King and the Archbishop, but only moved by the pacifiers (these
two Bishops) as a meet mean of reconciliation, in their own opinion and
judgment: or, if it may be thought, that they were sent and suborned by the
King himself with that devise: yet is it manifest, that the right of the
houses themselves were not desired, but only that they might remain as a
pain till the account were audited: Neither if the gift of this house would
have made an end of the strife, does it by and by follow, that the contention
was moved at the first about it. And therefore as on the one side you may see,
that Erasmus his report is but matter of Preface and no Gospel: So yet on the
other side it is evident, that of such and so lusty a stomach was this
Archbishop, that if former cause had not been, yet he could have found in his
heart to fall out with his Prince for this, or a smaller matter.

For, what would he not adventure for a Manor or twain in lawful possession,
that would not stick to hazard his head before he would release that right,
which he thought he had to a piece of land, and that but only by hearesay, or
supposition? But it is more the^ time to make an end, and therefore leaving
Thomas, and his house in the bottom, let us climb the Hill toward Sennocke.

Holmes Dale, that is to say, the Dale between the wooddie hills.
Reigate Castle in Surrey.
THere are as yet to be seen, at Reigate in Surrey, the ruins of an ancient
Castle sometime belonging to ye Earls of Surrey, which Alfrede of Beuerley
calls Holme, and which the Country people do yet term, the Castle of
Holmesdale. This took the name, of the Dale wherein it stands, which is
large in quantity, extending it self a great length into Surrey, and Kent
also, and was (as I conjecture) at the first called Holmesdale, by reason that
it is (for the most part) Conuallis, a plain valley, running between two
hills, that be replenished with stoare of wood: for, so much the very word
(Holmesdale) it self imports. In this Dale (a part of which we now cross,
in our way, to Sennocke) the people of Kent (being encouraged by the prosperous
success of Edward their King (the Son of Alfrede, and commonly surnamed
Edward the Elder) assembled themselves, and gave to the Danes, that had many
years before afflicted them, a most sharp and fierce encountre, Danes were
overthrown and vanquished.

This victory, and the like event in an other battle (given to the Danes at
Oxford, which stands in this same valley also) begat, as I guess, the common
by word, used amongst the inhabitants of this vale, even till this present day,
in which they vaunt after this manner.

The vale of Holmesdale,
Never won nor never shall.
Sennocke, or (as some call it) Seven oak, of a number of trees, as it is
coniectured.
About the latter end of the reign of King Edward the third, The Schole. and
Alms house.
there was found (lying in the streets at Sennocke) poor child, whose
Parents were unknown, and he (for the same cause) named after the place where
he was taken up, William Sennocke. This Orphan, was by the help of some
charitable persons, brought up and nourtured, in such wise, that being made an
Apprentice to a Grocer in London, he arose by degrees (in course of time) to be
Mayor, and chief Magistrate of that City.

At which time, calling to his mind, the goodness of God, and the favor of
the Townsmen, extended toward him, he determined to make an everlasting
monument of his thankful mind for the same: And therefore, of his own
charge, builded both an Hospital for relief of the poor, and a Free School
for the education of youth, within this Town: endowing John Potkyn, which
lived under the reign of King Henry the eight: and now lately also, in the
reign of our sovereign Elizabeth in Sennocke.

The present estate of the Town it self is good, and it seems to have been
(for these many years together) in no worse plight: The Town.
And yet find I not in all history, any memorable thing concerning it, save
only, that in the time of King Henry the sixth, Jack Cade, and Humfrey
Stafford, and his Brother, two Noble Gentlemen, whom the King had sent to
encounter them.

Eltham.
Anthony Beck, that Bishop of Durham which in the reigns of King Henry the
third, and of King Edward his Son, builded Aucland Castle in the Bishopric
of Durham, Somerton Castle in Lincolneshyre, and Durham place at London, was
(by the report of John Leland) either the very Author, or the first beautifier,
of this the Princes house here at Eltham, also.

It is noted of that man, that he was in all his life and Port, so gay and
glorious, that the Nobility of the Realm disdained him greatly therefore. But
they did not consider (belike) that he was in possession Bishop of Durham,
which had Iura Regalia, the Prerogatives of a petie Kingdom, and that he was
by election, Patriarche of Jerusalem, which is near Cousin to a Popedom, in
which respects he might well inoughe be allowed to have Domus splendidas luxu
Regali, his houses not only as gay as the Noble men's, but also as gorgeous as
the Kings. To say the truth, this was not to build up the spiritual house
with lively stones, resting on the chief corner to Heaven, and to Godward, but
with Mammon and Material stuff to erect warrelyke Castles for the nourishment
of contention: and stately Palaces, for the maintenance of worldly pride and
pleasure, toward Hell and the Devil. Howbeit, this was the whole study of
Bishops in the Popish Kingdom, and therefore letting that pass, let us see
what became of this piece of his building.

King Henry the third (says Mat. Parise) toward the latter end of his reign,
kept a Royal Christmas (as the Eltham, being accompanied with his Queen and
Nobility: and this (belike) was the first warming of the house (as I may call
it) after that the Bishop had finished his work. For I do not hereby gather,
that hitherto the King had any property in it, forasmuch as the Princes in
those days, used commonly both to soiourne for their pleasures, and to pass
their set solemnities also in Abbaies and Bishops houses.

But yet I believe verily, that soon after the death of that Bishop, the
house came to the possession of the Crown: for proof whereof, I pray you hear
and mark what follows.

The wife of King Edward the second, bare unto him a Son at this house, who
was thereof surnamed John Eltham. What time King John of France (which had
been prisoner in England, came over to visit King Edward the third (who had
most honorably entreated him) the King and his Queen lay at Eltham to
entertain him.

King Henry the fourth also, kept his last Christmas at Eltham. And King
Henry his Son and successor, lay there at a Christmas likewise, when he was
feign to depart soudainly, for fear of some that had conspired to murder him.

Furthermore, John Rosse writes plainly, that Edward the fourth, to his
great cost, repaired his house at Eltham: at which time also (as I suppose)
he enclosed Horn park, one of the three, that be here, and enlarged the other
twain. And it is not yet fully out of memory, that king Henry the seventh,
set up the fair front over the mote there: since whose reign, this house, by
reason of the neerenesse to Greenewiche (which also was much amended by him,
and is through the benefit of the River, a seat of more commodity) has not
been so greatly esteemed: the rather also for that the pleasures of the
emparked grounds here, may be in manner as well enjoyed, the Court lying at
Greenewiche, as if it were at this house it self. These be the things that I
had to remember in Eltham: And (to make an end of all) these be the places,
whereof I meant to make note in this my Xenagogie and perambulation of Kent, the
first and only Shyre that I have described: wherein although I have not spoken
of sundry Towns, not inferior, at this present, in estimation to a great
many that I have handled, and happily equal with them in antiquity also, yet
I think I have neither pretermitted many yt be much worthy of observation, nor
scarcely omitted any, that be mentioned in such books of History, as be
easily to be had and obtained: but as for the Feodaries and Tenures of land,
Genealogies and Arms of men, Ebbes, Floudes, and Tides of the Sea and Rivers,
Flattes, Bars, Havens, and such other things, although somewhat might have
been severally said concerning each of them, yet have I wittingly, and without
touch, lept over them all: Partly for the incertentie, partly that I scatter
not any seed of dissension and envy, and partly least whilste by disclosing
secrets I labor to serve the curiosity of some few, I either offend many of
the sadder sort, or deserve evil of the whole estate. Now therefore I will
deliver you, and rest me: wishing, that some other man, of greater profit in
reading, deapth in judgment, and dexterity in penning, would take in hand to
amend the description of this, and to add the residue.

For as I at ye first, assayd it to prove my self, to provoke some, and to
pleasure and profit others: So, having now achieved it (according to my
slender skill) if any man shall like to take this my base metal (drawn out of
a few Sowze, into many Sheets, as you see) and shall hammar it to some
further and finer fashion, I will not only not envy it, but most heartily thank
him, and gratulate to our Country, that so good a turn and benefit. And, as
touching the description of the rest of ye Realm, knowing by the dealing in
this one, that it will be hard for any one man (and much more for my self) to
accomplish all, I can but wish in like sort, that some one in each Shyre,
would make the enterprise for his own Country, to the end that by joining our
pens and conferring our labors (as it were) Ex symbolo, we may at the last
by the union of many parts and papers, compact a whole and perfect body and
Book of our English antiquities.

The Customs of Kent.
ALthough good order would have borne the rehersall of the Ancient Customs of
this Shyre, in that general discourse which we had in the beginning as
touching the estate of this whole County, the rather for that it was there
showed by what means and policy they were conserved: yet, least the recital
of the same (being of themselves large and manyfolde) might have been thought
too great a Parenthesis, or rather an interruption of the History, wherein we
were as then but newly entered, I thought it better to reserve them for this
place, to the end, that both the one and the other, might appear, without
breach, or confusion.

These Customs, therefore, being (for the most part) discrepant from the
common laws of our Realm, and annexed to such lands within this Shyre, as
bear the name of Gauelkinde, are commonly called Gauelkinde Customs, for that
they prevail and have place, in lands of Gauelkinde nature. In which
respect, it shall not be amiss to show, for what reason those lands were at
the first so termed, and why they do yet hitherto continue the name.

Two conjectures I have of the reason of this name, the one grounded upon the
nature of the descent, and inheritance of these lands themselves: the other
founded upon the manner of the duty and services, that they yeald: both
which I will not stick to recite, and yet leave to each man free choice, to
receive either, or to refuse both, as it shall best like him.

The name Gauelkind, whereof it arose.
I gather by Cornelius Tacitus, and others, that the ancient Germans, (whose
offspring we be) suffered their lands to descend, not to the Eldest Son alone,
but to the whole number of their male Children: and I find in ye 75. Chap. of
Canutus law (a King of this Realm before the Conquest) that after the death of
the father, his heirs should divide both his goods, and his lands amongst
them. Now, for as much as all the next of the kindred did this inherit
together, I conjecture, that therefore the land was called, either Gauelkyn, in
meaning, Giueall kyn, because it was given to all the next in one line of
kindred: or Give all kind, that is, to all the male children: for kind, in
Dutche, signifies yet a male child: Besides this, the Welshmen also (who but
now lately lost this custom) do in their language call this descent, Gwele,
and in their Latin Records, Lectus, progenies, and gauella, of their own
word, Gefeilled, which signifies Twyns, or such as be borne together,
because they do all inherit together, and make (as it were) but one heir,
and not many. And here (by the way) I cannot omit to show, that they of this
our Kentish country, To shift la^d is an old term.
do yet call their partition of land (shifting) even by the very same word that
the law of Canutus many years since termed it, namely (Scyftan) in Latin,
Herciscere, that is, to shift, depart, or divide land.

My other conjecture, is raised upon the consideration of the rent and services
going out of these lands: for it is well known, that as Knights service land,
required the presence of the tenant, in warfare and battle abroad: So this
land (being of Socage tenure) commanded his attendance at the ploughe, and
other the Lords affairs of husbandry, at home: the one by manhood defending
his Lords life and person, the other by industry mainteining with rent, corn,
and victual, his estate and family. This rent, and customarie payment of
works, the Saxons called, gafol, and thereof (as I think) they named the land
that yealded it, gafolette, or gafolcynd. that is to say, land Letten for
rent, or of the kind to yealde rent. In this sense I am sure, that the rents,
customs, and services, which the tenantes of London pay to their land lords,
were wont (and yet are) to be recovered, by a writ, thereof called Gauellet, as
by an ancient statute, made in the tenthe year of King Edward the second,
entitled, Statutum de Gaueleto, in London, and by daily experience there, it
may well appear. Thus much then, as concerning the Etymon of this word
Gauelkind, being said, let us proceed further.

The antiquity of Gauelkind custom.
It has already appeared, how the Kentishmen, immediately after the Conquest,
obtained the continuation of their customs: and it is very manifest by
ancient writers, that the same (for the more part) have been in ure and
exercise ever since. For (omitting that which Thomas Spot has written
concerning the same matter, for as much as it is already recited at large)
Glanuile, a learned man, that flourished in the reign of king Henry the
second, in his seventh book, and third chapter: Bracton, that lived in the
time of King Henry the third, in his second book, De acquirendo rerum
dominio: And Bretton, that wrate under King Edward the first, and by his
commandment: have all express mention, of lands partible amongst the males
by usage of the place, and some of them recite the very name of Gauelkind it
self. But most plainly of all, an ancient treatise, received by tradition
from the hands of our elders (whereof I my self have one exemplar, written out
as I suppose, in the time of King Edward the first) agreeing with the daily
practice of these customs, proves the continuance of them, to stand with
good law and liking. The division of this discourse.
And therefore, forbearing (as needless) further testimony in that behalf, I
will descend to the disclosing of the customs them selves: not numbering them
by order as they lie in that treatise, but drawing them forth as they shall
concern, either the land it self, or the persons that I will orderly speak
of, that is to say, particularly the Lord and the Tenant: The husband and the
wife: The child and the gardien, and so after addition of a few other things
incident to this purpose, I will draw to an end.

As touching the land it self, What lands be of Gauel kind nature
in which these customs have place, it is to be understood, that all the
lands within this Shyre, which be of ancient Socage tenure, be also of the
nature of Gauelkind. For, as for the lands holden by ancient tenure of Knights
service, they be at the common law, and are not departible after the order of
this custom, except certain, which being holden of old time by Knights
service of the Archbishop of Canterbury, are nevertheless departible, as it
may appear by an opinion of the Judges in the Kings benche.26. H. 8. fol. 4.
And that grew by reason of a grant, made by King John, to Hubert the
Archbishop, Some Knight fee is Gauelkinde.
the tenor whereof (being exemplified out of an ancient roll, remaining in the
hands of the Reverend father, Mathewe, the Archbishop now living) hereafter
follows.

Ioannes dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae,
and comes Andegauen. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Iusticiarijs, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis ministris, and omnibus
Balliuis, and fidelibus suis: Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, and praesenti
charta nostra confirmasse, venerabili patri nostro ac Chro. Huberto, Cantuar.
Archiepiscopo, and successoribus suis in perpetuum, quod liceat eis terras,
quas homines de feodo Ecclesiae Cantua. tenent in Gauelkind, conuertere in
feoda militu^. Et quod idem Episcop. and successores sui, eande^ in o^nibus
potestate^, and libertate^ habeant in perpetuu^, in homines illos qui terras
easdem ita in feodo militum conuersas tenebunt, and in haeredes eorum qua^ ipse
Archiepiscopus habet, and successores sui post eum habebunt, in alios milites
de feodo Ecclesiae Cantuar. and in haeredes. Et homines illi, and haeredes
eorum, eandem and omnem libertaetem habeant in perpetuum, quam alij milites de
feodo Ecclesiae Cantuar. and haeredes eorum habent. Ita tamen, quod nihilominus
consuetus redditus denariorum, reddatur integre de terris suis, sicut prius,
xenia, aueragia, and alia opera, quae fieba^t de terris ijsdem, conuertantur in
redditum denariorum aequiualentem. Et redditus ille reddatur, sicut alius
redditus denariorum. Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, quod quicquid
praedictus Archiepiscopus and successores sui post eum, de terris illis in
feodo militum secundum praescriptam formam conuertendis fecerint, ratum in
perpetuum and stabile permaneat. Et prohibemus ne quis contrafactum ipsius
Archiepiscopi, vel successorum suorum, in hac part venire praesumat. Test E.
Eliense, and S. Bathon, Episcopis. G. filio Petri, comite Essex. Willmo
Marescallo, comite de Penbroc. Roberto de Harocort. Garino, filio Geraldi.
Petro de Stoke. Ric. de Reuerus. Roberto de Tateshal. Datum per manum S.
Archid. Willielmi apud Rupem auriual. 4. die Maij Anno regni nostri tertio. But
now for as much as it is disputable, whether this Chartre of the King be of
sufficient virtue to change the nature of the Gauelkynd land or no, and for
that the certainty of the lands so converted into Knight fee, does not any
where (that I have seen) appear, (save only that in the book of Aid,
levied in this Shire, Anno. 20. E. 3. it is four or five times noted, that
certain lands there, be holden in Knights service, Per nouam licentiam
Archiepiscopi) I will leave this, and proceed to prove, that all the lands of
ancient tenure in Knights service, be subject to the ordinary course of
descent at the common law. And that may I (as me thinks) sufficiently do,
both by the express words of a note. 9. H. 3. in the title of Praescription.
63. in Fitzherbert: by the resolution of the same Fitzherbert, and Norwiche,
Justices, 26. H. 8. 5. And by plain recital in the act of Parleament, made.
31. H. 8. Ca. 3. by which statute, the possessions of certain Gentlemen
(there named) were delivered from this customarie descent, and incorporated to
the common law. For (amongst other things) in that act it is said, That from
thencefoorth, such their lands shall be changed from the said custom, and shall
descend as lands at the common law, and as other lands being in the said
cou^tie of Kent, which never were holden by service of Socage, but always have
been holden by Knights service, do descend. By which words it is very
evident, that the makers of that estatute, understood all lands holden by
Knights service, to be of their proper nature descendable after the common
law, and that Socage tenure was the only subject in which this our custom of
Gauelkynd descent prevailed, and held place.

But when I thus speak of Socage, and Knights fee, Ancient Knight fee, is not
of the nature of Gauelkynd.
I must always be understood to mean of a tenure long since, and of
ancient time continued, and not now newly, or lately created: for so it may
fall out otherwise then is already reported. As for example. If land aunciently
holden by Knights service, come to the Princes hand, who afterward gives the
same out again to a common person, to be holden of his Manor of Eastgrenewiche
in Socage, I suppose that this land (notwithstanding the alteration of the
tenure) remains descendable to the eldest son only, as it was before: As
also, in like sort, if lands of ancient Socage service come to the crown,
and be delivered out again, to be holden either of the Prince in Capite, or by
Knights service of any Manor, I think it ought to descend according to the
custom, notwithstanding that the tenure be altered.

And if this be true, in the grant of the King him self, then much less
(saving the reverence due to king John's Chartre) may the Archbishop by a new
creation of tenure, The change of Gauelkind tenure is no change of the nature
of Gauelkind.
make to his tenants any alteration, of this old custom and manner. For, as
the pleading is, Quod terrae praedictae sunt de tenura and natura de Gauelkind:
even so the truth is, that the present tenure only guides not the descent,
but that the tenure and the nature together, do govern it. And therefore, as
on the one side, the custom can not attache, or take hold of that which was
not before in nature subject to the custom, that is to say, accustomably
departed: So on the other side, the practice of ye custom, long time
continued, may not be interrupted, by a bare alteration of the tenure. And this
is not my fantasy, but the resolution of all the Justices (as Judge Dalison
him self has left reported) 4. and. 5. Philippi and Mariae: And also of the
Court. 26. H. 8. 5. where it was affirmed, that if a man being seized of
Gauelkind land, holden in Socage, make a gift in tail, and create a tenure in
Knights service, that yet this land must descend after the custom, as it did
before the change of the tenure.

A contrary usage, changes not the nature of Gauelkinde.
Moreover, as the change of the tenure can not prevail against this custom:
So neither the continuance of a contrary usage, may alter this prescription.
For it is holden. 16. E. 2. Praescription. 52. in Fitzherbert, that albeit the
eldest son only has (and that for many discentes together) entered into
Gauelkynde land, and occupied it without any contradiction of the younger
brothers, that yet the land remains partible between them, when so ever
they will put to their claim. Against which assertion, that which is said.
10. H. 3. in the title of Praescription. 64. namely of the issue taken thus, Si
terra illa fuit partita nec ne, is not greatly forceable. For although it be
so, that the land were never departed in deed, yet if it remain partible in
nature, it may be departed when so ever occasion shall be ministered. And
therefore, even in the form of pleading used at this day (Quod terra illa, a
toto tempore etc. partibilis fuit, and partita) it is plainly taken, that the
word (partibilis) only is of substance, and that the word (partita) is but
a word of form, and not material, or trauersable at all. Yea, so inseparable
is this custom from the land in which it obteyneth, that a contrary descent
(continued in the case of the Crown it self) can not hinder, but that (after
such time as the land shall resort again to a common person) the former
inueterate custom shall govern it. As for the purpose. Lands of Gauelkynde
nature come to the Queens hands, by purchase, or by eschete, as holden of her
Manor of. A. Now after her death, all her sons shall inherit and divide
them: But if they come to her by forfayture in Treason, or by gift in
Parleament, so that her grace is seized of them in Iure Coronae: then her
eldest son only (which shall be King after her) shall inioye them. In
which case, although those lands which the eldest son (being King) did
possess, do come to his eldest son after him (being King also) and so from
one to another, by sundry discents: Yet the opinion of Sir Anthony Brown was.
7. Elizab. that if at any time after, the same lands be granted to a common
person, they shall reuolte to their former nature of Gauelkynde, and be
partible amongst his heirs males, notwithstanding, that they have run a
contrary course, in diverse the discentes of the Kings before. But much less
may the unity of possession in the Lord, frustrate the custom of Gauelkynde
descent, as it may appear 14. H. 4. in the long Recordare. Only therefore
these two cases I doubt of, concerning this point, and thereupon judge them
meet to be inquired of.

That is to say, first, if a tenancie in Gauelkynd eschete to the Lord, by
reason of a Ceasser (as hereafter it shall appear that it may) or if it be
granted unto the Lord by the tenant, HeaHbeorg, in Saxon, is a high defense:
and the customs of Norma^die that call fie^e or fee, de Haubert which owes to
defend the la^d by full arms, that is, by horse, haubert, target, sword, or
helm: and it consists of. 300. acres of land which is the same (as I
suppose) that we called a whole Knights fee
without any reservation, which Lord holds over by fee of Haubert, or by
Serieancie (both which I take to be Knights service) whether now this tenancy
be partible amongst the heirs males of the Lord, or no. For the ancient
treatise of the Kentishe Customs so determines, but I wot not whether
experience so allows. The other dout is this, if it be so that any whole
town, or village in Kent, has not at any time (that can be showed) been
acquainted with the exercise of Gauelkynde descent, whether yet the custom of
Gauelkinde shall have place there or no. Toward the resolution of which later
ambiguitie, it shall tend somewhat to show, how far this custom extends it
self within this our country.

The custom of Gauelkind, is universal in Kent.
It is commonly taken therefore, that the custom of Gauelkind is general, and
spreads it self throughout the whole Shyre, into all lands subject by
ancient tenure unto the same, such places only excepted, where it is altered
by act of Parleament. And therefore. 5. E. 4. 18. and. 14. H. 4. 8. it is said,
that the custom of Gauelkind is (as it were) a common law in Kent. And the
book. 22. E. 4. 19. affirms, that in demanding Gauelkind land, a man shall
not need to prescribe in certain, and to show, That the Town, Borowe, or
City, where the lands be, is an ancient town, borowe, or city, and that
the custom has been there (time out of mind) that the lands within the same
town, borow, or city, should descend to all the heirs males. etc. But that is
sufficient inoughe, to show the custom at large, and to say, That the land
lies in Kent, and that all the lands there be of the nature of Gauelkynde.
For, a writ of partition of Lands in Gauelkinde (says Master Litleton)
shall be as general, as if the lands were at the Common law, although the
declaration ought specially to contain mention of the Custom of the Country.
This universality therefore considered, as also the strait bond (whereby the
custom is so inseperably knit to the land, as in manner nothing but an act of
Parleament can clearly disseuer them) I see not, how any City, Town, or
Borowe, can be exempted, for the only default of putting the Custom in ure,
more then the Eldest Son (in the case before) may for the like reason
prescribe against his younger Brethren.

But here, before I conclude this part, I think good first to make Master
Litletons answer to such as happily will demand, what reason this custom,
The reason of Gauelkinde Custom.
of Gauelkinde descent has, thus to divide land amongst al ye Males,
contrary to the manner of the whole Realm besides. The younger sons (says
he) be as good gentlemen, as the Elder, and they (being alike dear to their
common auncestor, from whom they claim) have so much the more need of their
friends help, as (through their minority) they be less able then the elder
Brother to help them selves: secondly to put you in remembrance also of the
statute of Praerogatina Regis, Ca. 16. Where it is said, that Faeminae non
participabunt cum Masculis, The Females, shall not divide with the Males:
which is to be understood, of such as be in equal degree of kindred, as
Brother and Sisters. etc. For, if a man have issue three Sons, and the Eldest
have issue a daughter, and dye in the life of his Father, and the Father dies:
In this case (it is holden) that the daughter shall join with the two other
Brethren her Uncles, for that she is not in equal degree with them, as her
Father was, whose heir she nevertheless must be of necessity.

What things shall ensue the nature of the land.
And now, thus much being spoken, touching the name, tenure, nature,
generality, necessity, reason, and order of Gauelkinde, it is worthy the
labor, to show of what quality the Rents, Remainders, Conditions, Vouchers,
Actions, and such other things (of the which some be issuing out of these
lands, some be annexed unto them, and some be raised by reason of them) shall be.

In which behalf, it may generally be said, that some of them shall ensue the
nature of the Land, and some shall keep the same course that common Law has
appointed. But in particular, it is to be understood, that if a Rent Rent.
be granted in Fee out of Gauelkinde land, it shall descend to all the Males,
as the land it self shall do.

And, Ald. and Chart. in 7. E. 3. were of opinion, that albeit a tenancie be of
Gauelkinde nature, yet the rent service, by which that tenancie is holden,
might well be descendable at the common Law. The like shall be of a Remainder
Remainder
of Gauelkinde land: for if it be tayled to the Heirs Males, they altogether
shall inherit it, as Fitzherb. and Norwiche two Justices, thought. 26. H. 8. 8.

But that is to be understood of a descent only: for if lands of Gauelkind
nature be leassed for life, the Remainder to the right Heirs of I. at Style.
Which has issue four Sons and dies, and after the Leassee for life dies
now the Eldest Son only of. I. at Style shall have this land, for he is
right Heir, and that is a good name of purchase. 37. H. 8. Done. 42. en
Master Brook: But if the lands had been given to I. at Style for life, the
remainder to his next Heir Male, this had been an estate tail in I. S.
himself, and then the Land (as I take it) should have descended to all his
Sons, in so much as in that case the words (next Heir Male) be not a name
of purchase. Howbeit, it was greatly doubted 3. and 4. Phil. and Mariae (as
Justice Dalison reports) if a remainder be devised by Testament (Proximo
haeredi masculo) whether in that case the Eldest Brother only shall have it, in
so much as (in the understanding of the Law, which is a Judge over all
Customs) he is the next Heir Male: and therefore inquire of it.

As touching Vouchers, it appears. 11. E. 3. Voucher.
that all the Heirs in Gauelkind shall be vouched for the warrantie of their
auncestour, and not the eldest only. But the opinion of Master Litleton, and
of the Justices. 22. E. 4. is clearly: that the Eldest Son only shall be
rebutted, or barred, by the warrantie of the auncestour.

To be short, Condition.
the Eldest Son only shall entree for the breach of a condition: but the rest
of the Brethren shall be joined with him in suing a writ of Attaint, Attaint,
and Error.
to refourme a false verdit, or error to reuerse an erroneous judgment: And
they all shall be charged for the debte of their auncestour, if so be that they
all have Assetz in their hands: But if the eldest only have Assetz remaining,
and the residue have aliened their parts, then he only shall be charged after
the mind of the Book. 11. E. 3. Det. 7. And this also for this part, at this
time shall suffice. Now a word or twain, touching the trial of right in this
Gauelkind land, and then forward to the rest of my purpose. There be at the
common law, two sorts of trial in a writ of Right, by Battle, and by the
Graund Assise: No battle nor graund Assise in gauelkinde
of the which two, this Custom excludes the one, and alters the other. For,
Battle it admits not at al, and the Graund assise it receaueth, not by the
election of 4. Knights, but of 4. Tenants in Gauelkind, as it may be read in
the ancient treatise of the Customs of this Country. But when I speak of
the treatise of the Customs (you must know) I mean not ye which was lately
imprinted, but an other with much more faith and diligence long since
exemplified: a Copy whereof you shall find, at the end of this Book.

For, not only in this part, the words (Ne soient prises per battle) be
clean omitted in the imprinted Book, but in sundry other places also the
words be mangled, the sentences be curtailed, and the meaning is obscured, as
by conferrence of the variations, it may to any skillful reader most easily
appear. But all that, I will refer to the sight and judgment of such, as
will search and examine it, and (retourning to my purpose) show you, what
belongs to the Lord of this Gauelkinde land, by reason of this Custom. And,
for because the Prince is chief Lord of all the Realm, (as of whom all
lands within the same be either mediatly or immediately holden) let us first
see what right (by reason of this custom) belongs unto him.

Forfaiture in Felony.
If Tenant in Fee simple, of Lands in Gauelkinde, commit fellonie, and suffer
the judgment of death therefore, the Prince shall have all his Chattels for a
forfaiture: But as touching the Land, he shall neither have the Eschete of it,
though it be immediately holden of him self, nor the Day, Year, and Wast, if it
be holden of any other. For in that case, the Heir, notwithstanding the
offense of his auncestour, shall enter immediately, and enjoy the lands, after
the same Customs and services, by which they were before holden: in assurance
whereof, it is commonly said, The Father to the Boughe,
The Son to the Ploughe.


But this rule holds in case of Felony, and of murder only, and in case not
of treason at all: And it holds also in case where the offendour is justified
by order of Law, and not where he withdraws himself after the fault
committed, and will not abide his lawful trial.

For if such a one absent himself (after proclamation made for him in the
County) and be outlawed: or otherwise, if he take Sanctuary, and do abjure
the Realm, then shall his Heir reap no benefit by this Custom, but the
Prince or the Lord, shall take their forfaiture in such degree, as if the
Lands were at the common law. Which thing is apparent, both by the Book. 8.
E. 2. abridged by Master Fitzherbert, in his title of prescription. 50. And by
22. E. 3. fol. Where it is said, that this Custom shall not be construed by
equity: but, by a straight and literal interpretation. And also by the plain
rehearsal of the said treatise of the Customs it self. And in this behalf
also, some have doubted, whether the Brother or Uncle shall have the advantage
of this Custom, because the words thereof extend to the Son only: but let
us proceed.

There belongs moreover, due by the Tenant, to each common person, being his
Lord of Land in Gauelkind, Suite to his Court, the oathe of fidelity, and the
true doing and payment, of all accustomed Rents, Duties, and Services. Also if
the Tenant dye, leaving his Heir, within the age of fifteen years: the Lord
has authority to commit the nouriture of the body, and the custody of the
goods, and lands of the infant, to the next of the kindred, to whom the
inheritance cannot descend. But, as neither the Lord ought to take any thing
for the custody, neither to tender to the Heir any marriage at all: So must he
take good heed, that he credit not the custody to any person, that shall not
be able to answer therefore. For if the Heir, at his full age of fifteen
years, shall come to the Lords Court, and demand his inheritance, although
the Lord may distreine the Gardien to yield his account (as it appears. 18.
E. 2. Auowrie. 220. Yet in defaulte of his ability, the Lord himself, and his
Heirs, remain charged to the Heir for the the same.

Furthermore, if the Tenant shall withdraw from the Lord his due rents, and
services, the custom of this Country gives to the Lord, a special, and
solemn kind of Cessauit, and that after this manner.

Cessauit, in Gauelkind.
The Lord, after such a Cessing, ought by award of his three weeks Court, to
seek (from Court to Court, until the fourth Court) in the presence of good
witness, whether any distress may be found upon the Tenement, or No: And if
he can find none, then at the fourth Court it shall be awarded, that he shall
take the Tenement into his hands, as a distress, or pledge, for the Rent and
services, withdrawn, and that he shall deteine it one year and a day, without
manuring it: within which time, if the tenant come, and make agreement with
the Lord for his arrerage, he shall enter into his tenement again: but if he
come not within that space, then at the next County Court the Lord ought
openly to declare all that his former proceeding, to the end that it may be
notorious: which being done, at his own Court, next following the said
County, it shall be finally awarded, that he may enter into that Tenement, and
manure it as his proper demean.

And that ye forfaiture, due to the Lord for this ceasser of his Tenant, was
five pounds (at the least) besides the arrerages: it does well appear by the
old Kentishe by word, recited in the often remembered treatise of these
Customs.

Neg he sith sealed and Neg he sith geld.
And five pound for the were, er he become healder
That is to say, Has he not since any thing given? nor has he not sense any
thing paid? Then let him pay five pound for his were, before he become tenant,
or holder again: But some copies have the first verse thus.

Nigond sith seld, and nigon sith gelde: That is, Let him nine times pay, and
nine times repay. And here (by the way) it is to be noted, that this word
(were) in old time signified, the value, or price of a man's life, estimation,
or countenance: For, before the Conquest, each man in the Realm was valued at
a certain su^me of money, having regard to his degree, condition, and
worthiness, as is more at large showed in the Table to the translation of the
Saxon laws, whereunto for this purpose I will send you. This custom of
Cessauit, is set forth in the treatise of Customs, and has been allowed of
(as Master Frowike. 21. H. 7. 15. reported) in time passed, but whether it be
also at this day put in ure, I cannot certainly affirm.

But now, as these advantages arise to the Lord from his Tenant: So on the
other side, the Lord also ought to suffer his Tenant to enjoy the benefit of
such customs as make for his avail. And therefore, first he ought to let him
alien his land at his own pleasure, without suing to him for license: He ought
also to be contented with one suite to his Court for one tenement although the
same happen to be divided amongst many: of very right also he ought to admit
an Essoine, if any be cast for the Tenant, whether it be in a cause of Plainte,
or for common suite to his Court: And lastly he may not exact of him any
manner of oath, other then that of Fidelity, which grows due by reason of
his Tenure. Tenant by the Courtesy.


And thus leaving the Lord and his Tenant, let us come to the husband and the
wife, and first show what courtesy the husband shall find by order of this
custom after the death of his wife that was seized of lands of Gauelkind
tenure: and then what benefit the wife may have after the decease of her
Husband dying seized of Lands of the same kind and nature.

The Husband (says our treatise of Gauelkind Custom) shall have the one half
of such Gauelkind land, wherein his wife had estate of inheritance, whether he
had issue by her or no: And shall hold the same during so long time, as he will
keep him self widower, and unmarried. For if he marry, he loses all.
Neither may he commit any waste, more then Tenant by the courtesy at the
common law, may. So that one way (namely, in that he shall have his wives land
for life though he never had issue by her) this our Custom is more courteous
then the common law: but an other way, (I mean in that he shall have but the
one half, and that with a prohibition of second marriage) it is loss
beneficial. Howsoever it be, it holds place, and is put in practice at this
day.

Tenant in D^wer, The difference between common Law, and Custom therein.
The wife likewise, after the death of her Husband, shall have for her life, the
one moitie of all such lands of Gauelkind tenure, whereof her Husband was
seized of any estate of inheritance during the couerture between them. Of
which Custom also, though it exceed common measure, the common law of the
Realm (bearing always special favor to Dower) has evermore even hitherto
showed good allowance: Nevertheless, as tenant by the courtesy after this
Custom, had his co^ditio^s annexed: so tenant in Dower, by the same Custom,
wants not some conditions following her estate. One, that she may not marry
at all: and an other, yt she must take diligent heed, that she be not found
with Child, begotten in fornication. For in either case she must loose her
Dower: But yet so, that lawful matrimony is by a mean (contrary to the
Apostolic permission) utterly forbidden, And the sin of secret Lechery
(according to the Popish Paradoxe, Si non cast tamen caute) is in a sort
borne and abidden, Seeing that by this custom, she forfeiteth not in this later
case, unless the child be borne, and heard to cry, and that of the country
people, assembled by hue and cry: For then (says the custom) Se that his
wend,
Se his lend:
But corruptly, for in true Saxon letters it stands thus Se that Hire end.
Se Hire lend.
That is to say, He that does turn, or wend her:
Let him also give unto her, or lend her.


And thus the custom, making like estimation of both the cases, depriueth her
of her living, as well for honest marriage, as for filthy fornication. In
which behalf, as I must needs confess, that the later condition has
reason, because it tends (though not fully) to the correction of sin and
wickedness: So yet dare I affirm, that the former is not only not
reasonable, but merely lewd and irreligious also. For, although the Ethnickes
did so much magnify wydowhood, that (as Valerius recites) Faeminas, quae vno
matrimonio contentae erant, corona pudicitiae honorabant, and although that the
common law also (being directed by the Popish Clergy, which therein followed
the error of Jerome) does in another case, by the name of Bigamie, dislike of
a woman's second marriage: Yet Saint Paul says plainly, Mulier, si
dormierit maritus eius, libera est, vt cui vult nubat, modo in Domino. But yet
for all this, seeing that our treatise of vsages recites it, seeing also that
common experience of the country approves it, and that the common law of the
Realm (as it may be read, Praerogatiua Regis Cap. 16. and 2. H. 3. in
Praescription. 59.) admits it: let us also for this place and purpose, be
contented to number it amongst our customs, and so proceed with the residue.
It appears, by that which is already said, that the common law, and this
custom, differ in two things concerning Dower: One, in that the common law
gives but a third part, whereas the custom vouchsafes the half: Another,
in that this custom gives conditionally, whereas the gift of the common
law, is free and absolute. Now therefore, there remain to be showed,
certain other points, wherein they vary also. As, if the husband commit
Felony: at the common law, his wife has lost her title of Dower, but by the
custom of this country, she shall not loose her Dower for the fault of her
husband, but only in such case, where the heir shall loose his inheritance,
for the offense of his father. Which thing is manifest, both by the treatise of
our Kentishe customs, and by the opinion of the Court 8. H. 3. Praescription.
60. At the common law also, the wife shall be endowed of a possession in law,
but (as me thinks) she shall have no Dower by this custom, but only of
such lands, whereof her husband was actually and really seized. For the
words be (Des tenements, dount son Baron morust seiset, et vestu,) which word
(vestu) being clean omitted in the imprinted book, inforceth a possession in
deed, and not in law only. And therefore, if lands in Gauelkinde descend to
a married man, which dies before he make his entry into the same, inquire
whether it be the manner to endowe his wife thereof, or no: for use is the only
Oracle that in this case I can send you unto. Again, at the common law, a
woman shall be endowed of a fair, or of any such other profit. But, (for as
much as the words of this customarie Dower, be (terres and tenements) and for
that all customs shall find a literal and straight interpretation) the
opinion of Master Parkins is, that no Dower lies of a fair, by this custom.
Furthermore, if the wife recover her Dower at the common law, she ought of
necessity to be endowed by metes and bounds: But in Dower after this custom
(says the same author) she may very well be endowed of a moitie, to be holden
in common with the heir, that inioyeth the other half. Lastly, this custom,
besides Dower of the one half of the husbands land, Dower of chattels.
provides Dower of the moitie of such goods also, as he dyed possessed of, if
he had no children, and of the third part, though he leave issue: whereas the
common law (at the least in common practice at this day) has no consideration
of any such endowme^t. These then be the differences, between the common law
of the Realm, and the particular custom of this country concerning Dower:
the comparison whereof, and whether sort of Dower is more beneficial, I will
not now attempt, and much less take upon me, to determine, least I my self
might seem rashly to preiudicate in another thing, wherein I most gladly desire
to be judged by other men: namely, whether a woman, entitled to Dower in
Gauelkind, may waine her Dower of the moitie after this custom, and bring her
action to be endowed of the third at the common law, and so exempt her self
from all danger of these customarie conditions, or no? The Resolution of which
doubt, will depend chiefly upon comparison, whether it be more advantage to
her, to have the third at the common law absolutely, or the moitie by the
custom conditionally.

For if the Dower at the common law be better for her, then it seems
reasonable that she should stand to the worse, which is the custom: even as
tenant by the courtesy, must take the moitie that the custom gives, and not
ask the whole, as Common law appoints.

And yet thereto it may be replied, that the cases be not like: for so much as
that of Dower is much more to be favored. I my self once heard two reverend
Judges of opinion, that the woman was at liberty, to ask her Dower of the
Third, or of the Moitie: But because it was uttered by them in a passage of
soudaine speech, and not spoken upon studied argument, I will not use the
authority of their names, to get the matter credit with all, but leave it at
large, to be better inquired of.

Partition of chattels.
After the husband and the wife, there follows next in order of our division,
the child and his Gardein, whom also (since they be Relatiues, as the other
be, and that their interests carry a mutual, and Reciproque eye, each having
respect to other) we will likewise couple together in one treatise. And because
the custom was wont to commit the custody, not of the lands only (as the
common law does) but of the goods and chattels also, we will first show, what
portion of goods did grow to the child, by the death of his parent.

Partition of chattels.
The manner of this country sometime was (as it appears by our old treatise)
that after the funeralles of the dead man performed, and his debts
discharged, the goods should be divided into three equal portions, if he left
any lawful issue behind him: of which three, one part was allotted to the
dead, for performance of his legacies: another to the children, for their
education: and the third to the wife for her sustentation and maintenance: But
if he had no children left on live, then was the division into two parts
only: of which, the one belonged to the wife for her endowment, and the other
to her departed husband, to be bestowed by his executors, if he made a
testament, or by the discr^tion of the ordinary, if he died intestate. The
self same order is at this day observed in the City of London, London.
and the same in effect, was long since used throughout ye whole Realm. For it
is evident, both by the law of King Canutus before remembered, by Master
Glanuille in his book Ca. 18. and by the words of Magna Carta, yt ye wife and
Children had their reasonable parts of the goods by the common law of the
Realm, howsoever it came to pass at the length, that it was admitted for law
but in such Countries only, where it was continued by daily usage (as it is
holden. 17. E. 2. and in many other books) and that all the writs in the
Register De rationabili part bonorum, Have mention of the special Custom of
the Shyre, in which the part is demanded. But as in deed at this day,
partition of Chattels is not used (though in the mean time it has not lost
the force of common law as many think) through out the whole Realm: so is it
(so far as I can learn) vanished quite out of all ure within this Country
also. And therefore, seeing the Gardein is delivered of this charge, we also will
leave to speak further of the goods, and come to the partition and custody of
the land of this Infant.

If a man die seized of lands in Gauelkinde, Partition, of Gauelkinde lands
of any estate of inheritance, al his Sons shall have equal portion: and if he
have no Sons, then ought it equally to be divided amongst his daughters: But
yet so, that the eldest Son or Daughter, has by the Custom a preeminence of
election, and the youngest Son or Daughter, a preferment in the partition.
For as of ancient time, there ought to be granted to the eldest, the first
choice after the division: so to the part of the youngest, there ought to be
allotted in the division, that piece of the Mesuage, which our treatise
calls Astre. (Astr^) what it means.
By which word is meant, (as I conjecture, for otherwise I have not learned)
either the Hall, or chief room of the house, either else the well for water,
or the Southe side of the building. For (Astre) being sounded without (s) may
come of the Latin word Atrium, which signifies a Hall, or of Haustrum,
which betokens the Bucket of a well, or of Austrum, the Southe side: every
of which have their particular commodities above the rest of the house or
tenement. Or otherwise (if that shall like any man better) being sounded with
(s) it may be deduced from the French word (Asistre) by contraction (Astre)
which is as much, as a site, or situation, and with the Article (le) before it
(Lestre) a Churcheyard, or Court about a house. But whatsoever the word mean,
I will not longer labor in it, seeing that at this day there is no such
regard made in the partition, but only consideration had that the parts them
selves be equal and indifferent. Now therefore, if the Child be under the age
of 15. years, the next Cousin, to who^ the inheritance may not descend, shall
have the education, and order of his body, and lands, until such time as he
shall attain to that age, even as the Gardein in socage at the common law
shall keep his until the ward aspire to fourteen. And in all other things
also, this customarie Gardein is to be charged and to have allowance, in such
sort, and none other, then as the Gardein in socage at the common law is: Save
only (as it is partly remembered already) that he is both chargeable to ye
Heir in account for his receipt, and subject also to ye distress of the Lord
for ye same cause: Gardein, after the cus^ome.
Yet do I not hear, that the Lords take upon them (at this day) to commit
the custody of these Infants, but that they leave it altogether to the order
of the next of the Kin, the rather (belike) for that they them selves (if
they intermedle) stand chargeable, in default of the ability of such as
happily they might credit therewithal. So that upon the whole matter, the
adds consists only in this, that Gardein in Socage at the common Law shall
keep the land till the Infant be fourteen years of age, and Gardein by this
custom till he have attained fully fifteen: which diversity, arises not
without great reason: For whereas the Infant in Socage at the common law, Sale
is at 15. year^^
cannot make alienation of his land until he have reached to the full age of
21. years (although he be long before that, free from all wardship) The Infant
in Socage by this Custom, may give and sell his land so sone as he is crept
out of this Custody.

And therefore it was expedient (at the least) to add one year to the common
Law, before he should be of power to depart with his inheritance, which
otherwise (being unadvisedly made away) might work his own impouerishment and
overthrow.

And truly it seems to me, that the Custom it self has a watchefull eye
upon the same matter, in so much as it licenceth him at fifteen years, Not to
give his Land (for that he might do for nothing) But to give and sell his
Land, which it means he should not do without sufficient recompense. Such
like interpretation, the common Law also seems to make of this custom both
by the opinion of Vauasor. 5. H. 7. who said ye it was adjudged that a release
made by such an Infant was void: by the sentence of the Book. 21. E. 4. 24.
where it was said, that an infant cannot declare his will upon such a
Feoffment: and by the judgment of Hank. 11. H. 4. who also held, that a
warrantie, or grant of a reuersion made at such age, was to no purpose at
all, although a lease with release might happily be good by the Custom,
because that amounts to a Feoffment. And, in my simple judgment, it is not
fit that this Custom should be construed by equity, for as much as it
stands not with any equity, to enable an infant, of little discretion, and
less experience, to sell his land, and not to provide withal that he should
have, Quid pro quo, and some reasonable recompense for the same: for that were,
not to defend the Pupil and Fatherles, but to lay him wide open to every slye
deceit, and circumuention. In which respect, I cannot but very well like of
their opinion, Sale good at. 15. years
who hold, that if an Infant in Gauelkinde, at this day will sell at xv.
years of age, these three things ought of necessity to concur, if he will
have the sale good and effectual. The first, yt he be an heir, and not a
Purchasour, of the land that he departs withal: The second, that he have
recompense for it: and the third, that he do it with liuerie of seison by his
own hand, and not by warrant of Attorney, nor by any other manner of
assurance. And these men for proof of the first and second point of their
assertion, do build upon the words of our written Custom, where it is said
Del heure que ceux heirs de Gauelkinde, soient, ou ount pass lage de. 15. ans,
list a eux, lour terres and tenementes, Doner and Vender) in which, the words
(Ceux Heirs) do restrain the Infant that comes in by Purchase: And (Doner
and Vender) in the copulative, (for so they lie in deed, though the imprinted
book have the^ disiunctiuely) do of necessity implye a recompense, for as
much as, Vendere, cannot be Sine precio. And for maintenance of the third
matter, they have on their part, besides the common usage of their own
Country, the common law of the whole Realm also: which expounds the word
(Doner) to mean a Feoffment (as I have before showed) and which not only
disaloweth of any gift made by an infant, but also punishes the taker in
trespass, unless he have it by liuerie from the infantes own hands.

Thus have I run over such customs, as by mean of this Gauelkinde tenure
do apperteine, either to the Lord or the Tenant, the husband or the wife,
the child or the Gardein: To these I will add (as I promised) confusedly, a
few other things, of the which, some belong generally to the Kentishe man
throughout the whole Shyre: Some to the inhabitants of some particular quarter
of the country: and some to the tenants in Gauelkinde only, and to none other.

It appears, No villains in Kent.
by claim made in our ancient treatise, that the bodies of all Kentishe
persons be of free condition, which also is confessed to be true.30. E. 1. in
the title of Villenage. 46. in Fitzherbert: Where it is holden sufficient for a
man to avoid the objection of bondage, to say, that his father was borne in
the Shyre of Kent: But whether it will serve in that case to say, that him
self was borne in Kent, I have known it (for good reason) doubted.

It seems by the same treatise, Appearance.
that such persons as held none other land then of Gauelkinde nature, be not
bound to appear (upon Sommons) before the Justices in Eire, otherwise then by
their Borsholder, and four others of the Borowe, a few places only excepted.
The like to this Privilege is inioyed at this day in the Sherifes Lathe, where
many whole Borowes be excused by the only appearance of a Borsholder, and two,
four, or six other of the inhabitants.

Furthermore, C^men.
I have read in a case of a written report at large of.16. E. 2. which also is
partly abridged by Fitzherbert, in his title of Praescription, that it was
tried by verdite, that no man ought to have commen in lands of Gauelkinde,
Howbeit, the contrary is well known at this day, and that in many places.

Chase and drive out.
The same book says, that the usage in Gauelkind is, that a man may lawfully
inchase, or drive out into the high way to their adventure, the beasts of any
other person, that he shall find doing damage in his land, and that he is not
compellable to impounde them, which custom seems to me directly against the
rule of the common law, But yet it is practiced till this present day.

Attaint.
The Parleament 15. H. 6. 3. minding to amplify the Privileges of Gauelkinde,
granted to the tenants of that land, exemption in Attaints, in such sort as
the inhabitants of ancient demean, and of the Five Ports before had: But
within three years after, upon the complaint of some of the Gentz of the
Country (which infourmed the Parleament house that there was not in the whole
Shyre above the number of 30, or 40. persons, that held to the value of 20.
li. land, out of Gauelkinde, who in default of others, and by reason of that
exemption, were continually molested by returns in Attaintes) that Act was
utterly repealed.

The Satute.14. H. 8. Cap. 6. gives liberty to every man, Changing of ways.
having high way (through his Land in the Weald) that is worn deep, and
incommodious for passage, to lay out an other way, in some such other place of
his land, as shall be thought meet by the view of two Justices of the Peace,
and twelve other men of wisdom and discretion. Finally, the general Law,
made 35. H. 8. 17. For the preservation of Copies woods, thorough out the
Realm, Goppies.
makes plain exception of all woods within this Weald, unless it be of
such as be common.

Thus much, concerning the customs of this our Country, I thought good to
discourse, not so cunningly (I confess) as the matter required, nor so amply
as the argument would bear (for so to do, it asks more art and judgment,
then I have attained) But yet sufficiently (I trust) for understanding the
old treatise that handles them, and summarily enough for comprehending (in
manner) whatsoever the common, or Statute, law of the Realm has literally,
touching them, which is as much as I desired. Now therefore, to the end that
neither any man be further bound to this my discourse upon these customs, then
shall be warranted by ye Customs themselves, neither yet ye same customs be
henceforth so corruptly carried about as hitherto they have been, but that they
may at the length be restored to their ancient light and integrity, I will
set down a true and just transcript of the very text of them, taken out of an
ancient and fair written roll, that was given to me by Master George Multon
my Father in law, and which some time belonged to Baron Hales of this
Country. I will adioyne also, mine own interpretation in the English, not of
any purpose to bind the learned unto it, but of a desire to infourme the
unlearned by it.

Kent.
Ces These sount are les the vsages, vsages, and les and custumes, customs,
les the ques which le the comunaute comunalty de of Kent Kent, cleiment
claims aver to have en in the tenementz Tenements de of Gauylekende,
Gauelkinde, e and en in gentz ye men of Gauilekendeys, Gauelkind, These words
between the stars were taken out of an other old copy.
* allows en Eire John de allowed in Eire before John of Berewike, Berwike, e
sos compagnions, and his companions, Justices the Justices en in Eire, Eire en
in Kent, Kent, le. the 21. 21. an year le of Roy Ed. fitz. le Roy Henry *
Cestascauoir, que toutes les King E. the Son of King Henry. * That is to
say, that all the cors bodies de of Kenteys Kentishe seyent men fra^cz, be
free, Free men.
auxi as well come as les the autres other frau^z free bodies cors of
Dengleterre. England. Esechator.
Et que ilz ne duiuent le eschetour le Roy And that they ought not the Eschetor
of the King to elire, choose, ne nor vnkes ever en in null any temps time ne
fesoint, mes le Roy prengne, ou did they: But the King shall take, or face
prendre, tiel come luy plerra, de ceo qui soit cause to be taken, such an one
as it shall please him, to serve him mistier a luy seruir. Et quilz pusent lour
terres in that which shall be needeful. And that they may their lands and and
lour their tenementz tenements doner and vender, Give and sell lands without
license.
sau^z conge demau^der a give and sell, without license asked of their lour
seignerages: sauues a seignorages les rentz Lords: Saving unto the Lords the
rentes and e les the services services dues des mesmes le tenementz. due out of
the same tenements. Et que touz, e chescun, And that al, and every of them,
puseit per Bre le roy, may by writ of the king, ou or per by pleynt, plainte,
Plede, by writ, or pleinte.
pleder pur lour plede for the obteining drou purchaser, auxibien de lour
Seignerages, come des auters of their right, as well of their Lords, as of
other men. gentz. Et clament auxi, que la Commune de Gauylekendeys, And they
claim also, that the communaltie of Gauelkindme^, que ne tenent mes que
tenemenz Gauylekendeys, which hold none other then tenements of Gauelkind
nature, ne deiuent venir a la comune Somonse del Eire, oug t not to come to the
common Summonce of the Eire, mes but ke per Borgesaldre, only by the
Borsholder, and and iiij. four home^s men de of la the Borghe: Borowe: Appear
by Borsholder.
horse except pris les villees que deiuent responder per xij. ho^mes en le Eire.
the towns, which ought to answer by twelve men in the Eire. Et And they
clament claim auxi, also, No eschete for felony, but of goods only.
que sil null tenant en Gauylekend seit atteint yt if any tenant in Gauelkinde
be attainted de of felony, felony, per que for the which il he suffer
suffers Iuyse de mort, judgment of death, eit le R^y the King touz ses
chateux, shall have all his goods, e and son heir eir heir meintenant
forthwith apres after sa his mort death seit shall enherite de touz be
inheritable to all ses his terres lands and and tenemenz tenements que which
il he tient held en in Gauylekende Gauelkind en in fee, fee, e en heritage, e
les tiend^a per^^^^ les and in inheritance: and he shall hold them by the same
services services et and customs, customs, sico^e ses au^cestres les
tyndro^t: don't est did as his ancestors held the^: whereupon it is said en in
Kenteis: Kentish: the the fader father to to the the boghe, boughe, and and the
the son son to the plogh. to ye plough. And if Et he si il eit have a femme,
Dower, of the one half
wife, meintenant seit dowe forthwt be she endowed by per ye le heir, heir sil
seit dage, (if he be of age) de of la ye meytie, one half de touz les terres e
teneme^z que son Baroun tint of all the lands and tenements which her husband
held de of Gauylekend Gauelkind nature en in fee, fee: a aver, e a tener solonc
la form de to have and to hold according to ye form suthdyte. hereafter
declared. Et And de of tiels such terres lands le ye Roy King ne auera An shall
not have ye year, ne nor wast, wast, Flying for felony, causes forfeiture.
mes tant soulme^t les chateux, sicome il est aua^tdit. Et si but only the
goods as is before said. And if any man of null Gauylekendeis Gauelkind, either
pur felony, either for felony, ou or pur for Ret suspision de of felony.
felony, se suthtres A draw him de la pees, out of the country, e scit en
count demand com il appent, and be demanded in the county as he ought, e
and puis be vtlaghe^ou sil se met en scinte eglise, et foriure la terre one
afterward vtlawed: or put him self into ye holy church, and abjure the le
Reaume, le Roy auera lan e le wast de ces terres, and de land and ye King shall
have ye year and yt wast of his lands and of touz all ses his tenemenz
tenements, ensemblement oue touz together with all his goods ces and chateus,
chattels: issint que apres lan, e le tour, le plus procheyn Seig^ou Seigneurs.
So that after the year the day, the next Lord, or Lords, eyent shall leur
have their eschetes Eschetes de celes terres e tenemenz, of those lands and
tenementes, chescun every Seigneur Lord ceo, that que which de is luy est
tenu immediately sans holden men. of him. E clament And they claim auxi, also,
que that si if ascun any tenant tenant en in gauylekende Gauelkind murt, dye,
Partition, amongst the heirs males
et seit and be an enherite inheritour de of terres lands e de and tenemenz
tenementes de in Gauylekende, Gauelkinde, que touz ses fitz that all his sons
shall partent part cel that heritage inheritance per by ouele equal
porcioun. portions. Et And si null heir if there be no madle ne seit, seit la
party feit enter les females sicome hei^e male, let the partition be made
between the females, even entres les freres. as between brothers. Et la
mesuage seit autreci enter eux And let the message also be departed departi,
mes le astre demorra al pune, between them: but the Astre The Astre.
shall remain to the youngest son, ou or al punee, daughter: e la value seit
de ceo liver a chescun des And be the value thereof delivered to each of the
parceners parceners de of cel that heritage heritage, a. from xl. forty pes
de cel Astre, si feet from that Astre, if le the tenement tenement le will
peut so suffrir. suffer. E And donkz then le eyne friar eit let the eldest
brother have la primere electioun, e les autres apres per degree. the first
choice, and the others afterward, according to their degree. Ensement Likewise
de of mesons houses que which serront shall be trouets found en in tieus
such mesuages. Messuages, seient departye enter les heirs per ouele porcioun,
let them be departed amongst the heirs by equal portions, Ceo est that is
asauoir per peies sil est mistier, Sauue le covert del Astre, to weete, Curt,
in other copies.
by foot if need be, Saving the Covert of the Astre, que remeynt al pune,
which shall remain to ye youngest son, ou al punee sicome il est auandist, or
daughter, as is before said: issi que nequedont que le punc face renable gre a
ces So nevertheless, that ye youngest make reasonable amends to his parceners
de la party que a eux appent parceners for the part which to them belongs,
per agard de by the award of bone good gentz. me^. One suite, for all the
parceners.
E des auaunditz tenemenz don't un soul Suit And of the aforesaid tenements,
whereof one only suite tant soulement soleit estre feit auaut, ne seit per la
resoun de la was wont to be made before time, be there not by reason of ye
partition party fors un soul suit faite sicome soleit auant, but one sole
suite made, as it was before accustomed: mes But que tous les parceners facent
contributi^un a celui que face yet let al ye parceners make contribution to ye
parcener which makes la suit pur eux. Ensement seient les chateus de
Gauylekendeys ye suite for the^. Partition of goods.
In like sort let ye goods of Gauelkind persons parties en treis apres le
exequies e les dettes rendues, si il y cit be parted into.3. parts, after ye
funerals and ye debts paid, if there be issue multer en vye, issi que la mort
eyt la vne party, e les fitz lawful issue on live: So that ye dead have one
part, and his lawful e les filles muliers lautre party, et la femme la
tierce party. sons and daughters an other part, and ye wife ye third
part. Et si null issue mulier en vye ne seit, And if there be no lawful issue
on live, eit la mort la meite, let ye dead have ye one half, e la femme en vye
lautre meytie. Et si le heir, ou lez heirs, seit, and ye wife on live ye other
half. And if the heir, or heirs, shall be ou seyent de deins le age de xv.
ans, seit la nouriture de eux under ye age of.15. years, Custody of the heir
in Gauelkind.
let ye nourtriture of them be committed baille per le Seig. al plus procheyn
del sank a qui heritage ne by the Lord, to the next of the blood to whom the
inheritance can peut not descendre, descend, issi que le Seign. pur le bail
rem ne prengne. So that ye Lord take nothing for the committing Et quil ne
seit marie per le Seign. mes per sa volunte thereof. And let not ye heir be
married by the Lord, but by his own demeine, and per le conseil de ces amys sil
veut. Et quant cel will, and by the advice of his friends, if he will. And
when such heir, ou ceux heirs sont de plener age de.xv. auns, seient a heir,
or heirs, shall come to the full age of fifteen years, let their eux lour
terres, e lour tenemenz livers, ensembleme^t one lour lands and tenements be
delivered unto them, together with their chateaux, et oue les enprowemenz de
celes terres outre goods, and with the emprouements profits of the same lands,
remaining renable sustinance: de quel enprouement, e chateux, above their
reasonable sustenance: of the which profits and goods, seit tenu a respondre
celui qui de luy a tera la noriture, let him be bound to make answer which
had ye education of the ou le Seigneur ou ses heirs que cel noriture auera
baille. heir, or else ye Lord, or his heirs, which committed ye same
education. Et ceo fet a sauoir que del hour que ceux And this is to be
understood, that from such time as those heirs Gauylekende seient, ou ount
pass le age de xv. auns, heirs in Gauelkind, Sale at xv. years of age
be of, or have passed, the age of fiftene years, list a eux lour terres ou
tenemenz doner e vendre it is lawefull for them, their lands or tenementes, to
give and sell a at lour their volunte, Sauues les services au chefz seignorages
com il at their pleasure: Saving the services to the chief Lords, as is est
deuant dit. Et si null tiel tenant en Gauylekend meurt, e eit before said.
Dower, of the one half
And if any such tenant in Gauelkind dye, and have a femme que survive, wife
that ouerliueth him, seit cele femme meyntenant douwe de let that wife by and
by be endowed (of la meite des tenementz don't son baroun morust vestu e the one
half of the tenements whereof her husband dyed vested and seisi, per les heirs
sil seient de age, ou per les Seigneures seized) by the heirs, if they be of
age, or by the Lords, if si les heirs ne seint pas de age, the heirs be not
of age: issi que ele eyt la So that she may have the moietie one half meite de
celes terres e tenemenz, a tener tant com ele se of those lands and
tenementes, to hold so long as she keeps tyent veue, her a widow, Forfaiture
of Dower.
ou de enfanter seit atteint per le auncienne or shall be attainted of
childbyrth, after the ancient usage, usage: ceo that est is to asauoir, que
quant ele enfaunte, e say, that if when she is delivered of child, the lenfant
seit oy crier, E que le hu e le cry seit leave infant be heard cry, and that
the hue and cry be raised, e le pais ensemble, and the country be assembled,
e eyent weue de lenfant ensi faunte, and have the view of the child so e de
la mere, borne, and of the mother, adonks perde son dowere enterement, e then
let her loose her Dowre wholly, and autrement nyent, tant come ele se tient
veue, otherwise not, so long as she holds her a widow: don't il est whereof it
is did en kenteys: se that His wend, se His lend. said in Kentish: he that
does wend her, let him lend her. Tenant by the courtesy, of the one half.
E And clament auxi, que home que prent femme, que eit heritage they claim
also, that if a man take a wife which has inheritance de of Gauylekend,
Gauelkind, e la femme murge auant luy, and the wife dies before him, eit le
Baroun let the husband have le meite de celes terres et tenemenz, tant come the
one half of those lands and tenements whereof she died seized il se tient
veuers (don't il morust seisei) saunz estrepement, so long as he holds him a
widower, without doing any strippe, ou wast, ou exile fere, le quel kill y eit
heir enter or waste, or banishment, whether there were issue between eux them,
ou or noun. no: Et sil prent femme, And if he take another wife, trestout
perde. let him loose all. The descent of Gauelkind, changed.
Ei And si null tenement de Gauylekend eschete (et ceo eschete seit a if any
tenement of Gauelkinne do escheate (and that escheate be to null seigneur que
tiene per fee de hawberk ou per seriauncye) any Lord which holds by fee of
Hawberke, or by Sericancie) per by mort, death, ou or per by Gauelate sicome il
est suthdite, is heareafter said, ou li ^^it or be to him rendu de son tenant
que de li auant le tynt per quiteclamau^ce rendered given up by his tenant
which before held it of him by quiteclaime de ceofete, ou seit sa eschete per
Gauelate sicome il est de suthdit thereof made, or if his eschete be by
Gauelate as is hereafter said, remeyne cele terre as heirs impartable. let
this land remain to the heirs vnpartable: Et ceo fet asauoir, And this is to
be la ou le tenant ensirendant, understood, where the tenant so rendering, nule
service retent does retain no service deuers sey, sauuet nequedent as autres
Seigneurages fees fermes to himself, but saves nevertheless to the other
Lords their fees, e les rentes don't les auant diz tenemenz de Gauylekende
fermes, and the rentes wherewith the aforesaid tenementes of ensi rendus
auaunt furent charges per ceux, ou Gauelkind (so rendered) were before charged,
by him, or them, per celuy, Forfaiture by Ceslauit or G^uelate
que le charger poent, ou poeyt. which might charge them. Eclament auxi, que si
And they claim also, that if any null tenant en Gauylekende retain sa rent, e
son service del tenant in Gauelkind retain withholde his rent, and his
services of the tenement tenement quil tient de son Seign. querge le Seign. per
which he holds of his Lord, let the Lord seek by the agard de sa court de
treys semeynes en treys semeynes truue award of his court from.3. weeks to.3.
weeks, to find some distress destre^se sur cel tenement tant que a la quart
court, a totefet upon that tenement, until the fourth court, always with per
tesmoynage, Et si dedens cel temps ne trusse destresse on ce witnesses: And if
within that time he can find no distress in the^ tenement per queux il puisse
son tenant iustiser, tenement, whereby he may have justice of his tenant, Donc
a la Then at the quart court seit fourth court let it be agard, awarded, quil
pregne cel tenement en that he shall take that tenement into sa mein en noum de
destress, his hand, in the name of a distress, ausi come boef ou vache, as if
it were an ox, or a cow, e le tiene un an, and let him keep it a year, e un
iour en sa mein sance meyn and a day, in his hand without manuring ouerir:
dens quel term, it: within which term, si le tenant vent, e rend ses if the
tenant come, and pay his arrerages, arrerages, e feit renables amends de la
detenue, and make reasonable amends for the withholding, a donc eit, e ioise
son tenement sicom ses ancestors e Then let him have and enjoy his tenement
as his auncetors and ly auant le tyndront. Et sil ne vent deuant lan, he before
held it. And if he do not come before the year, e le tour and ye day pass,
donc auge le Seign. al prochein Count suiant oue resmoynage paste, then let
the Lord go to the next county court with the witnesses de sa court, e face
la pronuncier cel process pur of his own court, and pronounce there this
process, to have tesmoynage aver further witness. Et per agard de sa court,
apres ceo Count And by the award of his court (after that cou^tie tenue,
entra, e meynouera en celes terres e tenemenz, court holden) he shall enter,
and manure in those lands and teneme^ts, sicome en son demeyne. Et si le tenant
vent apres, e voill^ as in his demeanes own. And if the tenant come
afterward, and will ces tenemenz reauer e tener sicome il fist deuaunt, face
rehaue his tenements, and hold them as he did before, let him make gree al
Seigneur, sicome il est auncyenement did, agreement with the Lord, according
as it is aunciently said: NegHe sithe selde. and neg He sith gelde: and fif
pond for the ere. er He bicome Healder. Aussi il cleyment que null home deit
serment sur liver fere, Also they claim, No oathe, but for fealty.
that no man ought to make an oath upon a book, per destress, ne per poer de
Seigneur, (neither by distress, nor by the power of ye Lord, ne de Baylif, nor
his bailyfe) encountre sa volunte saunz bref le Roy (sinon pur feaute against
his will, without the writ of the King (unless it be for fealty. fere a son
Seigneur) meske per deuaunt Coronner, ou auter to be done to his Lord) but only
before the Coroner, or such other minister le Roy, qui Real poer eyont de
enquerer de minister of the King, as has Royal power to enquire of trespass
fet encountre la Coronne nostre Seigneur le Roy. Essoignes
trespass committed against the crown of our Lord the king. Ecleyment And
auxi, que checun Kenteys put autre assonier en they claim also, that every
Kentishe man may essoine an other, la court le Roy, en Count, en hundredth: e
en la either in the Kings court, or in the county, or in ye hundredth, or in ye
court son Seigneur, la ou assoigne gist, aussi bien de commune Court of his
Lord, where essoine lies, and ye as well in case of co^mu^e suit, come de play.
Estre ceo il cleyment per especial fet le Roy suit, as of plea. Moreover they
claim by an especial deed of king Henry, pere le Roy Edward, que ore est,
que dieu Guard, No battle nor graun^ assise, in Guelkinde lands.
que Henry ye 3 father of King E. which now is (who^ god save) yt of de
tenementz que sont tenus en Gauylekende ne scit prise battaille, the tenements
which are holden in Gauelkind, there shall no battle ne graund assise per xij.
chiuallers, sicome aillours be joined, nor graund Assise taken by.xii. Knights,
as it is used in est prise en le reaume: ceo est a sauoir, la ou tenant e le
demau^dant other places of ye realm: this is to weet, where ye tenant and
demau^dant tene^t per Gauylekende: mes en lu de ces grandes assizes hold by
Gauelkinde: But in place of these ground assizes, seie^t prises Iurees per xii.
homes tena^tz en Gauyleke^d: Issi let Iuries be taken by.xii. men, being
tenants in Gauelkind: so ye que quatre tena^tz de Gauyleke^d elisent.xij.
tena^tz de Gauyle four tenants of Gauelkinde, choose.xii. tenants of
Gauelkinde to kende jurors. E la chartre le Roy de ceste especiaute est en la
be Jurors. And the chartre of the King, of this especialtie, is in ye guard
Sire Johan de Norwode le tour S. Elphegh en Ca^terbyre, custody of Sir Ihon of
Norwood, the day of S. Alphey, in Canterbury, le an le Roy Edward, le Fiz le
Roy Henry.xxi. the year of King Edward the son of king Henry, ye xxi. Ces
sont les vsages de Gauilekend, e de Gauylekendeys en Ke^t, These be the vsages
of Gauelkind, and of Gauelkinde men in Kent, que furent deuaunt le conquest, e
en le Conquest, e totes hours which were before the conquest, and at the
Conquest, and ever teskes en ca, since till now.

The names of such persons, as procured their possessions to be altered from
the nature of Gauelkinde, by act of Parleament made.31. H. 8. Cap. 3.
Thomas Lord Cromwell. Thomas Lord Burghe. George Lord Cobham. Andrew Lord
Windsore. Sir Thomas Cheyne. Sir Christopher Hales. S. Thomas Willoughbie. S.
Anthony Seintleger. S. Edward Wootton. S. Edward Bowton. S. Roger Cholmley. S.
John Champneys. John Baker Esquier. Reignold Scot. John Guldeford. Thomas
Kempe. Edward Thwaites. William Roper. Anthony Sands. Edward Isaac.
Perciuall Heart. Edward Monyns. William Whetnall. John Fogg. Edmund Fetiplace.
Thomas Hardres. William Waller. Thomas Wilforde. Thomas Moyle. Thomas
Harlakenden Geffrey Lee. James Hales. Henry Hussy. Thomas Roydon.
The names of such, as be likewise provided for. E. 6. Ca.
Sir Robert Southwell. S. James Hales. S. Walter Hendley. S. George Harper. S.
Henry Isley. S. George Blage. Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebirie. John Colepeper
of Ailesforde. William Twisden. Tho. Darrell of Scotney. Robert Rudston. Thomas
Roberts. Stephan Darrell. Richard Couarte. Christopher Blower. Thomas Hendley.
Thomas Harman. Thomas Louelace. Thomas Colepeper.
The names of such, as be specified in the act made for the like cause, 5.
Elizabeth. Cap.
Thomas Brown of Westbecheworthe in Surrey. George Brown.
It were right worthy the labor, to learn the particulars and certeintie,
(if it may be) of all such possessions, as these men had, at the times of
these several Statutes, for that also will be serviceable in time to come.

A Table, containing the principal places, and matters, handeled in this Book.
A
Angles, or Englishmen. Page 2 Archebishopricke of Canterbury. Page 62
Archebishops contend for the primacie. Page 65 Archebishops all named. Page 70
Armor. Page 112. 211. Apledore. Page 146. 162 Aile, or Eile a River. Page 177.
Correction of adultery. Page 180. Appropriations. Page 292 Ailesforde. Page
321. Asheherst. Page 333. Adington. Page 258. Aldington. Page 149.
B
Brytones, or Welshmen. Page 1. 12. Borsholder, what he is. Page 22 Bridges of
stone. Page 49. 303 Boroughes in Kent. Page 52. Brittishe History. Page 59
Flamines turned into Bishops. Page 62 Barons and Citizens. Page 94. 101. Bull
of Gold. Page 134. 218. Thomas Becket Tharchbishop, look Thomas. etc.
Bilsington. Page 154 Beacons. Page 160 Boxeley. Page 181. Baramdowne. Page 217
Barons war. Page 219. 298 Burial of the dead. Page 244 Bishop of Saint
Martines. Page 250 Bartilmew Badelsmere. Page 262 Bishops of Rochester named.
Page 271 Benerth. Page 169 Blackheath. Page 340 Blacksmithes rebellion. Page
340 Saint Bartilmew and his offering. Page 375. Anthony Beck, an edifying
Bishop. Page 384
C
Julius Caesar. Page 1 Customs of Kent. Page 22. 388 Cities in Kent, Page 50.
91 Castles in Kent. Page 52 Cross of the Archbishop. Page 67 Cursed bread.
Page 87 Cinque Ports. Page 93 Co^stableship of Dover castle. Page 102
Contentions between religious persons. Page 67. 128, 237. 251. 269. 290. 301.
Courtopstreete. Page 148 Carmelite Friars. Page 166. 324 Contempt of Good
Counsel worthily punished. Page 168 Cranmer the Archbishop. Page 186 Lord
Cromwell. Page 186 Charteham. Page 220 Chilham. Page 227 Canterbury. Page 231
Thomas Colpeper. Page 262 Feast of Saint Cuthbert. Page 270 Cruelty against
Strangers, Page 7, 278 284. Conquest of England. Page 283 Chetham. Page 286
Crayford, and Cray River. Page 345 Cliffe at Hoo. Page 352
D
Domesday book. Page 93 Danes, and their whole History. Page 107. 162. 322.
337. Dele. Page 117 Dover. 119, the Castle. Page 121 Doncastre. Page 195
Drinking and Carowsing. Page 280 Depeford. Page 335 Dartford, and Dare^t river.
Page 346. 349
E
Ethelbert the King. Page 18 Eadric, the King. Page 19 King Edward the
confessor. Page 89 Eastrie. Page 114 Saint Eanswyde. Page 136 King Edward the
first, claims supremacy over the Clergy. Page 226. Saint Edith, and her
offering. Page 372 Elizabeth our Queen. Page 58. 275. Eslingham. Page 292
Edmond Ironside. Page 323 Erasmus Roterodam. Page 255, 377 Edric the Earl, an
infamous traitor. Page 323 An Earl, Butler to the Archbishop. Page 331.
Earithe. Page 343 Eltham. Page 384
F
Fifteen and tenthe of Kent. Page 25 Fraunchises. Page 48 Forestes and Parkes
in Kent, Page 48 Faires in Kent. Page 51 Flamines turned into Bishops. Page 62
Folkstone. Page 136 Farley. Page 172 Fermes, why so called. Page 172 Feuersham.
Page 202 Frendsbury. Page 290 Fernham. Page 322
G
Gentlemen of Kent by name. Page 54 Geffray of Mounmouth. Page 59 Goodwine
Sands. Page 84 Godwyne the Earl. Page 84. 86. 120 Genlade and Gladmouthe,
Page 205 Gillingham. Page 274 Gauelkinde. Page 22. 388. Grenewiche. Page 336
Grauesend. Page 349 Gentlemen, and gentry, of old time. Page 363
H
Heptarchie of England. Page 1. 3 Hundrethes, how they began. Page 21 Hills of
name, in Kent. Page 49 Houses of honor in Kent. Page 53. 211 Hospitals in Kent.
Page 53 King Henry the eight. Page 117. 200 Hubert of Borough. Page 162 Hyde
haven. Page 141. Havens, why they decay. Page 141. Hydeland. Page 1^2. Holy
Maid of Kent. Page 149 Harlot, whereof so called. Page 178 High ways. Page
213 Hakington. Page 251 Harbaldowne. Page 254 Harold the King. Page 284
Horsmundene. Page 288 Horstede. Page 289 Halling. Page 317 Hengist, and Horsa,
two Capitaines. Page 15. 289. 345 Saint Hildeferthe. Page 354 Husbandry. Page
368 King Henry the second. Page 239. 377 Holmesdale. Page 382
I
Iutes. Page 2 Inglishmen. Page 2 Ingland first inhabited. Page 12 Inglishmen
first named. Page 20 Indigenae, what they be. Page 12 Ippedfleete. Page 82
Ightam. Page 197 Inglishe speech corrupted. Page 205 decayed. Page 209
King John of Ingland. Page 133, 203. 217 Jack Cade. Page 340. 384 Jack
Straw. Page 340. 348
K
Seven Kingdoms in England. Page 1. 3 Kent, how situated 7. why so named, 7.
167. Her gentry, 10. 5. Her Yeomanrie, 10. 65. Fertility. 8. 9. Artificers.
11. First inhabited part of al Ingland. 14 has many Kings, 14. 317. One King.
15. 345. her kings names 17. she keeps her old Customs. 22. particularly set
down. 25. has three steps. Page 158. Knights fees. Page 48 Kemsley down.
Page 190 Kentish tails. Page 315 Kemsing. Page 372 Knolle. Page 377 Knights
service. Page 9, 368. 389
L
Laws of Ingland. Page 5 Lathes how they began. Page 21. 212. London spoiled
of the Archebishopricke. Page 63 Lymne, and Lymene. Page 145 Lymen, a River.
Page 146. 165 Lyming. Page 216 Leedes. Page 260 Lady of Chetham. Page 286
Liuerie of seisine. Page 317 Lord Dane, and Lourdan. Page 111 Lowy of
Tunbridge. Page 329. Lesnes. Page 342
M
Marriage. Page 16. 299. 405 Markets in Kent. Page 50 Minster Abbay. Page 80.
Saint Myldred. Page 81 Miracles. Page 81. 116. 136. 152. 268. 336. Saint
Martines night. Page 210 Saint Martines. Page 128 Maidston. Page 174 Medway, a
River. Page 176 Mylton. Page 190 Minster. Page 198 Monks contend forceably
against the King. Page 203 Mottindene. Page 230 Maude the Empress. Page 260
Malling. Page 325 Mepham. Page 355 Merchandise. Page 368
N
Nor ^ans. Page 3 Neshe. Page 160 Newendene. Page 165 Names of towns fetched
from Rivers adjoining. Page 174, 205 Norwood. Page 258 Naming of men. Page 258
Navy, See Ships. Names of Towns in Eng. Page 325
O
Order of this description. Page 62. 77 161. 207. 215. 273, 353. 386. Odo the
Earl of Kent. Page 123. 178. 297. Order of Templers. Page 132 Orpington. Page
345 Otford. Page 374
P
Pictes. Page 2 Parkes, see Forestes. Polydore Virgill. Page 60. 222. 316. 355
Ports, see Cinque Ports. Pope. 133. 217. 220 abolished. Page 157 Passage over
the Sea. Page 143 Piccendene Hothe. Page 178 Purgatory. Page 192 Parleament
without the Clergy Page 221. Priests wives, see Marriage Priests unlearned.
Page 352 Papisme and Paganism agree in many points of religion. Page 373
Portreue, whereof it comes. Page 349. Partition, of lands.409. of goods Page
408.
Q
Quinborow. Page 200
R
Rivers in Kent. Page 49. Religious houses in Kent. Page 53. and their values.
Page 230
Rome whereof named. Page 81 Relics. Page 82. 105. 216. 247. 255 Richeborowe.
Page 90 Rutupi. Page 90 Rother, a River. Page 146. 165 Rumney. 156. and the
Marsh. Page 158 Roode of grace. Page 182 Saint Rumwald. Page 186. 188.
Reculuer. Page 207 Robert Wynchelsey the Archbishop. Page 222 Religous houses
valued. Page 230 Sir Roger Laybourne. Page 263 Bishops of Rochester named. Page
271 Roode of Gillingham. Page 286 Rochester. Page 293, 354 Rochester bridge.
Page 303 Sir Robert Knolles Page 313 Rauensborne, a river. Page 335 Reave,
whereof it comes. Page 350 Reigate Castle. Page 382
S
Scots. Page 2 Saxons. Page 2. 79 Samothees. Page 12 Shyres, how they began.
Page 20. 337 Swanscombe. Page 23. 354 Schools in Kent. Page 54. 233. 383
Stonor. Page 83 Sandwiche. Page 91. 105 Ships. Page 97. 112. 274. 335 Sandowne.
Page 118 Stephan Langton Tharchebishop.. Page 133. 197 Saints in the Papacy.
Page 137 Saltwood. Page 139 Shypwey. Page 144 Seawatche. Page 160 Stone. Page
164 Sittingbourne. Page 191 Shepey, Page 198 Sheep of England, Page 198
Stouremouthe. Page 208 Saint Stephans. Page 251 King Stephan. Page 260 See of
Canterbury, look in Archebishopricke See of Rochester. Page 266 Shorham
Deantie. Page 267 Sees of Bishops translated from villages. Page 271 Cruelty
against Strangers. Page 7 278. 284. Seruingmen. Page 282 Strowde. Page 290.
315 Sealing and signing. Page 318 Socage tenure. Page 9. 391 Sherif, whereof it
comes. Page 350 Sennocke. Page 383
T
Tithings, how they began. Page 21 Tanet. Page 78 Order of the Templers. Page
132 Thomas Becket Tharchebishop Page 143, 239, 248. 255. 374. 377 Trial of
right, Page 178. 343 Tongue Gastle. Page 195 Tenham. Page 197 Decay of Towns.
Page 236 Towns named, see names. Tunbridge. Page 327 Thieves, how suppressed.
Page 21 Torneament. Page 347 Testament, or last will. Page 356
W
Wasseling cup. Page 1^ Writers of Kent by name. Page 58 Winchelsey. Page 94.
96 Lord Wardeins of the Ports by name. Page 102 Walmere. Page 118 William
Longcha^p the Bishop of Ely. Page 129 William Courtney Tharchebishop. Page 139
Westenbangar. Page 140 William Warham the Archbishop. Page 151 Weald of Kent,
Page 167 Woole of England. Page 198 Wantsume, a river. Page 97. 207 Wingham.
Page 211 Wapentakes. Page 212 Wrotham. Page 370 Wyngham. Page 380 Watches at
the Sea Page 160 Watling street. Page 213 Wye. Page 228 Wrecke at the Sea.
Page 228 Saint William of Rochester. Page 301 University at Canterbury. Page
233 Whoredom punished. Page 180 Vagaboundes Page 21 Wager of Law Page 344
Y
Yarmouthe. Page 95 Yeoman, whereof so called. Page 10 Yeomanrie of Kent. Page
10 Yenlade, see Genlade.
Jmprinted at London, for Rafe Newbery dwelling in Fleetestreate, a little above
the Conduite.

Anno Domini. 1576.


