The true Copy, of a Letter written to a Gentleman of Worship in England.

Lamentably discoursing the cruelty of Bashavv Mahomet, high Admiral to the
great Turk: who with a Fleet of one hundred and seven Galleys, entered the
Confines of the Christian Princes within the Straits of Gibraltar.

With his landing in Sicilia an Island of the Spanish Kings, which he burned
and spoiled, taking many Prisoners.

Also the taking of two of the principal Galleys of the Duke of Florence with
one thousand fighting men: The taking and burning of three great Ships in the
vale of Messina, and two others in the gulphe of Venice, one of which being a
Venetian, the other a Fleming.

Printed at London by I.D. for Thomas Gosson: and are to be sold at his shop by
London Bridge Gate, 1595.

The Admiral of the great Turks invasion of Sicilia an Island of the Spanish
Kings, with his other extreme cruelties over diverse Nations whom he spoiled,
entering the Confines of the Christian Princes in the Straits of Giblatar with
107. Galleys in January last.
RIght worshipful, to write you the many wrongs offered my Captain, your
worshipful good friend, in this place (where neither laws of Christians or
conscience is regarded) might rather cumber you than any way move your
content, wherefore I omit them, not doubting, but by his own reports you have
long sithence been advertised of each particular accident, for that I hear to
all our great comforts, by Master Spencer of London, who arrived here with a
ship of the Thames, that he was met out of the Straits long since: which news
(I may well say) was joyful unto us, for that it was verily thought, yea, and
spoken expressly, that he was dead, so credibly believed by the sudden going
hence of his ship: But blessed be God for his safety, for by his welfare our
hopes are made the greater, his care will be the more of us his poor followers,
and we shall the more patiently bear this discontent, living here amongst
those which hold us in no more regard than they do beasts, but only in
regard of the league between our gracious Queen and the graund Seigniory, as
has appeared by their indirect dealings with us, not only the Gentleman being
present, but with us in his absence, especially, so long as the old Bashaw
continued here, which stomacked us greatly, the more for our Captains
departure, of whom he thought if he once again got him in his possession to
have made a great gain: But he is now gone to Constantinople, where it is said
he is very hardly thought of, not only for abusing my Captain and us, but also
for forcing Master Poynes his man the Purser of the Mary to ^u^ne Turk, who is
prosecuted hardly by the English men there for the same, so that for the love
the Emperor bears to our Nation, they say he is like to loose his head,
since whose departure, and the coming of this new Viceroy we have been
very well entreated, and with such favor, as we cannot be better with our
nearest friends, being not of our own Nation, which kindness is by the express
command of the great Turk, whom he dares not offend, dreading his life.

But for all their shows of love; God send us the company of our good friends
in England, for our own extremity is not such, as is the grief and
discontent of mind, to see what numbers of Christians daily are brought
hither: And not long since there was brought by Meryteroyze the Admiral 1000.
able men prisoners, besides slaves which were taken by four small Galleys of
the Turks, going in course on the Christian shore, where they met the the two
chief Galleys of the Duke of Florence his Admiral with his lantern, and one
other, the least having twenty eight banks on a side, and six men at every
Oar. These Galleys when they saw, first the Turks gave them chase, and the
Turks coming with them likewise, came suddenly in sight to discrie what one
the other were.

The Florentines perceiving them to be Turks, were amazed what to do, some
would fight, others gave counsel to be gone: Growing into mutinies within
themselves the guider of the Christian Admiral cried out to the Captain, to
free his slaves, and let them fight for their liberty: But he cried to be gone,
and caused them to row all they could. But his slaves being many of them Turks
would not work, but gave over their labor in hope that they should be freed by
those Galleys. How so ever it chanced, they assured them selves worse than
they were, they could not be: if taken, they were sure of livertie: if not,
they could be no worse.

The companies as is said, being at this ods within themselves, up came the
Galleys, and discharged their Prowes and small shot upon them, doing much spoil
unto the^ and killed many of the men, yet were most bravely answered of the
Florentines, who spared neither powder nor shot, but in reasonable sort
bestowed them both. But in the end, having small hope to escape being so
fiercely assailed, their stomachs quailed, the Turks boorded them. In the
entry, they murdered as many with their Curtleaxes as stood in their ways,
forcing diverse to leap over board, making such massacre amongst them, that
might grieve any Christian heart to hear it. In this conflict was the
Christian General slain, and many of the better sort, who if they had been
men, as they be proud cowards, might as well have taken the Turks.

Thus the poor Christians being subdued, such of the Turks which in the fight
had their friends slain, did in revenge they so abuse them as they wished they
had all leapt over board to escape their tyrranny, in which fight, there
perished many Christians, and not above four score Turks in the whole: with
this booty they returned to Argiere again, after they had been from thence
some eighteen days, bringing with them of Captains Christians nine hundred
and ninety, and released threo hundred Turks and more which were slaves with
them.

Amongst which was one Englishman who was Gunner in one of the Galleys, whose
favor was more than all the others, yet was he chained with the rest, until
the Admiral Meryteroyze had examined him, who finding as well by others
reports as his own, that he was taken at Genoway, coming Pilot ^ha Flemming
to serve against his will, he was set at liberty.

Whiles these Galleys were abroad, there arrived a Frigot here from
Constantinople with Letters, commanding as well Argiere, as all other Ports
in Barberie by a day (...) ^d, with such Galleys as they could make to meet
the Admiral of Turkey, who came with a great Fleet to range the ^eas, (...)
^^w^ the forces of the Christians (...) commanding them to put over to the
Christian shore, and learn by such means as they could what forces the
Christians had, who they were informed had one hundred and fifty Sails reads
to encounter them, and in the vale of Messina to meet them, to give
intelligence what they heard.

For this service, seven Galleys from Argiere was appointed four, of them
being Meryteroyze who was Admiral: Manny Ro^zus vice Admiral: Manny
Prechinel^, and Manny Spaniola, the chief of the other best Galleys, who were
not long in providing, but hastened to meet the Basha we as they were
commanded, and putting over to the Christian shore, in the ^e of Venice, they
gave chase to a tall ship of Venice, with whom they came and haled them, but
the Venetians would not suffer them to come a board but most courageously
resisted them, doing great spoil, yet in the end were enforced to yield, and
being taken and demanded how they durst break the League between them and the
State whom they answered in such manner, that they were for their labor
chained and made slaves, and their ship which was laden with great wealth, bound
for Marcellus was before their faces without any remorse fired.

From thence they bore to Calabria, an Island situate between Christendom and
Barbary where they gave chase to a great ^^^e-boat laden (as they say) with
Englishmens goods* These Flemings seeing the Galleys give them chase, and
doubting they had been the Spanish Galleys, fearing if they were taken they
should be ill entreated for wearing the english color in their top, heaued the
same over boorde, with their Charti^ Party bills of lading and all letters
that might give them any show to be, or have to do for England: for which
their rashness when the Turks had boorded and taken them, they were all made
prisoners and chained, and their ship fired and burned, notwithstanding all
their entreaties, dilating truly what they were, and what they intended: Soon
after this mischief was ended, the Turkish Galleys had sight first of two
Galleys then three then four more, so that they had discried nine Sails in
sight, all tall Galleys far bigger than the Turks, which being well percei^ed
(...) was suspected by the Turks, they were part of that Fleet of one hundred
and fifty which was said to be made out for them, and thereon resolved not to
stay, dreading the rest was not far, and they too weak to encounter them, and
therefore made from them all they could: But the Christian Galleys having had
sight of them, gave them chase, but wind failing them, and the Turks Galies
being light and nimble, towed away from them and so escaped.

This hazard past, they plied to meet the Fleet as they had directions, of
whom by other small Galleys which were sent for spies they had intelligence,
th^ther they made, and in the vale of Messina met them, at which, such general
rejoicing after these manner was made that the noise of their Cannons and small
shot was heard tumbling in the air by report near twenty Leagues. This
triumph past, Meryteroyze and his three companions were sent for to the Bashaw,
who gave them great entertainment, and many welcomes: To him when they had at
large discoursed what had happened them with all their fortunes in their voyage,
the night growing on, they take their leaves for that time, each one going to
his charge. The next morning a flag of parley was put out in the Admiral, to
summon all Commanders to come (...) where of^ ^^me par^ey, they had (...) their
intended action, each one ^ng ^^s charge delivered, as will those for the
service by sea, as those appointed for the land: To Sicilia they come, and
rowed close aboard the shore, banking breast and breast, and on the I Will where
they were most sure their force was least; they landed: at whose sudden
coming, the people such as could make shift for themselves, fled into the
mountains leaving few others but aged and weak people, with young children,
which those cruel people made no conscience to kill in most brutish and vile
manner, seven several villages they thus surprised: Carried their ordinance
from their Ports, spoiled and rifled their goods, burned their towns and
houses, sacked their holds and places of defense, leaving many man wiueles, and
many a wife husbandles, the parents lamenting their children lost, led by these
merciles people into captivity, and the children crying for the parents who
were murdered, their vineyards burned in like manner, and what mischief was
there which they did not perform? Thus by the force of those merciles people
are many beggered which were of wealth and utterly spoiled. And it is greatly
feared in all Christian Regions in these parts, that with greater forces they
will make their repair into those Confines: and by the Merchants of Marcellus
it is commonly spoken here, that he gathers a great power pretending to
come for Naples: To rebate whose furious pride in conquering, the Spanish King
has sent to the State of Venice for aid against them, which the Duke will not
grant in regard of the League between them, without great matters be
accomplished which is required: It is said, he requires Sicilia be assured to
the State of Venice. But how true the report of these Princes doings is, I
cannot say, for the rest I have certain knowledge to be true, as well by that
Englishman, which was present at all the service, which was taken in the Duke
of Florence Galleys, as also by diverse other which were eye witness to the same
and returned hither with great spoil.

God of his great mercy unite the hearts of all Christian Princes, that they
loving faithfully, may join themselves and their Forces, to relieve those
miserable afflicted people, which grove under the burden of their miseries: So
shall God be glorified by them, and the oppressed comforted.

Thus sir I have been over bold with your Worship, which I hope you will
pardon, and remember my suite to my friendly Captain, whom I hope shortly to
see.

Argiere this tenth of January. Your Worships in all duty, ever ready, R.
La.


