One and forty DIVINE ODES ENGLISHED, SET TO KING DAVID'S Princely Harp.

By S. P. L.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. 1627.

AN ASSAY, OR BVCHANAN HIS PARAPHRASE ON THE FIRST twenty Psalms of DAVID
TRANSLATED

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for Richard Moore in St. Dunstones Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. 1627.

TO THE KING His most excellent MAJESTY.
A King put in a baser weeede,
And brought unto your Princely view,
Some man that may misdeem the deed,
And doubt some danger to ensue,
Will say that no disguise is good
For Kings, or for the Royal blood.
But, Sir, by blessed proof we find
Clothes change the man, but not the mind.
With Him Heavens darling then advise,
Who, though disguised, will not disguise.
URANIA to the King.
Descended first of Kingly blood,
Bequeathed since to your royal race,
More humbly-bold in hope I stood
Of entertainment with your Grace.
And though disroab'd by this am known,
I sing Iehouahs name alone.
PSALM I.
O Blessed He, whom from the sacred way
Lewd men's contagion has not swai'd aside,
Nor errors paths has trod, nor made his stay
In scorners trade, set in their chair of pride:
2 But who to the track of better life enured,
Does on Gods Law his time, and spirits spend.
3 He like a tree which sun and wind endured,
Low on a bank set by the streams, shall send
His branches wide, which in abundance yield,
And bless the Planter with fair fruit, nor shows
His flowring bloomes but to adorn the field,
And mock the Master while it fruitless grows.
4 It fares not so with them, who void of grace,
Like out-lawes slight the Heavens, they soon shall fly
As dust, which with the whirlwind leaves his place,
And mounting capers in the vaulted sky,
As if the wind did take a sport to see
It dancing there, and making many a round.
5 But when the Judge of right shall seated be
On a fair cloud, his head with glory crowned,
And holds his Scepter in his royal hand
To judge the world of sin; then shall not proud,
Iniquity in public presence stand,
Nor show her face where just men are allowed.
6 For Heavens great King knows their unspotted way,
Viewes all their hearts, and all enclosed therein,
And those that in blind errors bypath stray,
Shall perish with their crooked ways of sin.
PSALM. II.
Why do the Nations rage, and raise the cry,
And headlong run in a tumultuous fright?
Their threats why dart the people at the sky?

All against the Lord, and his Anointed plot,
When all in vain their proiects prosper not.

And free us from their bonds that yoke our necks?

Laughs at their pride, and their vain threatening checks.

And mar their plots when fury flames his gall.

My sacred King, that placed on Sion hill,
He may give Law, invested with renown,
And through the world spread wide my royal will;

Of Heavenly seed this day begat I thee.

As my sole Heir, what Earth and Sea contain;
That what the Heavens in their wide arms infold,
May all be thine, and Thou as Monarch reign:

The Insulting proud, as Pipkins made of clay.

And judge the Nations by the doom of Law,
Dispell the clouds of error, while you learn
Truth from above, and serve the Lord in awe:
And you, Earth's gods, who rule with sou'raign might,
Be wise your selves, and see the rest do right.
Serve God with fear, and finding sweet content,
Join with your joy that awe to him is due,
That you may kiss his Son whom He has sent,
Lest whilst you stray rage and revenge pursue.
Soon, when just wrath his flames against sin shall throw,
How happy they who hope in him, you will know.
PSALM. III.
AH what a rout, viewd either by the poll
Or by the bulk, vex me with deadly hate!
How many troops do their lewd names enroll,
Conspiring all against my life, and state!
Whilst they dare say, No hopes at all remain
In God for him; He looks for help in vain.
When yet in combat often my soul bleedes,
And thou me shield'st that no force beats me down,
When all my praise, and worth from thee proceeds,
When thou with glory do my temples crown;
When in the night I do thy grace recount,
And God, my God, hears from his holy Mount,
Then clear from cares I lie, and take my rest,
And rise again as safe, and free from fear;
Whilst He does guard, no fright inuades my breast,
Though endless troops of armed foes be near:
When all fell Nations bandy against me,
Thou, Lord, wilt lead the point, to set me free;
And thou will break the iaw-bones of my foes,
And dash their teeth out with thine angry fist,
But thou, the hope of all, our safe repose,
(Whilst thou alone do all mishaps resist)
Thy people in thine arms of love embrace,
And guard them with thy wonted hand of grace.
PSALM. IIII.
Who made, and rul'st above, below,
Angels, and gods of mortal kind
And conscious of my thoughts do know
The cleerer current of my mind.
Who in a safe and spacious plain,
(When I in straights do sue for aid)
Do lead me forth set free again,
Whilst counsel fails, my self unstaid,
Propitious with thine ear of grace,
Hear calmly what I justly vow,
Give way and welcome to my case
Whom hateful spite beleaguers now.
3 O minds of men enuolu'd in vain,
And idle shadows that deceive,
Why will you not have me to reign,
Whilst you of rest your selves bereave?
4 Believe at length, I tell you true,
Whom God has chose from all the rest,
And graced him more than was his due,
No man can hurt whom he has blessed.
The Lord did hear me when I cried,
And laid before him my sad case,
Nor help I craved, has he denied,
Or has shut up his gate of grace.
5 Then wretched you, Gods awefull might
Recount at length, and cease to sin,
And cast in silent bed at night
The day, and all that past therein.
6 It Is not the entrals of a beast
Wherein the Lord does liking find,
A faithful heart he makes his feast,
And best accepts a guiltless mind.
If this thou to the Altar bring,
And offer it with due regard,
If Truth be true, from Heavens great King,
Thou may expect a rich reward.
7 The most of men grown out of kind,
Affect proud wealth which they adore;
8 But when thy beams on me have shined
With smiling looks, I seek no more.
Let others load their barnes with corn,
And with sweet wine their cellars fill,
With gold crammed up in plenties horn
Let them have all they wish, or will.
9 But free from cares I Will take my rest,
And with sweet sleeps will spend the night,
With hope from Heaven thou steelst my breast,
And shieldst me safe, Lord, with thy might.
PSALM. V.
WHose supreme power over all extends
Benignely, Lord, my prayers hear,
And with a calm and facile ear
Receive the plains which sorrow sends.
2 When loud I call, attentive see
How my full veins distend my heart,
My God and King alone thou art,
And in distress I serve but thee.
3 Lord, hear me when I early cry,
For while pure vows cheer hopes within,
I Will call on thee ere beams begin
To sparkle from the Suns bright eye.
4 Thou, God, who love a pious mind,
And hat'st the filth of impious rites,
Let him whose soul in sin delights,
Hopeless of thee no favor find.
5 Armed wrong flies from thy dreadful sight,
6 Who art a foe to blood, and fraud,
The glozing tongue that does applaud
Foul falsehood, thou will cut out quite.
7 Since on thy grace I, Lord, rely,
Thy sacred gates will I draw near,
And to thy Temple go with fear,
And send pure vows to thee on high.
8 That I my foese slinets may find,
Thou, God of Right, thy light display,
And in a dark and doubtful way
Direct my steps, which else are blind.
9 Truth shuns the lips of my proud foes,
Whilst filth and fraud keep the inner rooms,
Their throats smell worse than rotten toombes,
Their tongues with honied poison gloze,
And inly mind closely to wound.
10 O God, the source whence all things spring,
Destroy the wicked Nation, bring
Their drifts to naught, and who do found
And foster all, confound the vain
And idle plots they undertake,
Quite root them out who thee forsake,
And due to sin feel they the pain.
11 But by thy grace, Lord, guarded still
Let them be glad who fix on thee
Their hopes alone, and fearelesse free
Adore thy Name, and ever will.
12 Pure minds to Heaven which homage yield,
Thou cheer'st with treasures from thy store,
And when refreshed, they need no more,
Thy favor shades them like a shield.
PSALM. VI.
WHilst anger boiles, and rage inflames thy gall,
Correct me not, though sin for vengeance call;
Whilst fury burns, and runs a swifter pace
To bring fell plagues on body, soul, and all,
Spare, spare me, Lord, whom grief does so appall,
Lay justice by, and use thy hand of grace.
My force is spent, my bones the bodies stay,
^aile, since their nerves are loosed where vigor lay,
3 And care does vex my troubled spirit sore.
^ow long will thou neglect, and keep away,
And leave me on the rack, vexed night, and day?
Come now, and me from deaths fell jaws restore.
5 When he has once ceaz'd with his griping paw,
Not leaving one poor puff of breath to draw,
Who thinks on thee? Ah no, it it too late,
Wrapped up in mold, made subject to deaths law,
(Where men are like those births that no Sun saw)
Who there thy Name shall sing, or praise relate?
6 When in the night my grieved soul aghast,
Breathes forth deep sighs, as if she breathed her las^
With weeping eyes I wash my mournful bed,
That all the clothes which on my couch are cast
Are wet with tears, which trickle down so fast
As if a shower of rain powered from my head.
7 My fight, once quick, her virtue now has spent
With gripes of grief, and pining discontent.
The lively vigor of my limbs is gone
Whilst that my foes their wiles applauding went,
And for their plots which naught but mischief men
In my fresh checkes now ruddy hue is none.
8 The cursed crew, Ah you, that so delight
In graceless acts, hence, hence now take your flight,
Cast off the hopes which you conceived in vain
9 God calmely heard the roarings of my spri't,
And though you grieve and envy at the sight,
He heard my vows and raised me up again.
10 Let sudden shame mine enemies disgrace,
The guilty blush let it confound their face,
Let infamy which them to horror drives,
Make pale their looks to show their doleful case,
And in their hearts let torturing grief take place,
Who fled, and left me like base fugitives.
PSALM. VII.
SInce I in thee my safties hope have placed,
(Great Keeper of all things in this our All)
^n their fell jaws who always me disgraced,
Lord, let not thou, let not thy servant fall;
Like savage beasts more like than civil men,
They plot my death, devising how, and when.
If none do come and take my cause in hand,
^s a fierce Lion tears the harmless Sheep,
Who at first fight affrighted do disband,
^o my fell foe (who wakes whilst others sleep)
Will rend my limbs, whose thirst of blood is su^^
He sheds, if guiltless, he cares not how much.
If he accused whose faith had tainelesse stood,
Nor lying lips had warped and wou'n false crimes;
If I have wrought them ill, who meant but good,
Or spared not those who harmed me many times,
5 Me let my foe pursue, and overtake;
And taken, foil, and foild, his football make,
and let him tread, and trample in the mire
^y Diadem, the ensign of my pride:
But, Lord, arise, let rage and lewd desire
Of my proud foes (thy mercy laid aside)
Incense thee to just ire, rise, Lord, and pay
Thy vowed revenge to those who Truth betray.
Arise, and let thy sacred Majesty
His beams display, and all parts ouerspread,
And let all people to their Parlies hie,
And thee proclaim their fire and supreme Head.
Thou, whose strong hand holds all the Scepters her^
8 And vindicates the sins done every where,
Revenge my wrong, if rightly I implore
With hallowed mouth, and mind, plagues on my fo^^
9 O thou just Judge, who knows our thoughts before
We speak or think, whose eye does all disclose,
Batter, and bruise lewd men's all-daring lust,
Whilst grace supports and animates the just.
10 I scorn all foes if God be on my side,
11 Who takes delight, where Candor takes her sea^
In minds that have nor welts, nor guards of pride,
And godly men protects when dangers threate,
And not by fits, but by a fixed decree
Menaceth death to those that impious be.
12 If stiff my foe stands in his vain pretense,
13 Then God soon draws his sword, he bends hi^ bow
He snatcheth up his dart of more offense,
Which, where it lights does give a dangerous blow;
He whets his shafts, with fury fiery red,
That carries death on the sharp-pointed head.
14 Behold who great with sin beings mischief forth
And plots against my guiltless soul designed,
He brought to light things that were little worth,
Like fancies which affright a sleeping mind,
15 He dug a pit, and closely laid his gin,
But missing me, himself was caught therein.
16 On his own head shall all his follies fall,
And where they heed shall all his mischiefs light,
17 Then free from fear, and enuies bitter gall
I Will sing of thee, and thine impartial right
And glorious name. O thou all-ruling Lord,
With cheerful mind I will thy praise record.
PSALM. VIII.
FAther, and Fostrer of mankind,
How have the rays of thy renown
Astonished all, on whom have shined
The beams which Heavens great light darts down?
Thy greatness has surmounted far
The Spheres, where stars bright glistring ar,
2 How thou do rule the world with care,
The infant age, yet sucking tells,
That thou may stop the mouths that dare
Bark at thy power, which so excells.
Such mouths at thee as poison spue,
And thirst for blood which they pursue.
3 When I behold the Heavens so clear
With purest light made by thine hand,
When Moon, and Stars so bright appear,
And all by thee created stand,
4 Ah, what is man in life, or lim
Think I, that thus thou mindest him?
What is his stock, his offspring what,
To whom thou daign'st such honor, such
A graceful eye of favor, that
5 He Is like a God, the odds not much?
6 Thou made him Prince, to undergo
The rule of all thou made below.
Of all that breathes, by right of birth,
Thou made him master of their wills,
7 The horned, and the fleeced flocks on earth,
And all that feeds on plains and hills,
8 Or what with wings or sins divide
The air and Sea, He tames their pride.
9 Father, and fostrer of mankind,
How have the rays of thy renown
Astonished all, on whom have shined
The beams which Heavens great light darts down?
Whose throne is Heaven, whose footstool Earth,
Protect thine one of noblest birth.
PSALM. IX.
OF thee I sing, great Guardian of all things,
To thee my heart her duties tribute paies,
Thy wonders to our seed that after springs
I will declare, and thence thy glory raise.
Safe guided by thy hand I Will nothing fear,
But cheerful notes will sing with cheerful mind,
And will thee praise, who supreme rule do bear,
Chief Justice of the Heavens, and heavenly kind.
3 My prouder foe, who, without counsel led,
Conceived vain hopes, has turned, and took his flight,
And thy right hand pursuing whilst he fled,
With more than humane force has foiled him quite.
4 My greedy foes wide yawning for my blood,
Thy wreakfull rage confounds, and rends their jaws;
Thine aid releeu'd while guilty-like I stood,
And from thy Throne thy doom did end my cause.
5 Thou tam'st the fury of the savage rout,
Thy matchless might did so my foes dispell,
As in the roules of Fame they were left out,
That none their names in after-age should tell.
6 Lo, to what end come all these swelling threats?
Lo him that towns would level, and lay plain,
That where in former times stood stately seat^^,
No memory should of their state remain.
But He that swaies eternally this ball,
By justice fixed his everlasting throne,
8 To distribute the laws by righting all,
And ruling men that each may have his own.
9 When force does sit to hatch high-swelling pride,
Thy gate of Grace stands open for the poor,
Thy castle of safe refuge thou set'st wide,
That all distressed may enter at the door.
10 And therefore well may they in Thee alone,
Who know thy wide-spread Name, their trust repose,
When all the world has by experience known,
Thou leau'st not thine to'h mercy of their foes.
11 Then sing due praise unto the Lord, whose hand
And watchful eye keeps his loved Sion sure,
Spread wide his wise decrees in every land,
Them let no bounds less than the world immure.
12 For guiltless blood he takes a strict account,
Revenging it with plagues, and inward fears,
And suffers not pride unrevenged to mount
And press the poor, whose cries soon pierce his ears.
13 But thou, dear God, look nearer to my cause,
Whom armed force pursues with deadly spite,
And take me from the fell and direful jaws
Of Death, whose hue is black as pitchy night.
14 That all so high as Sion lifts her head,
And sets her towers so far, so wide to view,
I man thy name with vows and praises spread,
And daily thanks for hourly help renew.
15 Perfidious wights in waves of selfe-bred wrong
Tossed, and turmoild, have worthily been drowned,
And in the nets, which they were knitting long
For others laid, themselves were helpless bound.
16 Who but admires Heau'ns-equall balanced right?
Who weau'd the web of fraud himself was caught,
A thing so often performed in all men's sight
Should be enrould and kept in inward thought.
17 But so it is. Time not foreseen arrests
The god-lesse men, who have not Heaven in mind,
Then sudden death wounds their rebellious breasts,
And hides them in his pit where no sun shined.
18 But modest minds which breathe but air divine,
Hopeless of help, but what from Heaven descends,
God in his heart does them a place assign,
Where causeless grief at last finds large amends.
19 Up, up, Creator of all things, arise,
And let not man, not many spans in length
Mount to a monster of deformed size
To crush the poor, Curb thou men's lawless strength.
20 Thou with the boundless weight of endless might,
Strike horror deep into their fiercer minds,
That man may know his feeble state aright,
Whose weaker parts no lasting cement binds.
PSALM. X.
HOw long will thou, Conseruer of mankind,
Neglect thy servants in their sad distress?
2 How long will thou remain in Heaven confined,
Whilst Lord-like here lewd men the just oppress?
Let ill befall the ill-conceiuing head,
And perish it with all the arts it bred.
3 Whilst he with wrongs does cram his lustful heart,
The proud man boasts, and inwardly is glad,
As he had won by right, and used no art,
And still should hold the glory that he had.
4 Thus his unbridled arrogance neglects
Of right, and wrong the contrary respects.
Whilst sweetly he applauds his inbred wit,
And thinks in Heaven there is no God, nor fears,
5 But proudly champing on his pleasant bit,
His happiness his haughty hearts vpreares,
Nor dreams that thou to judgment wilt proceed,
And vindicate the guilt of his mis-deed.
He sleights his foes, nor cares for them a straw,
6 And reckoning with himself without his Host,
My life, says he, at longest length I Will draw,
And steer my course with no rough billows tossed.
No care shall come to interrupt my state,
Nor fits of pain my pleasure shall abate.
7 Out of his mouth do cursed slanders flow,
Disgorging taunts, and crafty wiles withal,
Whilst to good men do griefs and travails grow,
By his enuenom'd tongue, and bitter gall.
8 His ambushes to catch the just he lays,
And poorer men with sterner looks affraies.
9 As a bloodthirsty Lion in his den
Lies couching close, and hides his fearful head,
So lurking he assaults the weaker men,
His panting heart with fainting fury led,
And with his many knotted nets fast ti'de,
He draws them in as captives to his pride.
10 He tames them with his force, won with his wiles,
And as in clouds does he conceal his spite;
How many troops of trauailers with guiles
Has he surprised, and them deprived of light?
Who passing by, when they do think no harm,
Are caught unawares, and crushed with his proud arm.
11 He argues thus with reasons wanting weight,
That God his wrongs does neither see, nor know.
Does He, enthrond in clouds of supreme height
Behold the right, and wrong done here below?
Can man conceive so high maiestick power
With smiles, or frowns on earth to laugh, or lowre?
12 Up, Lord, and lift thy sacred hand on high,
And with thy powerful sword pierce thou his side,
Nor let thou him in dark oblivion lie
Whose pious heart does in thy fear abide.
Extend thy grace, and deal thy justice so,
As meek men may have bliss, and proud men woe.
13 Ah shall the more then madness of lewd men
Contemn thee thus, and set thy will at naught,
And dare to mutter in their secret den
That God for humane things does take no thought?
Thus when their mouths are closed, and dare not speak,
Their hollow hearts are full of thinks, and leak.
14 Thou see without, within, thou vew'st all things,
And under thy sharp hand shall lewd men fall,
That by affliction, which true insight brings,
This lesson they may learn, that ruling all,
Thou sleight'st not poor men's grief, nor toils neglect'st,
But left to thee the Orphans thou protect'st.
15 Break thou the force of the ungodly wight,
And cool the fury of his graceless mind,
Till he, and all the branches of his might,
Be broken down, nor root be left behind,
That he, nor they may in the limits stand,
And compass of the Ocean-bounded land.
16 Thus thou, the Lord of time, till time have end
Shall rule, and reign sole Monarch over all,
And from the land to which thy bounds extend,
Shall chase the Nations that do lewdly fall
To impious rites, and set thy law aside,
That banished they may vanish with their pride.
17 These vows the men o're-whelm'd with cross affairs,
These prayers they pour forth with reu'rence due,
And spurgald with the pricks of deep despaires
With brinish tears to thee these humbly sue,
(For whom have they in Heaven and Earth but thee
That with a power supreme can set them free?)
18 To loose the poor (whom beasts do pity more)
From the dire bands of men's all-daring might,
That man, who does his arm of flesh adore,
May strike his sails, and leave his fury quite,
When he beholds, and conscious is within
Of his frail state, the web of his foul sin.
PSALM. XI.
When I have hope safe harbor to attain,
And for my star on Heavens great Lord rely,
Like frighted foul, which would the covert gain,
You bid me to the rocks for safety fly.
2 Behold, you see, the impious man does bend
His threatening bow, and makes his shafts to wound
The harmless soul, and closely does attend
To murder those whose fearelesse hearts are sound.
3 But thou, great King, with thy all-conqu'ring hand
The rebels tam'st, and do divert their will,
Who, mad with rage, vex those who humbly stand
At thy devotion, and deserve no ill.
4 God who in Heavens eternal temples dwells,
And does in his star-spangled throne appear,
With his trans-piercing eyes, whose sight excells,
Viewes all the acts are represented here.
5 From his all-seeing eye nor wrong, nor right
Can hidden be, but those who beat their brains
To compass mischief, He who rules with might,
And right combind, hates all their cunning trains.
6 He showreth down on their detested heads
His wide spread nets, and thundering tempests casts
With sulpher mixed (which the proud'st scorner dreads)
To scorch them here, whose burning ever lasts.
7 But he that fosters right, himself most right,
With sacred love does upright men embrace,
And sets before his everlasting sight
The rightful conscience, where no guile has place.
PSALM. XII.
Help, Savior, help and be not thou auerse,
Since virgin Faith fallen now in men's disgrace,
2 Expuls'd is gone, and Truth flees all commerce,
And naked shuns the Earths disguised race.
Now every man does entertain his friend
With words, the scum, and fume of idle brains,
And cloakes the wrongs which falser hearts entend,
With lies which smooth dissimulation fains.
3 Deceitful mouths whence sugared poison flows,
Let God confound, and pluck out root, and all,
The tongue that does the hearts base births disclose,
And speaks great things although it self be small.
4 And perish they with brazen brows, who say,
What should we fear, come let us swear, and lie,
That perjury, by custom bearing sway,
Our tongues may venture on all villainy.
No Lord, I think, has any thing to show
My free borne tongue in vassalage to hold,
Nor lock my lips, nor bar my language so,
As not to range at pleasure uncontrolled.
5 But God that hears the plaints of poor distressed,
And burthen-bearing souls that sigh for grief,
Arise will I, says He, and them oppressed.
Securely place in harbor of relief.
6 This says the Lord, and what from him proceeds
His faith is fixed like gold, which seuen-times tri'de
By purging fire, no more refining needs,
When smoke, and ashes do the dross divide.
7 Then mindful of thy promise, Lord, restrain
The cure-lesse poison of a cursed tongue,
And thou, the worlds best Sentinel, contain
The viperous race that we may not be stongue.
8 For lewd men now give law, and measure right
By their own foot, and dominering will,
And governed by their disproportioned might
The best men fear the doomes of men most ill.
PSALM. XIII.
HOw long will thou, who guid'st our common helm,
Neglect my cause as one forsaken quite?
Will thou leave me whom swelling surges whelm
Wrapped in obliuions everlasting might?
How long will thou in fierce displeasure hide
Thy lovely face, and graceful eye from me?
How long shall vexing cares which draw aside
My mind from rest, my souls companions be?
2 How long shall my grieved heart with rougher waves
In seas of deep afflictions thus be tossed?
How long shall my proud foes, (who are sins slaves)
Thus triumph over me as all were lost?
3 Great Regent of the world behold and see,
Assist me, and infuse thy sacred light,
Lest Death with his long sleep do ceaze on me,
And close mine eyes, and bid the Sun good night.
4 Let not my foe brag in his haughty pride,
That he has crushed me with his brawny arms,
And who hate truth, and cannot me abide,
Have they no cause to triumph at my harms.
5 Thou do with hope refresh my drooping heart,
Whose help extends it self to all my veins:
When I am safe (because thou took'st my part)
Thy name, great King, I Will sing with lofty strains.
PSALM. XIIII.
PRoud Policy, now making Vice his minion,
Inly conceived thus mutters his opinion,
And says that fear which keeps the mind in aw,
Bred of the froth of melancholy brains
Has made a God, and given him the raines
Whilst whirling Chance gives all the world the law.
Then did Iniquity that fears no rod
Wallow in sins as if there were no God,
And no man had a will to follow right
2 But Heavens great Lord cast down his eye to view
Who would, whilst fools their vainer cares pursue,
Adore his name of majesty and might.
3 There all conspired in mischiefs of all kinds,
Their foul, flagitious, loathsome sins he finds,
Nor was their care in any to do good,
4 For how should they do good, or how give ear
To sound advice, who still about them bear
The plague-sores of foul sin, and stains of blood.
When as a beast his prey, so they devour
My people, if they come within their power,
Nor serve they God, who sou'raign rules all things:
5 But with chill fear shall horror strike their hearts.
When the just God takes guiltless iust-mens parts,
And wounds the impious with sharp words like stings;
6 And says, O you made Piety a jest,
You laughed when cares the pious minds oppressed,
And scoffed at their vows, hopes, and silent fears,
But God, in whom the poor their trust repose,
Their hopes, and vows which their sad breasts enclose,
Unto their wished ends he fairly stears.
7 O then that God to his would succor send,
Which longing they from Sion hill attend,
For when he breaks their bonds, and them acquits,
Then Abra'ms race, shall with a cheerful breast
Joy, and enjoy their long desired rest,
And Is'acs race shall triumph as befits.
PSALM. XV.
WHo sacred Sions temple by thy will,
Heavens supreme Lord, inhabit shall with Thee?
And whom will thou place on thy holy hill,
To live in sweet repose from dangers free?
2 He that delights to have an honest heart,
And stiff in what he undertakes does right,
Nor fair in show, with counterfeiting art
Has taught his tongue how to conceal his spite.
3 Nor with his lips does deadly draughts contriue,
Nor mischief to his neighbor does devise,
Nor does his friend, who seems endeared deprive
Of his good name with his opprobrious lies.
4 Who casts no eye of favor on the proud,
But takes into the closset of his heart
The Heauen-grac'd man. Who minding what he vowed,
Not for a world will from his word depart.
5 Who lends not money, nor takes biting use
To make the poor a prey caught in his nets,
Who for reward will offer no abuse
To harmless men. Who thus his compass sets
To lead his life, thus makes his last account,
Shall ever rest within the holy Mount.
PSALM. XVI.
O Thou Creator of all things below,
And men's safe harbor in their dire distress,
Thy servant save, who does no Savior know,
But thee alone when instant perils press.
2 Thy servant I, do thee my Lord auow,
And tell abroad what a great Lord thou art,
But whom all bless, and to whom all things bow,
What good to thee can all I do impart?
3 I therefore there my utmost powers appli'd^
To tend the people with a zealous care,
The people which of all the world beside
Thou took'st to thee for thy peculiar share.
4 But they rebelled unmindful of thy grace,
And to themselves apart new gods did feign,
Which they adored, and prostrate on their face
Idol'd the dreams of their own idle brain.
Their altars stained with blood will I not tuch,
Nor in their feasts does my soul take delight,
Nor shall their names (profanely used too much,)
Be witness of my words, or faith I plight.
5 But Gods right hand of lasting love shall shield
The people which his grace to me assigned,
And such reward me shall his bounty yield
As for my pains even Hope dispair'd to find.
6 How beauteous are the bounds which I possess
In what a field does Heaven my lot dispose?
Seated where pleasure does her self address,
And feeds my mind with flowers sweet-smiling shows.
7 To God eternal be all endless praise,
Whose counsel does direct me in the light,
And brings into my soul by privy ways
His Heauen-spir'd motions in the darkest night.
8 What so my heart does think, or hand does act
I see the Lord assisting still at hand,
Guarded before, on either side, and backed
By him, and him alone, I steaddy stand.
9 My trembling heart so quauers in my breast
The noates of joy, as that my tongue delights
To sing thy praise, and so before suppressed
A lightsome hope my lumpish lims excites.
10 For neither will thou leave my soul to bide
In hellish vaults, where never comes thy light,
Nor let it like a carcass putrifi'de
Resolved to ashes be consumed quite.
11 Thou to the way of life vnlock'st the gate,
And from thy face high tides of joy do spring,
From thy right hand where bounty keeps her state,
Thy blessings flow which all delights do bring.
PSALM. XVII.
WHo rul'st the world, and all things do direct,
Hear righteous Lord what righteously I crave,
Nor stop thine ears, nor do my plaints reject
Which come not from such lips as Liers have.
2 Poor I distressed unto thy throne do fly,
Take thou my cause in hand, on thee I call,
Prostrate before thy face, with graceful eye
See just men here unjustly dealt withal.
3 Thou often view'st through clouds of silent night
With curious search the secrets of my mind,
And how my heart put in a fearish fright,
And shaking fit no rest at all could find.
As fire does gold, so thou my heart do try
With cross events, nor did thou find the same
Conscious of fraud, or lawless villainy
To wrong even such as branded were with shame.
4 My mouth, and mind agreed, my soul, and sense,
My heart vpheld by thy decrees divine
Abhors foul sin, that gives so foul offense,
And flies from pride, which does with wrong combine.
5 Thus guide my steps led by thy laws advice
Lest that my foot slip in a doubtful way,
Or in such paths as seem all pau'd with ice
My footing slide, where it can find no stay.
6 I call to thee, and fly unto thy grace
Which I have often tri'de in dire distress,
Attentive lend thine ear in my sad case,
When I by prayer my plaints to thee address.
7 With grace, good Lord, support, and bear up those
Whose hope and help on thee alone does stand,
And curb the lofty spirits of my foes,
And justly moved use thy reuengefull hand.
8 But guard me like the apple of thine eye
More dear, and tender than all parts beside,
And thou that do foresee all dangers nigh,
Under thy wings me from proud fury hide.
9 The troop of impious men stand ready pressed
At all assaies to take away my breath,
10 And me with force beleguer, and infest
With swelling words, and dart their threats of death.
11 They make their bars, and turn-pikes in the way,
And view the places that may most offend,
Which they design to make my life their pray,
And seeming not to mind it, work mine end,
12 Like as a lion hunting beasts, or men,
Runs furious on, or like unto his sire,
The weaned whelp lurks, and glowting in the den
Long looks with blood to cool his raging fire.
13 Up, Father, up, their lewd attempts prevent,
And whilst the Tyrant trampled lies on ground,
Free thou me from thy sword (to mercy bent)
Wherewith he now enraged does strike, and wound.
14 Nor let the pride of great men ctam'd with gold
With might oppress me, whose delightful care
Is but to wallow (as themselves are mold)
In earthly pleasures, so bewitched they are.
Thou pour'st on them thy blessings from thy store
Dug from the bowels of the earth below,
And pamp'rest them with corn, and, which is more,
Thou glad'st their hearts their offspring prospers so.
15 Then shall the candor of my life make way,
That I loosed from the bodies give, and free
Shall see thy face, and that bright shining day
Shall make me blessed, all-blest in highest degree.
16 Those beams of light, which brings all sound delight,
Heaped with all ioies, shall represent thy clear,
And sacred Majesty unto my sight,
When as no cloud shall in my mind appear.
PSALM. XVIII.
All-fostring Sire, I Will thee adore,
And will thee love with all my heart,
2 Who shap'dst the world a lump before,
My strength, my might, my tower thou art,
Help, hope, and joy to me distressed,
My shield, my sword, my steaddy stay,
An anchor fixed whereon I rest,
And when storms come my calmest bay.
3 For when my tongue I do untie,
Which craving peace thy praises sings,
All hostile arms are then laid by,
And Peace brings safety on her wings.
4 Now Death enuolu'd me in his net,
With Hell-black streams encompast round,
5 Infernal snares my feet beset,
And drawn was I with fetters bound.
6 Here taken, and entangled so,
Groueling on ground to God I su'd,
Aloft to Heaven my cries did go
When doubtful chance my fears renewed.
Seated on his flame-circled throne
He heard my prayers, when as my cry
Did pierce the skies, and to my moan
He bent his ear, and laid it nigh.
7 The Earth affrighted at his sight
Shook then, and hills their closures brake,
And all their ioints dissolved quite
In their low vaults a bellowing make.
8 A smoking heat, like breath near spent,
Fumed from his nostrils flames that turned
As does a whirpoole from him went,
And what they touched escaped not vnburn'd.
9 Heaven at his beck bowed humbly low,
To set his Lord on the earthes round ball,
And foggy clouds that sullen show
Under his feet do prostrate fall.
10 He in his chariot mounted hie,
In flames an Angel holds the rain,
Whose wings of wind do swifter fly
Than oars can cut the liquid maine.
11 Inuolud in mists of sable hue,
He hides from Earth his brighter face,
In hollow clouds that storms renew,
The pitchy waves obscure his grace.
12 Fire-flinging darts from his sharp eyes
Clear lowering clouds with cheering beams,
A rattling shower of haile-stones flies,
And flitting flames cast winding streams.
13 But when his voice sad silence brake
His thunder roares, and rends the sky,
The Earth with stormy hail did make
An hideous noise: Out lightnings fly.
14 His fiery shafts flew far, and wide
15 In the aires vast vaults, lights took no rest:
He strikes, and the Earths wide chaps divide,
And show the springs hid in her breast,
And opens all the fountaine-heads,
Trembling for fear she shows how low
The strength of her foundation spreads,
And brings the darkest deep to show.
So thundering flies his roaring sound,
So heavy falls his frightfull ire;
16 His hand that does with grace abound
He stretched from Heaven at my desire.
And took me up when almost drowned,
Swift waves had ouer-whelmed me,
17 And from my foes, for force renowned,
With greater force He set me free,
18 And with their power He mocked their spite,
When in their harmefull madding mood
They sought by craft, as dark as night,
To ruin me who staggring stood.
19 He gave me aid, enlarged my way
When straights before did me enclose,
And when Death had me at a bay
He saved his friend whom He had chose.
20 My heart, and hand from falsehood free
His eyes did pierce, and found them so,
And raised me high from low degree
That Honor might true virtue show.
21 For vice nor error prone to ill
Did make my steps to go astray,
22 His Law that does prescribe his will
Was in my sight still night, and day.
Whose presence kept my soul in awe
Thundering her precepts in my heart;
23 In truth that has nor crack, nor flaw,
I took delight, she took my part
As witness, when that inly free
From fraud, and guile I shunned the arts,
The cursed arts that sinke-hoals be
Whence flows foul sin that soiles all parts.
24 His blessings therefore did He give,
His bounties showed how He regards
The guiltless life which I did live,
And which the all-seeing Judge rewards.
25 As Men, and as their manners be,
So do they find thee harsh, or kind,
Nor harm to h'harmlesse comes from Thee,
Whom still a friend, thy friends shall find:
26 To good men good, but who would gain
Ought at thy hand by sleight of wit,
Thy wider reach proves his but vain,
And him not wise that trusts to it.
27 In hard distress thou keep'st the rent,
And worn estate of thine grown low,
And make st to fall the lofty bent
Of the proud eye of my fell foe.
28 And taken from the throng of those
That baser be, Thou do me place
Above the rest in solemn shows,
And clear'st my night with thy bright face:
29 And under thy command the troops
^ break, and pass their glittring arms,
The towring'st mount to me it stoopes,
^ scale their walls, and escape their harms.
30 As true as God is only good,
He shows to life the shortest way,
And cleerest from expense of blood
To those that with his colors stay.
From his eternal mouth what flows
(...) far more pure than refined gold,
and with his shield He guards all those
Whose hearts in him confirmed are bold.
He bids them not to be dismayed
When things succeed not to their minds,
Since naught on Earth can make affrai'd
That heart in Heaven that refuge finds.
31 Say you who painted stocks adore
The mock-minds of the vulgar rout,
Who stones and iu'ry do implore
In sundry shapes with art cut out.
What other God does rule the raines?
Who else does guide the Earths round ball,
And sits in Heaven that all contains?
Whose hand but his rules all in all?
32 This God gives strength to all my parts,
And lively force, and shows to me
33 The spotless way. By Him with Hearts
In swiftness I contend, and He
Conuai'd me far from dangers near,
And placed me high on safties hill,
34 And taught my hand deuoid of fear
To manage arms with useful skill:
And besides that, He made me bend
A massy bow made all of brass,
And it to pieces break, and rend;
So strong was I, so weak it was.
35 He guardes me round on every side
With the defense of his safe shield,
His grace makes his right hand my guide
Trebling my strength when I would yield.
36 He opens me a wide retreit,
In passages where men do lay
Close ambushes, traps of deceit:
Nor lets my feet wild wandering stay,
Or take offense in unknown ways
37 And I by thine auspicious hand
Pursue my foes, break their arraies,
And take them when as they disband.
Nor do I back return before
Their daring minds are brought so low,
As, though at first they threatened sore,
Their courage cooled it was not so.
38 And at my feet down let them fall
That they may never rise again,
Nor with their arms, or engines all
Repair the loss that they sustain.
39 Thou through my members make to flow
A lively vigor, and have steeled
My nerves with strength, and do me show
The art to march in Mars his field.
And me who dares come to defy
40 Thou lai'st him groueling on the ground,
And make my foes for fear to fly,
And none to hear their yelling sound.
41 And so, of Thee if they crave aid,
Thou turn'st thine ear from their request,
42 And as the Noth-winde hardly laid
Drives to, and fro, and gives no rest.
Unto a cloud of dust, so I
My foes disrankt force to retire,
And trample on them as they lie,
As in foul ways men stamp the mire.
43 Me from the vulgar rout thou take
Free from their base and surly aw,
And as for my proud foes thou make
Me put a snaffle in their iaw.
To creep and crouch, my grace to seek
44 Thou make the Nations come from far,
Fame strikes a palenesse in the cheek,
And daunted at my name they are.
45 With words composed to gain them grace
Their oylye tongues do smoothly flow,
Nor think themselves safe in a place
Whose strength is such as fears no foe.
46 Be to the Lord, rule, honor, praise,
Who shields me circled with his might,
Whose hand of help to health does raise
My weakened lims from Deaths near spite.
47 Who with revenging arms in hand
Makes me confound what is lewd, and ill,
And makes that (whilst none dare withstand)
The people yield all to my will.
And on his word He bid me cast
All fear aside of blustering war,
And when the bounds of awe be past,
And rage does raise a civil jar,
48 He guardes me from the rebel rout:
As in a mortar pounded small
He beats the plots they fetch about,
The filthy froth of their foul gall.
46 Then to the neighboring cities I
Will wide thy noble acts extend,
And, sacred Sire, thy praise shall fly
Sung by my Muse to the worlds end.
50 Who bidd'st the King rest safe, and sound,
Nor be dismayed with cross success,
And make him with worlds wealth abound,
And with much kindness do profess,
That him, and his till time have end,
Closs'd in thin arms thou will defend.
PSALM. XIX.
YOu senseless race, selfe-seeming wise,
Though impious error dark your sights,
Yet see with eye, and mind the skies
Bespangled with a world of lights.
Hence learn his art whose hand adornes,
And in a vault of fiery flames
His temples placed, whose bending horns
Compass the seas, and lands wide frames.
2 Where enter change of night, and day
By constant course does teach below,
That mortal things which soon decay,
Not here by chance, but counsel go.
Where every part placed in due frame
Sounds Gods all guarding powerful hand,
3 And whisper not, but cry the same
That all that hears may understand.
4 For in the worlds remotest parts
No savage Nation dwells so far,
Whose eyes see not, and makes their hearts
Confess the Heavens right guided ar.
Who when at night no clouds be near
Does not bright-shining stars admire?
5 Or when he sees the Sun appear
Mounting his chariot red as fire?
When rowsed from his Eastern bed
His orient looks show bridegroom like,
Glittring in gold, and on his head
A crown whose sparks amazement strike.
Or when he gallops in his race,
And cuts the time in equal shares,
In lims, and strength, and fiercer pace
Most Giant-like He furious fares.
6 Who from the East to'h Western gole
Does passing by the oblique signs,
With heat give all a quickening soul,
And keeps in state that none declines.
7 But the due course, and comely grace
Of other things draw not our sight,
As does his law, where it takes place,
Guide by close raines men's minds aright.
Whose promises, which constant stand,
By light of truth confirm the mind,
8 And by whose sweet sin-wounding hand,
More gain than pain, or loss we find.
And of his laws the sacred lights
Vnuaile the minds, and bodies eyes,
9 And faith professed with holy rites,
Draws awefull fear that never dies.
10 And right, and conscious truth in brass
Do keep thy statutes all enrol'd,
Which honey do in sweetness pass,
And better are, than gems, or gold.
11 Engraven in his inmost parts
Thy servant keeps them night and day,
And knows that they, whose faithful hearts
Preserve them, shall have full, full-pay.
12 His wandering ways who calls to mind?
What force of wit can find them out?
Then purge the soiles which sin by kind
A winding Serpent, shedds about.
13 Let not the force of surly pride
Hold now the raines, and rule my heart:
So shall thou soon loose me fast ti'd,
With worst of ills bound every part.
14 The words which from my tongue do flow,
What inlye does my mind record
Benignely hear, O Thee I know
My strength, my Savior, God, and Lord.
PSALM. XX.
THough that the mad, and bloody savage rout
With sword, and flame rage spoiling far, and wide,
Yield not, but go more daring on, and stout,
He Will hear thy prayers, who the round globe does guide.
And as He good, and mild heard in distress
Jacob when He with hands to Heaven cri'de loud,
2 So will he thee, and his wide power express,
And free thee from thy foes though never so proud.
With secret force He will give thee full strength
From out the sacred temple where he dwells,
Thy drooping heart He will confirm at length
From Sion hill where his high power excells.
3 He thy desires will bless, and keep in mind
The free oblations of thy purer hand,
Thy offerings shall with him fair passage find,
Nor shall thy slaughtred beasts a minute stand,
Before the greedy flames on them have fed,
And raised their bloody colors in the skies.
4 He Will crown thy hopes, and all shall soon be sped,
As thou thy self could wish, or best devise.
5 The Lord to us returned will we applaud,
And serve our own God with his own due rites,
Each place shall thanks, and to Gods name give laud,
Assigned for sacred use, gain, or delights.
What so with hallowed lips we humbly crave,
He of his grace will give his free consent,
All shall a good, and happy issue have,
Nor shall just prayers fall short of their intent.
6 I know, nor does my Calender deceive,
The Lord his King in safety back will guide,
Nor shall his hand, his powerful hand, thee leave,
When He Heavens sacred temple opens wide.
7 Let Syria brag, and troop her Chariot bands
Armed with sharp siths upon the axeltree,
And on her courser which on no ground stands,
Stamps, and cornets, let Persias boldness be.
Trust He in wheels, He in his hoofes, but we
Will call on God, who shoots his flames, and thunder,
8 Nor horse, nor chariot shall their safeguard be,
But Vulturs claws shall rend their lims asunder.
Thy grace shall raise us when we lie full low,
And set us on our feet again upright:
9 Help, Sovereign, help, for if Thou favor show,
Nor seek we aid, nor fear we any spite.
He will respect, and at all times of need,
(A King most gracious to his subjects dear)
He to their humble suites will give good heed,
And soon his grant shall make his grace appear.
FINIS.
PSALM. XXI.
NOw that the King in triumph rides
Free from sad cares of vexing foes,
To thee, Heavens King, and none besides,
The honor of the day He owes.
Thou gave him courage to withstand
The toiles, and hazards of the field,
And brought him back led by thy hand,
Whom in his flight thy Grace did shield.
2 Nor thou deni'dst what humbly He
Implored, nor did his plaints reject,
Nor what in heart he wished should be,
Returned in vain by thy neglect.
3 More then he wished for, and before,
Thou powr'dst on him all blessings down,
And on his head, to grace him more,
Never wore King a richer crown.
4 He asked thee life, and thou did give
For death a life that never dies;
5 In high renown thou make him live,
And shine to dazzle Enuies eyes.
6 Him did thy Grace a pattern make
Of happiness to th'after-breed,
That mothers thence might measure take,
When as they bless their hopeful seed.
7 Thou art the Anchor of his trust,
And safest haven in roughest seas,
Fixed on thy help he fears no gust,
And free from harms he lives at ease.
8 Thou will his foes both apprehend,
And as a Judge inflict their pains.
9 As flames pent close do more extend,
When bursting forth they get the raines,
And burn the aged arms of trees;
So shall the blasts of thy just ire
Consume thy foes, who thy decrees
Contemn, to work their lewd desire.
10 Thou will cut down both root and boughs,
The wicked race, and graceless brood,
11 Who thee, whilst they conceived vain vows,
With bootlesse force, and fraud withstood.
12 Whilst thou pursu'st them in their flight,
Their backs the marks of shame shall bear,
And on their face thy darts shall light,
When from pale death they run for fear.
13 O Thou whose right hand holds the reins,
And rul'st eternal Judge of all,
Up, let thy foes with pride-fill'd veins
Confess thy force, and feel thy gall.
Then the blessed troop (worlds Sire) shall sing
Of Thee in Hymns on holidayes,
Who mild receiu'st the vows they bring,
And lowr'st on lewd men's gifts, and lays.
PSALM. XXII.
1 O God, my God, why leau'st Thou me?
2 Why leau'st Thou me, that thus in vain
My words I spend which bootlesse be?
For if the Sun shows day light plain,
The day sees how in vain I cry,
And so the night, though dark her eye,
Yet has she ears to hear me groan,
And those with mournful plaints I fill;
3 But Thou art He who dwell'st alone
In Sion thy devoted hill.
4 Of Js'achs race thou art the song,
Our Fathers hope have thou been long.
5 Nor who in Thee their trust did place
Went frustrate of their hopes from thee,
But craving aid of their sad case,
They did profess thou sett'st them free:
For they who on thy word rely,
The taints, and taunts of foes defy.
6 But I a wormling am, no man,
A subject for the basest tongue,
They speak of me the worst they can,
And soil my honor with their dongue;
7 And in the street as I pass by,
But nods, and points naughtelie have I.
They shake their heads, they mumpe, and mow,
And with base words with points most sharp,
At me their filthy gall they throw,
8 Behold, say they, (ah thus they carpe)
Gods darling here, who safe, and sure,
Thinks by his help to stand secure.
Now let him save him if he can,
And from near danger draw him out,
Who thinks himself the only man,
And on his love does stand so stout.
9 But from the womb thou took'st me, Lord,
When first thou didd'st me light afford.
10 On thee in hope I still reli'de,
Even hanging at my mothers breast,
And seeing light, when first I cride,
My God thou wast, and so do rest;
11 Now leave me not in this my last,
When danger presses on so fast.
Now is the last of all the game,
For fear of death friends slipped aside:
12 Bulls fierce, and fat, (whom none can tame)
Did compass me with bellowing pride:
13 As Lions, roaring for their prey,
When hope and hunger makes them way.
14 In streams of blood my body swimmes,
Yet bloodlesse I, and all the bands
Of my ioints loosed, make vselesse limbs,
With me like melting wax it stands,
As that dissolues, set near the Sun,
So is my heart with fear undone.
15 My iuicelesse members all are dried,
As potters shards burnt in the fire,
My tongue to my dry jaws is tide,
And to the grave stands no man nier:
16 Mad dogs about me bark for spite,
And with their fangs they pinch, and bite.
The worst of men who against me rank,
My hands and feet with piercers bore,
17 And through my skin, grown thin, and lank,
They tell my bones not seen before,
And though their fury spent his spite,
Yet (their fierce mind fed with delight)
They make a sport to glut their eyes,
18 And see me tortured thus: At last
They shared my garments as a prize,
And on the inmost lots they cast:
19 But stay the end and me receive,
Nor, Lord, in my last languor leave.
Thou only art my strength, my might,
Then have thee, and my life sustain,
20 Support me when all leave me quite,
And my foes bloody sword restrain.
21 From foming Dogs their venomed jaws
Save me, and from the Lions paws.
22 The horns of Unicorns break thou,
So, thy suppliant saved from death,
To friends, and kin I will auow
That by thy grace I draw my breath.
And where thy servants troop, will I
Show forth thy Truth, Strength, Majesty.
23 You that serve God with purer mind,
Extol his name with sober lays,
And Jacobs seed, that found him kind,
Sing his great power on holy days.
And you that spring from Is'achs race,
To faithful men confess his grace.
24 He leaves not him whom men forsake,
Nor from the poor turns He his eye
With proud dudaine. When I did make
My sure to him, He past not by,
But me restored from fits of pain,
Unto a pleasing life again.
25 Then to the worlds ends yet unknown
Thy praises loud will I resound,
And tell of thee, and thee alone,
So far as w^ues the vast Earth bound.
But pay my vows will only where
Most men adore thy name with fear.
26 Where called unto the sacred feast,
The sober troop that knows no fraud
With Nectar filled shall every guest
The Lord of that great feast applaud:
And with his costly cares repleat
Acknowledge God who gave them meat.
And of that God the praise shall sing
Who enters with Maiestick grace,
And does a spark like vigor bring
Into their hearts where it takes place,
That fear of death fled far away,
There lasting life with joy should stay.
27 Then shall the Earth, moved at the fight
So new, and strange, from pole to pole
Be subject to the God of might,
And of all kindreds every soul
Shall kiss his feet, and prostrate fall,
To Him alone the Lord of all.
28 To whom of right by fixed decree
(Who everlasting King is known)
Belongs this mass of Kingdoms three,
Whose triple Crown he wears alone,
To heaven and hell he gives the law,
And all between he holds in awe.
29 The Greatmen here that rule the rest,
With him as bidden guests shall sit,
And filled with sweets, fed of the best,
Shall to his yoke their necks submit:
The which because so well they fare,
To bear it the more willing are.
The poor who pined stands near the grave,
Shall bend to him his weakened knee,
Whose wearied limbs no vigor have,
Nor moisture left more then has he
Who lying at the point of death,
Is yielding up his fainting breath.
30 Him shall the ofsprings that succeed
In the long tract of time adore,
And tell to all their after-breed,
His love to me showed long before.
This seed to him shall homage yield,
And bear his colors in the field.
PSALM. XXIII.
AT me mad dogs, ah what a coile you keep?
And Envy why sett'st thou them on to baule?
But God keeps me, as Shepherds keep their sheep,
Nor do I want, nor can I want at all.
2 And as a sheep I feed, which has no spleen,
In pastures where the short sweet grass does grow,
And where the Spring beflowres his lovely green,
My wearied limbs, that scarcely served to go,
Refreshed again, I at full ease extend.
3 The river clear that gliding passes by,
Unto my fainting force does succors send:
And in the Sun when I do parching lie,
As with a fan of cooling breath alaies
My drooping spirits: And when my wandering mind
Following the train of pleasing Error, strayes,
Tendering his flock, his way he makes me find.
4 And should pale Death, whose hand brings yelling grief
Dart at my heart when Hell black shades affright,
I Will follow, Lord, where thou do lead in chief,
Thy Shepherds staff will guide me safe, and right.
5 My table thou do with full dishes spre^d,
With sweetest wine my crowned cup o'reflowes,
With sense-refreshing balm thou cheer'st my head,
Whilst looking on grief does confound my foes.
6 Me shall thy hand of bounty never leave,
Nor thy good grace which good men does attend,
And so till death does me of life bereave,
I in thy house, my pleasant days will spend.
PSALM. XXIV.
THe Earth is all the Lords, and what beside
It sparing does conceal, or bounteous give,
And they are his that in wild mountains bide,
In fruitful plains, and civil cities live.
2 Upon the Sea the solid Earth he bound,
And firmly placed it, in so weak a seat,
With joints so strong, and all the pieces sound,
To bide all brunts, when swelling billows beat.
3 Thus all belongs unto the Lord by right,
But for himself he hallowed has a place;
And who is he can thither clime? what wight
Has leave to stand within that court of Grace?
4 Whose heart and hand is clear, nor idle dreams
Possess his mind, nor who by swearing thrive,
Whilst his false oaths stripped true men of their means,
Heavens Lord to him will Earths best blessings give.
And by his power supreme him will he take,
From force, and spite, and all they do, or say.
6 This, this is Truth, and this alone will make
Him see Gods face: This leads to heaven the way.
7 Vnlock'd, vnbarr'd, you Gates stand open wide,
The Eternal Gates, that lead to th'endlesse throne,
Make way, and all that hinders put aside,
Though strong as steel, and hard as marble stone.
For that great God, that he may passage find,
Whose glory casts his splendor far and near.
8 For what new guest is all this pomp assigned?
What King is he whose glory shines so clear?
It is the Lord whose glory shines so far
With wealth in peace, with victory in war.
9 Vnlock'd, vnbarr'd, you Gates stand open wide,
The Eternal gates that lead to th'endlesse throne,
Make way, and all that hinders lay aside,
Though strong as steel, or hard as marble stone,
For that great God, that he may passage find,
Whose glory casts his splendor far and near.
10 For what new guest is all this pomp assigned?
What King is he whose glory shines so clear?
He is the great Commander of the field,
To whose strong arms all Kings on Earth must yield.
PSALM. XXV.
LEt him in arms, another in his train
Of courting followers trust, and martial bands,
But Thou who made what Heaven and Earth contain,
In Thee my hope, in Thee my safety stands.
2 Thou, heavenly Sire, whom I to serve have chose,
Let not my hopes be vain to please my foes.
3 Some from shames confusion shall Thou free,
Nor shall the blushing hue their faces stain,
Who fix the staff of all their trust in thee:
But who love filth, and filthy will remain,
With shame and grief do Thou their hopes abate,
Who have no cause to vex me but their hate.
4 Among so many bypath trod below,
Among the brambles, and thick bushes here,
Thy sacred way to me thy servant show,
And let thy light in darkness now appear:
5 And from the waves of Error draw me out,
Which long, too long, have compast me about.
Thence with the light of thy resplendent beams,
Bring me into the way of Truth, and Right,
From thy clear spring since all my goodness streams,
My God, my stay, my Savior, and delight;
Then whilst alone I do on Thee depend,
Let not my hopes be frustrate of their end.
6. 7. Did my life's rule by crooked vices swerue,
Or Error did my slippery foot betray,
Or did my Youth my vainer pleasures serve,
Yet Thou whose Grace does thy fierce rage alay,
Pity my case, and what thou may deny
To my deserts, yield to thy Clemency.
8 Nor Thou the best of Good can this refuse,
To give good things to those who sue to thee,
And who desire the rightful way to use
Thou will not fail their rule of right to be,
For Thou who art Truth, Equity, and Right,
Do not as men, good will with ill requite.
9 Thou mild thy self, Lord, love a modest mind,
And teach it how to discern the iar
T'wixt good and ill, (which pride seeks not to find)
But whilst there is no concord where they are,
Thou by a short and safer way the while,
Art guide to those who have no gall, nor guile.
10 Sin thou abhorr'st, yet gracious, soon forgett'st,
Thy promises thou do as franckly pay,
And sparingly thy penalties thou sett'st,
And whilst we not neglect, but firmly stay
Upon thy sacred stablishments, O Lord,
Thy words and works eternally accord.
11 That after-ages may record thy grace,
That glory thence unto thy name may spring,
And spread it self abroad in every place,
Pass by our faults, O Father most bening,
What passions, by blind Error whirled about,
Have printed in us, let thy Grace blot out.
12 Thrice happy he who with a guiltless mind
Serves thee, O Lord, what course soever he takes,
He for his compass shall thy mercy find,
Which in foul seas him fairest passage makes,
Until it bring him to that blessed port
Where all things well to his best wishes sort.
13 Where with a mind without presumption, bold,
He with the best of blessings shall be sped,
Where pillars of fair issue shall uphold
His ancient house, and his old stock shall spread,
His branches wide, and sap shall still proceed
From the fresh root, to bless the after-breed.
14 So will the Lord infuse with sacred light,
His mysteries into the pious mind,
And what the godless men contemn, and spite,
And worldly wits could not by searching find,
He will reveal the knowledge of his will,
The rule of right, and the profoundest skill.
15 Thee therefore, heavens great King, I seek, and none
But thee alone: Mine eyes turn not from thee.
Thou will my feet (when they are near upon
The snares which my slye foes shall lay for me)
Alone so free, and clear from dangers set,
As craft shall never take them in her net.
16 O blessed Keeper of the Souls of men,
And bodies both, look with a serene eye
Upon me always, but most clearly then
When all else fails whereon I might rely:
17 And free my mind from cares which sore oppress,
And in their change bring new griefs, but not less.
18 Repel the pains which more and more increase,
And spare me, Lord, with travails spent, and worn,
Forget my sins, so shall my pangs surcease.
19 The wicked crew with might not to be borne
Pursue my soul: O with what spite enraged,
Torment they me, and cannot be asswag'd.
20 Free me from harms, and, Lord, protect thine own,
From scorn of those who hate both thee, and thine,
21 Since all my wealth depends on thee alone,
And I have nothing that I can call mine
To help my self, but only trust on Thee,
Mine innocence accept, and set me free.
22 And let the Nation bound unto thy law,
By thy right hand be cleared from servile awe.
PSALM. XXVI.
With open force the Tyrant me pursues,
And with close guile at me shoots bitter gall,
But Thou whose eye the hearts dark corners viewes,
To thee do I appeal, great Sire of All.
My mind from fraud is clear, my hand is clean,
And free from lawless force, or lewd intent,
In God I fix my hope, who does not mean
To leave me still to fortunes furious bent.
2 Search thou my raines, and inwards of my heart,
And the deep plots lie hidden in my mind,
With flames as do the skillful artists part
The dross from gold, which they by fire refined;
3 And thou shall see my mind how mindful still
It is of thy munificence, and grace,
And how my life directed by thy will,
Holds an even course, and keeps a sober pace.
4 Hence, hence auant the tongue with falsehood fraught
Nor let it think to find a friend of me,
And who has learned to paint his inward thought
In his fly breast, far from my house be he.
5 I hate the counsels of ungracious men,
And impious routs then poison more detest,
Whose hearts do leap, as in a triumph, when
They do foul facts, hatched in a filthy breast.
6 But with a mind not conscious of lewd sin,
And bathed in purest fountains, I will go
Unto thy altars, and there leading in
The dance, my joy will in Oblations show.
7 My Timbrell, Lute, and voices set thereto
shall all accord with joint and sweet consent,
To tell the youths what wonders thou didd'st do,
And that in places where they most frequent.
8 The house wherein men sing thy sacred name,
The Temple where thy Godhead men adore,
These set my mind (long absent from the same,)
On fire to see thy glorious arc once more.
9 Ah let not this profane vnhallow'd soil
Among the savage beasts, that thirst for blood,
Cover these bones when they shall rest from toil.
The men so bad, how can the ground be good?
10 Their guilefull minds to mischief wholly bent,
Hunt after bribes with a devouring hand,
11 But I will still pursue my first intent,
And in the way of innocence will stand.
Lay thy mild care close to my sad complaint,
And free me from near dangers that affright,
12 That in plain paths I go, and do not faint,
But keep on still, and always follow right,
This is thy gift, this is alone thy grace,
And therefore I on high thy name will raise,
Of thee who art my safeties only base,
^n the assemblies I will sing thy praise.
PSALM. XXVII.
When in the dark God guides me with his light
As with a torch, and he my life protects,
What open force, or fury can affright?
Or what can fear me, that blind fraud proiects?
2 When th'impious rout, in ill that join so well,
Mustred their troops all against me alone,
Into the nets themselves they headlong fell,
Where they hoped I should have been overthrown.
3 If Camps entrenched, if Armies dart their threats,
Securely I behold their camps enclosed,
And all their bloody broiles, and warlike feats.
I fearlesse view, with eye, and mind reposed.
4 One thing I craved, and that I ever shall,
That free from cares which may my joys abate,
I still may dwell within thy sacred wall,
And that mine eyes may see thy courts of state.
And seeing them I may admire the same,
That, whilst my vital parts draw quickening breath,
I may sing praise to God, and laud his name,
And naught may end that sweet consent but death.
5 Then will he hide, and me safe-guarded lay
Under the shadow of his saving tent,
Removed from all that might my mind dismay,
In walls as strong as rocks of hard ascent.
6 Nor will he leave me now to be a prey
To th'impious force of the seditious rout,
So conquering I to him my vows will pay;
Who won the field should his name be left out?
7 Hear me who call, and prostrate at thy feet,
Broken and bruised, as on a rack, with pain,
With sweet consent let grace and goodness meet,
To raise and ease my tortured limbs again.
8 My mind runs panting after thee, mine eyes
Fixed on thine eye, attend thee day by day:
9 Hide not thy light, that from thy love does rise,
Nor leave me in the dark to find my way.
Nor in thy rage confound thou me thine own,
Protect the life thy servant owes to thee:
O thou the hope of all his help alone,
From foes defend, and him from dangers free,
10 Who near, and dear, even he that gave me breath,
And she that bore me do forsake me quite,
But God that leaves not his when neer'st to death,
Forsook me not in my despairfull'st plight.
11 Teach me thy ways, by whose free grace I live,
And guide my steps in the fair path of right,
That force, nor fear (wherewith my foes have strive
To draw me from thy way) may work their spite.
12 Not leave thou me obnoxious to the lust
Of impious men, who me of crimes endite,
And witness bear in things that are not just,
Armed to the proof with lies, the arms of spite.
13 Conquered at last with weight of pressing ills,
My mind would faint, but hope of thy good grace,
This comfort to my drooping spirits instills,
That after anxious toiles joy shall take place.
I living here with men that draw like air,
The blessings of an happy life expect,
Then take not thou the foil of foul despair,
The Lord will give thee strength, and will protect
And stay thy fainting soul, as props uphold
A crased house. Then fearlesse stand and bold.
PSALM. XXVIII.
Worlds King then starry Orbs more high,
My life's support, sur'st shield to save,
Hear mildly my request, lest I
Be like a corpse brought near the grave.
2 Mild Father, to my vows give ear,
When I with tears lift up my hands
To heaven, where wandering lights appear,
The Temple where thy glory stands.
3 With lewd men be not I enrol'd,
Nor as their mate, Lord, doom thou me,
Whose tongues are made by the Sirene mould,
And minds with poison tainted be.
4 Let their reward their lewdness show,
As bad their work, even be their hire,
And let them reap, as they did sow,
Pains equal to their lewd desire.
5 The wise foresight of thy decree
(Who do my head with honor crown)
Keeps not their hands from falsehood free,
Nor holds their spite-swolne stomachs down.
And therefore shall not their long line
Of hopeless offspring wide extend,
Of stock and house shall be no sign,
Their fathers pelf shall soon have end.
6 To thee all-ruling Lord be laud,
Who to my prayers fair passage yields,
7 Whose strength arms me from force, and fraud,
Whose hopeful help my safety shields.
8 Hence joy triumphing in my breast,
My measured lines thy praises sing,
Who guard'st thine own with dangers pressed,
And from all snares preseru'st thy King.
9 Thou Prince of men keep safe and sound
Thy people, and let Hebers race
In all Earths blessings still abound,
Until the night do leave his place.
PSALM. XXIX.
THough rich in gold, though thou in wealth abound,
Thy front adorned with a victorious crown,
Acknowledge God, nor be ungrateful found,
Use thy good hap, but know heaven sent it down.
2 Sing praise to him, and with submisse request
Make him thy friend, who made the worlds wide frame,
And with his beck who rules the sky addressed
With glittering Stars, give honor to his name.
3 Whose sounding voice powers moistning showers below,
Who horrid tumults raising in the sky,
With roaring thunders makes fierce Boreas blow,
And mount the swelling waves, when Seas grow high:
4 A voice, I say, with Majesty repleate,
Whose power makes good, what first his will designed,
5 Whether he pleased of Cedars tall and great,
T'uncloth the hills, or rend high Elmes with wind.
6 Or burst out stones, conioyn'd to stones with lime,
Or toss the hills, and their first footing change,
As youthful rage joyed with the springing time,
Does prick the lusty Bull to leap and range.
7 If his voice strikes fire flashes from the cloud,
8 The desert Cabines of th'Arabians shake:
9 Beasts quake for fear, abortiues disauow'd,
Burst forth with pain. Oaks fell when he but spoke.
What Heaven contains in his gold-vaulted room,
What Earth sustaines, ennamel'd with rare skill,
And what lies hid within the Seas deep womb,
They all confess Gods unresisted will.
10 The sinne-reuenging sea, moved at his sound,
Overwhelmed the Mountains, when it raged and rau'd,
And thou (to whose decrees are all things bound)
Wast pleased to drown the world, so sinful made.
11 If thou give strength, we neither fear our foes,
Or proud for wealth, or for their number daring:
If thou give peace, from Plenties horn that flows,
No blessing shall to Js'achs race be sparing.
PSALM. XXX.
OF thee my Muse, of thee my Harp shall sound,
Judge of the world, whence all good things do flow,
Freed from deaths jaws that sought my overthrow,
My vows now will I pay, by promise bound.
Released by thee nor now insults my foe,
To see mine eyes pour forth their floods of tears,
Nor takes delight to see me vexed with fears
Of pressing ills, thou cool'st his courage so.
2 I sought thy help, when I unsteady stood,
And doubtful of success, to thee did sue,
By thee refreshed, alone by thee I drew
Th'aires lovely light, that cheeres the vital blood.
3 Nor do I lie with fates long night oppressed
In the low vaults, where windows want, and lights;
4 But you devoted to the sacred rites,
And clean oblations of a purer breast,
Him let your heart with sweet harmonious cheer,
(Who minds your prayers) be mindful to record,
Extol with praise your Sire, and Sovereign Lord,
Since to your vows he bends his listening ear.
5 The heat of his revenging ire alayde,
Does vanish as a fleeting buble falls,
And a sweet life, which no sad hap appalls,
By his right hand is to good men repaid.
If late at night our mournful faces be
Bathed all with tears, yet when the golden Sun
Sheds forth his beams, the glass of grief is run,
And smiling mirth our captived minds sets free.
6 When I had all that fits a blessed state,
Thus said I to my self, no gust nor gall
Shall stay my course so fortunate in all,
Nor doubtful chance give sweet content the mate.
7 Thou giving me strength, wealth, and high degree,
And like a mount raised with strong walls of brass,
Strengthening my crown, Credulity that was
My minds Enchantresse, fed vain pride in me.
But leaving me unto my foolish vain,
Thou drawing back thine hand, that light winged dame
False Fortune fled, and left all out of frame,
My house disord'red in the head and train.
8 Then presently, sole President of all,
Humbly my vows I on thine altar strewn,
I craved thine aid, and said with tears bedewed,
9 What good to thee can of my blood befall?
What use can thou make of my breathless limbs?
Can the cold ashes that in silence lie
In Deaths dark mansion thy great works descry
To th'after-age, and sing thee sacred hymns?
10 Mild to my vows thy facile care apply,
That to thy grace does easy passage make,
Nor from my tears turn thy grim looks, but take
The plague-sores from my limbs that fretting lie.
11 When I implore thou do thine care address,
And laist it close, and wip'st my tears away,
And in their place bring'st mirth, and to allay
My grief comes joy, which hand and heart express.
12 Of thee my lays shall sing, my harp shall sound,
My voice on thee devoted shall attend,
Nor shall my Muse want matter to commend,
Since of her song thy praise shall be the ground.
PSALM. XXXI.
IN thee my hope I placed,
Who best made all things good,
See I be not disgraced
Whilst hope dies in the bud.
Me just Revenger free,
And from false foes exempt:
2 Beningly hear thou me,
And take me from contempt.
Keep me as in a Rock,
Where no path ever was,
Or closed where needs no lock,
Within a wall of brass.
3 Thou art my rock so steep
As none can footing win,
My brasse-wall trench'd so deep
As none can enter in.
So may thy name affright
The minds of my proud foes,
4 That whilst thou lead'st me right,
I may their snares disclose.
5 Thou art my strength, with thee
I leave my life in trust,
True of thy word save me,
And keep thy cou'nant just.
6 I hate with all my heart
Those that pursue vain dreams,
My steady hope thou art,
My hau'n in roughest streams.
7 When dangers sore oppress,
The clear light of thy grace
Does grief soon dispossess,
And brings joy in the place.
8 Vexed without right or laws,
Where tyrant rage does reign,
Thou took'st me from his jaws,
And did pale death restrain.
9 Have pity then on him
Who all to pieces rent,
Mind, eye, and every limme
Is senseless, dim, and spent.
10 My frail life worn with anguish
Does slide away, with groans
My foiled forces languish,
And iuicelesse are my bones.
11 Who hates me takes a pride
At my mishap to jeere,
Some flip for fear aside,
And not a friend comes near.
12 Rac'd out of mind, as dead,
My Kin deny me place,
Where I was borne and bred
No pot shard held more base.
13 In troops with public scorn
The rascals me disdain,
My death a crew has sworn,
And plot with might and maine.
14 But confident the whiles
Of help from thee, my foes
Their threats, wrongs, taunts, and guiles
Disturb not my repose.
15 Of life thou guid'st the line,
And make time swift or slow,
Free me who, Lord, am thine,
From rage of my fell foe.
16 Ah show thy lovely face
To me thy servant dear,
Still let me find thy grace,
As those that do thee fear.
17 Nor let it be my shame,
That I implore thine aid,
Blush they are worthy blame,
And deep in silence laid
Sleep they out their long night.
18 Dumb be the tongue does use
To lie, to bark, and bite,
And most the best abuse.
19 How great, how many be
Thy blessings to thy friends,
Witness the Poles that see,
Thine blessed beyond their ends.
20 These safe thy Grace protects,
When great men threat and swell,
No poisonous tongue infects
Those in thy house who dwell.
21 Eternal be thy grace,
The worlds supremest Guide,
Who, as in a strong place,
Do me from danger hide.
22 Hopeless, and helpless when
I scarce was saved by flight,
I to my self said then
My God has left me quite.
But having me in mind,
When ditefull'st dangers pressed,
Thou lent'st thy ear so kind
When I made my request.
23 To heaven your hearts who vowed,
Love your all-fostring Sire
Who does depresse the proud;
And raise his followers higher.
24 In God who put their trust
Rely on him in all,
Let Chance with no rough gust
Your courages appall.
PSALM. XXXII.
THrice blessed He whose heavenly Fathers grace
Remits his sins which kill the living soul,
And whose flagitious facts hid from his face
He buries deep, nor puts them in his role.
2 Thrice blessed he to whom the Judge of right
Imputes not his frail life's sin-straying ways,
Nor in his heart found slights concealed from light,
Such as for shame Fraud in her closet lays.
3 Whilst in my breast I fostred the disease,
My bones displaced, my ioints I scarce could draw,
And mournful grief, that nothing could appease,
Cried and complained, nor could I give it law.
4 With thy strong hand enraged thou did me press,
Both when the night with clouds did hide the day,
And when the rosy Sun did him address
To show the world his beams to guide their way.
So wasting grief discolored had my skin,
Pain dried my moisture pined with sad distress,
That Cancer, when his furious flames begin
To burn the sand-sow'd crop, his rage is less.
5 Then did I change my mind, and showed my wound,
And laid my follies forth before thy face,
Disclosed my fraud, then from sins bonds unbound,
I reconciled was taken to thy grace.
6 Who seeks to keep his court of Conscience sound,
With humble prayer let him appease thine ire,
Nor let him fear, though Earth the Seas confound,
The threats of direful rage that burn like fire.
7 Thou still at hand to help, do set me free
From perils which do fiercely me assail:
In all my parts are joys infused by thee,
Like his that breaks his bonds, and scapes the jail.
8 Nor leau'st thou here: I will, say thou, expel
The dusky clouds that keep thy mind from light:
The blessed way of life I will thee tell,
Nor from thy steps will I reflect my sight.
9 Now be not thou like Mule or Horse, whose breasts
With brutish fury filled, do follow kind,
And know no kindness, but advance their crests,
Till bit and curb do tame their fiercer mind.
10 Headstrong iniquity shall undergo
A world of pains, but who sincerely crave
Of God with faith (whose grace does ever flow
To those that humbly sue) shall pardon have.
11 Who all from Right, and in fee simple hold,
And who love Truth, and know nor fraud, nor guile,
With gesture, and with voice, your joys unfold,
Since graceful Heaven does on you sweetly smile.
PSALM. XXXIII.
YOu that chaste love to Righteousness profess,
With cheerful lays sing of the Lord, who made
The worlds round ball: it is fit your songs express
Your love to Right, who know no other trade.
2 Him praise with Harp that yields a Siren sound,
And Shalmes with wind that warbling notes divide:
That hand that proves his masters skill profound
On twice five strings here let his art be tried.
3 Let us to him new songs of joy devise,
And him alone sound with the Trumpets shrill,
4 On whose bare word all faith and truth relyes,
And Equity attends his royal will.
5 For He Is the God that Justice loves, and right,
And truth; for why? in him no fraud is found,
His Bountie's known, exposed to all men's fight,
So far as the vast Earth has any bound.
6 He with his word, (whose word is his decree)
The shining globe of brighter Heavens did bend
Like to a bow, and so the lights we see
In the flame colored sky their beams extend.
7 He bounds the restless Ocean with a shore,
And curbs his lawless rage begirt about,
The waters in a cellar kept for store
When he has cause to use, he calls them out.
8 Him East and West both serve with awful fear:
Who dwells in climes discou'red, or unknown
In the utmost bounds, where sea and land appear,
Adore he him as Sovereign Lord alone.
9 What here below draws breath, or breathless dies,
Does live and dye even as he please to will,
Under whose changelesse law all trembling lies,
Bound to obey, and his Edicts fulfill.
10 Who far more wise then men professing arts,
(Profaner men that vainer arts profess)
He mockes the baser births of their lewd hearts,
And frustrate bad men of all good success.
11 But what the Author of all things propounds,
And keeps within the closet of his mind,
Whilst day and night do tread their measured rounds,
Shall steady stand, nor alteration find.
12 Ah thrice, nay more then fourefold blessed are those
Whose patron God takes on himself to be,
And whom he took peculiarly, and chose
To be his own in a more near degree.
13 From the star-spangled vaults where Saints abide,
The Grand-Sire of the world casts down his eye,
14 And in his inmost rooms retired aside,
Beholds the cares and toiles wherein men lie.
15 Who framed the heart, and her dark angles made,
And knows what lurkes in every humane breast,
There Is nothing hid even in the darkest shade,
That can be kept from him, or lie suppressed.
16 The King in vain troops with his mustred bands
To be safe-guarded, and preserved secure;
The Soldier hopes in vain with his steeled hands
Against his foe to be protected sure.
17 Oft-times the Horse that ouer-runs the wind
Deceiues his rider, nor performs his speed,
18 But God beholds Just men of heavenly kind
With a fixte ye that still his mark does heed.
19 And does retort the darts of daring fate,
And stops the jaws of hunger sharp and fell:
20 Hence comes our hope of help, and happy state,
None can like him, and none will guard so well.
21 And hearts devoted to his service, He
Besprinkles all with oil of joy, and brings
22 Their hopes, and vows, that on him fixed be,
To happy end, whence endless solace springs.
PSALM. XXXIV.
IN weal, or woe, what e're befall,
At all times I the Lord will praise,
My mouth with high-strain'd accents shall
His praise resound, and always raise.
2 This shall my joy and comfort be,
And present ease in dire distress,
The mournful crew thus following me,
Shall cause their sorrow seem the less.
3 Thus all in one, let us pursue
With praise his name and sovereign might.
4 In dangers when I called, he knew
My voice, and soon put fear to flight.
5 Who heart and all to him apply,
With cheerful hue their visage shines,
Nor shame with her cheek-staining dye,
Shall show them crossed in their designs.
6 Behold this poor penurious wretch
When he to him for aid did call,
He forth his saving arm did stretch,
And freed him from what ill might fall.
7 Who fear the Lord an Angel sent
Does guard their camps, and fence them so,
That impious force against them bent,
He foiles them all, leaves not a foe.
8 Make proof, and you shall quickly see
How far Gods bounty does extend,
And know how blessed they only be,
Who hope, and hap to him commend.
9 You holy Nations serve the Lord,
They nothing want who him adore.
10 Extortious wrongs do not afford
Their masters food, when these have store.
11 Come heavens delight, attend, and hear,
Whilst I the Lords true fear relate:
12 Who look for life from dangers clear,
And for long days in happy state,
13 Refrain thy tongue from poisonous spite,
And keep thy lips from cursed fraud,
14 Avoid the crooked ways; do right,
And love sweet rest, and peace applaud.
15 The Lord beholds the innocent,
And to their vows lends open ear,
16 His brow against the wicked bent,
Their names in no records appear.
17 The Lord attends the just man's plaint,
And frees him from all pressing ills,
18 When others with lost labor faint,
And hopeless are to work their wills.
And when the mind with griefs oppressed
Does vnderlye the weight it bears,
Gods help at hand is still addressed,
And care-distracted souls vp-reares.
19 What good men would blind Chance enuies,
And taskes them to laborious toiles,
But God, who guards the godly wise,
Abates her edge, and forces foiles.
20, 21 And keeps the bones in their right place
Unbroken by the hands of foes,
When lewd men (to their more disgrace)
By their own sins work their own woes.
And he who is not the godlies friend,
Shall with his house quite ruined fall,
22 But who serves God, he does defend
His life, house, liuelihood, and all.
PSALM. XXXV.
Blessed Architect, who made the worlds wide frame,
Come and protect me, and my cause defend,
And to my foes with ignominious shame
Retort the ill which they toward me intend.
2, 3 Take with thy darts thy all-resisting shield,
And draw thy sword, and meet my foes in the field.
Say to my soul, secured by mine aid
Let not thy courage be appalled with fear,
4 The shameful blush that shows a shind dismayed
Be that the color, and let that appear
In my foes front, and turn they soon their back,
Who their blind traps prepared to work my wrack.
5 As Boreas fierce does whirle the dust about,
So let the wreakfull Angel in their flight
6 Hard at the heels pursue this heartlesse rout
Dabling in dirt, let then the sullen night
Cloud all her lamps, that frighted with her frown,
The wreakfull Angel then may ding them down.
7 For since they sought by their lewd luring trains,
To take me in their nets who meant but good,
And dug a pit in The Earths deep hollow veins,
8 Snared be they in the nets laid for my blood,
And where my death was threatened, in that pit
Headlong fall they, and blindfold lie in it.
9 In the mean time my heart shall leap withal,
All sweet delight infused. My mind now free
By grant of grace from harms that might befall,
Shall praise the Lord, whence comfort comes to me;
10 And all the senses that express the mind,
Shall cry, and say, None like our God we find,
Who guards the poor from violence of those
That press them down with their huge weight of pride,
And whose revenging hand keeps off the blows
That would confound, were he not on their side.
11 Conspiring Calumny does spit her spite,
And of foul crimes me guiltless does endite.
12 They feign flagitious facts which I never knew,
To bring my soul unto a shameful end.
What I did well with malice they pursue,
And break their sleeps whilst they my death intend.
13 Whilst poisonous grief burns like a plaguey sore,
And eats their intrails, in ill case before,
I in a sable hue, and mourning weed,
Deformed, and worn, scourged with pale famines rod,
Groueling on ground, eyes, hand, and heart agreed,
With tears and humble suit to appease my God.
14 So friend for friend, so brother mourns for brother,
So sons bedew with tears their dear dead mother.
15 If Fortune touched me with her heavy hand,
They flock, and joy at my supposed ills,
The rascal rout, when I think nothing, band
To work on me their proud and spiteful wills.
16 Base Parasites, and all the babbling crew,
Whet tooth on tooth, and their fell poison spue.
17 O Father dear when shall this long forbaring,
And irksome patience have a final end?
Restrain this scoffing pride, and saucy daring,
And me thus left let not fierce Lions rend:
18 That this by thee I may acknowledge done,
That now I live, and see the lovely Sun.
And in the solemn meetings I will sing
Of Thee, and of thy ready help to those
Who call on thee, the universal King.
19 Nor let the crew which fat and fulsome grows
By laughing at mine ills, to see me pined,
Nourish vain hopes of wrongs which they designed.
With nods and winkes let not my cruel foe
Note me, nor triumph at my bad success,
20 Who still insults with scornful words that flow
From his fell gall, and ill-aduis'd does press
On me with trains (that feign would live at rest)
To snare me sleeping, by his guiles oppressed.
21 They girne and fleere, and, Ha, say they, our eyes,
Our eyes have seen this smiling sunshine day.
22 Who view'st with thy all-seeing lamps what lies
In the wide world dispersed, can thou yet stay,
And see, see this? Then setting all aside,
Protect thou me. Delay draws on their pride.
23 Up, up at length with thy revenging hand
Batter and bruise the refractary proud:
24 And thou just Judge with just revenge withstand
Lewd men's attempts, that will not else be bowed,
Nor let them bear, as they had won a prize,
Mirth in their minds, when tears are in mine eyes.
25 Nor let them mutter in their inward soul,
Ha, ha, all now goes right, and far beyond
Our hopeful plots, now have we won the goal,
See where he lies, whose hopes were vain and fond.
26 Let them repay with ignominious shame
Their foolish mirth, and pride that moved the same.
And let the blushing hue, which shame attends,
Repel the joys unseasonably bred
Within their breasts, to see me miss my ends.
27 But who are with another spirit led,
And take to heart to see me walk upright,
Vsher'd by Conscience that no fears afright,
Live they a life from sorrow far remote
In sweet repose, and raise unto the sky
Their Sou'raignes praise, strained to the highest note,
Who frees from cares those that on him rely.
28 Blessed Savior of mankind, let my tongue sing
Thy Justice always, whence all right does spring,
And tell thy Grace, which guides the ruling raines,
Whilst in my breast one spark of heat remains.
PSALM. XXXVI.
ALthough thou burn in sacred flames
The intrailes of a thousand Cowes,
Kiss stocks and stones, with hallowed names,
And mumble double prayers and vows,
And heap thine Altars all beset
With the best gifts that thou can get.
I will not yet think thee a jot
The more religious for all that,
Since that thy sins say thou art not,
And all thou do denies flat
There is a God that rules at all
With providence this our round ball.
2 How plausible soever thou seem
And fair in show above the rest,
Yet all may see, and seeing deem
Foul sin lies close couched in thy breast,
And bursting forth like fire brings hate,
Which follows thee with shame her mate.
3 Whatever thou say is guilt with guile,
With thanklesse cares thou put by
All wholesome words, and others while
They wish thy good, thou think they lie:
4 Contriuing mischief all night long,
Thou fly'st from right, and fostrest wrong.
5 Great ruler of the world, the land,
The sea and sky thee gracious find,
And all that heaven enfolds, does stand
And fall to thee, all in their kind.
6 Thy rule of right and sacred skill,
As it made all, so guides all still.
It higher is then tops of hills
Whereon the snow does longest lie,
Deeper then gulfes that nothing fills,
Hence men draw breath, and live thereby:
Nor escape thy care the beasts on earth,
Nor creeping things of lowest birth.
7 In this all comforts that we have
Of life, and liuelihood are found,
Whilst the pure soul is made a slave
Here in the bodies dungeon bound.
As birds by dammes safe brooded lie,
So by thine aid all harms we fly.
8 But when the exiled mind is free
By death, and goes from whence it came,
Where all the rooms star-spangled be,
There want, and with her grief, and shame
Are banished; there has every man
More then he wished, wish what he can.
There pleasures are strewn all about,
And unmixed joys do there abound,
There like a torrent gusheth out
Streams of delights not elsewhere found.
9 Thence springs the life whose fount still flows,
The life which Deaths fithe never mowes.
There vanish mists that dark our minds,
And like to clouds do blind our hearts,
But from thy face the beam that finds
His radiant light, us light imparts;
Which shall with knowledge feed the mind,
That leaves no dregs of filth behind.
10 Those with thy gracious goodness cheer
Who know thee, and what thou have done,
And love the truth, to thee so dear,
With heart and mind clear as the Sun,
Let, let them now in justice have
The blessings which thy Grace first gave.
11 Nor let the foot of surly pride
Trample on me, nor let the rout
Of impious men put me beside
My house, and home, and thrust me out.
12 Who joy in sin be sin their fall,
That they once down, rise not at all.
PSALM. XXXVII.
AH let not Spite inflame thy gall,
Though fortunate thou lewd men find,
Nor at their wealth fret thou at all,
More fugitive then is the wind.
2 So fades their shadow of renown,
And seeming show of happy state,
As grass in flowery meades cut down,
Whose leaves their verdure soon abate.
3 Trust thou in God, with heart and hand
Pursue the trade of right, and truth,
So will he give thee house and land,
And feed thy age, who nursed thy youth.
4 Rapt be thy soul with his delight,
And of thy joy be he the base,
So cheered and cherisht day and night,
He Will crown thy wishes with his grace.
5 Commit thy life, goods, and good name
To his alone directing hand,
Then as thy self would have the same,
Thy hope and hap shall jointly stand.
6 Like heavens great light when it does rise,
Thy Justice he will make appear,
Thy Judgment too in all men's eyes
Like beams at midday shall be clear.
7 Bear thou the crosses that may fall,
And if thou see (which few can brook)
The wicked with their pride sway all,
Yet cast not thou a lowering look.
8 Restrain the current of thine ire,
And let not hurtful passion in,
Lest emulation move desire
To run the common course of sin.
9 Ungodly men shall never stand,
But pass as smoke with ayrie wings,
When godly men possess the land,
Left to their seed that after springs.
10 Stay but a while and thou shall see
The wicked man consumed and gone,
His towers of pride shall ruined be,
And no sign left to gaze upon.
11 The golden mean in humble mind,
Shall bless the meek with peace and rest,
And leave his well-got lands behind,
Of rightful heirs to be possessed.
12 The graceless man does spread his net
The good with cunning to ensnare,
And his enuenom'd tushes whet,
Chafed with despite, and fretfull care.
13 But God beholds this from his throne,
And laughes to scorn these threats so vain,
For he fore-sees he soon must groan
Upon the rack of torturing pain.
14 The wicked man does draw his sword,
And bends his bow to take his mark
At him who is just in deed and word
The humble Dear in Gods own park.
15 But his drawn sword with edge reuers'd
Shall wound his master with the blow,
His shaft in vain made to have pierced,
Shall break asunder with his bow.
16 Plain homely stuff fallen to thy lot
By a fair course shall grace thee more,
Then all the lothed spoils ill-got
By rich men pillaging the poor.
17 Extortious goods the Judge of right
Shall scatter wide, and bring to dust
The mountains of these men of might,
And with his right hand guard the just.
18 God fosters those who harmless be,
And what they have his grace assures,
Their birthright too by his decree
Beyond the date of days endures.
19 When plaguey boiles, and furious arms
Do all the world with rage infest,
Then he whose hand is free from harms,
Shall not with pining dearth be pressed.
20 But impious men against heaven that fight,
Shall perish quite without delay,
And vanish in the smoke so light,
As fat of Lambs that melt away.
21 Unrighteous men nor give, nor lend,
But borrow, and not pay again,
When frugally the lust do spend
And portions for the poor retain.
22 The Just man's friends shall free dispose
Possessions to their hopeful breed,
When as the seed of his proud foes
Shall want a root the stock to feed.
23 The Lord loves Just men, and sustaines
Their steps in all the ways of right,
24 His right hand them from slips restraines,
And if they fall they fall not quite.
25 I was a child, now aged grown,
Yet never saw in all this space
The just man left, nor his have known
To beg their bread from place to place.
26 The righteous man in time of need
Unto the poor does lend, and give,
Yet leaves to them that shall succeed
Enough whereby they richly live.
27 Eschew the wrong and winding ways,
And follow right as heaven shall guide,
So whilst the Sun with golden rays
Directs the day, thine shall abide.
28 The Lord takes truth and right to heart,
And never honest men forsakes,
But they that from his ways depart,
Their fruitless seed no rooting takes,
29 The Just man that is fair possessed
Of lands, of goods, of hoof, or horn,
Both he and his shall see it blessed,
While day and night have even and morn.
30 Wisdom and Truth do still abide
Within the lips of honest men,
31 And heavens just laws in heart reside
To keep their feet from Errors den.
32 When impious men watch very near,
To bring the just man to his end,
33 Then God who sees his cause is clear,
From unjust doom will him defend.
34 Hope thou in God, his laws ensue,
Then great in wealth, and high in place
He Will give thee help, and health to view
Thy foes to fall before thy face.
35 I saw great men as fresh and tall
As bays that grows by the river ride,
Who whilst they will, or would have all,
Go strouting out with swelling pride.
36 I turned my eye, and lo the shape
And substance gone of all their glory,
Their boundless power which naught could escape,
Left but their fall to tell their story.
37 Behold the state, and stately train
Of men upright, whose lowly mind,
Crowned with content endures no pain,
And in old age sweet quiet find.
38 But factious men for mischief pressed,
Their glass soone's run, and pleasure past,
An end which suites with all the rest
Concludes their loathed life at last.
39 The just man casts his anchor deep
Of solid Hope in heaven above,
Which steady does the righteous keep,
That earth nor hell can him remove.
40 The Lord gives aid to those that crave,
And from all harms he sets them clear,
Who him entrust with all they have,
What man can do they need not fear.
PSALM. XXXVIII.
COrrect me not, Lord, in thy burning ire,
(Who made and rul'st the universal mass)
Though I deserve what Justice may require,
Yet let not Fury on my Judgment pass.
2 The arrows deep within my entrails stick,
Which thy right hand did level at my heart,
Thy wrath so gauls, my conscience so does prick,
(And forced by them fear seizes every part,)
3 That in my wounded soul no piece is free
From mortal sins, which so waste all within,
As that my bones (their ioints so loosened be)
Have sucked the poison of infecting sin:
4 Of sin that does ingulfe me in the maine,
And if my head above the waves but peep,
Or that I do but strive to rise again,
It weighes me like a stone down to the deep.
5 The new skinn'd skarres of my old wounds renewed,
Spue out foul matter, and with pain brought low,
6 With anguish, and long lying ugly hu'd,
The worst, and last of ills, surcharge my woe.
7 The plague-fore hid within my belly boiles,
Nor any part without is free from pain,
8 So weak am I, and broken too with toiles,
That day and night I am enforced to plain.
And made to yield unto my pressing ills
My heart does cry, and like a Lion roar,
9 Thou Monarch of the world, whose power all fills,
Know what my soul desires, and sighs implore.
10 My trembling heart, and troubled mind with fear
Do beat, and pant, the juice, that all parts fed,
And vigor spent, no force is left to cheer
My members stricken with a palsy dead.
My eyes now drawing toward their evening, cloud.
11 Near neighbors, and dear friends, and nearer bound
By deerer link of blood, me disauow'd,
And all cried faugh, lothing my parts unsound.
12 But that proud crew still ready for my ill,
Devising wrong with utmost maine, and might,
Spread their slye nets, and that they hold on still,
And impious fraud assaid they day and night.
13, 14 In the mean while like him was deaf and mute,
I stone-still stood, and silence kept as one
Who wanted words, and reasons to confute
Objected crimes, and could reply to none.
15 Whose power rules all, O guide me with thy grace,
16 In thee my hope is fixed, then let not pride
With scorn insult to see my doleful case,
Or foes triumph if foot but slip aside.
17 I ready am thy sturdy strokes to bear
My skin swells with the marks still black and blue,
Rent as a plow share does the furrows tear,
So in long streakes it shows a bloody hue.
18 My sins I know deserve, deserve the wound,
And worthily I all these plagues sustain,
19 But still my foe, my cruel foe gets ground,
The faction too does strength and courage gain.
20 They live, and living sprout, and bear up head,
And though of them I, Lord, deserve no ill,
With wrongs they me pursue, by fury lead,
And injuries repay for my good will.
And still they spit their gall, and wot you why?
Because I always follow that is right.
21 But be not thou far off, nor let me lie,
Nor leave me thus engaged to spitefull'st spite.
22 Make have, and give me thy sweet saving hand,
Since for my help, I have but thee to stand.
PSALM. XXXIX.
When my fell foe triumphing at my harm,
Prouok'd me with tart taunts, I in my mind
Resolved from biting terms my tongue to charm,
And brawling shun, and all of that base kind.
2 I locked my lips, and rein'd my tongue so hard,
As not a word could escape, all was so barred.
But lest my mouth might rashly spit her gall,
I let not pass even words were good and kind,
3 But grief, like fire, finding no vent at all,
To burn within the more did fuel find,
And rage at last, that burst the curbing reins,
Thus on the Lord she calls, and thus complains:
4 Show, show what bounds thou to my days have set?
When shall I fly, and from this dungeon free
Be rid of loathsome cares, that inly fret?
5 Thou live past date, there is no end with thee,
Blessed of thy self, and of thy self most strong;
But soon our glass is run, we live not long,
6 And almost less then nothing are our years,
Like to a flitting shade, or breathless shape
Which in the surface of a glass appears,
Nor that can vain and anxious cares escape:
Lust rackes the mind, and joy does raise his crest,
Hope mounts him up, by fear again deprest.
We tumults raise, and spend we know not how,
(Without advise not looking to the maine)
Our life in things, which folly may auow,
But of no moment, fruitless are, and vain:
So whiles we toil, and moile, abroad, at home,
We gather wealth apace, God knows for whom.
7 On which side shall I turn? who gives me aid,
Tossed, and garboild? who frees me wrapped in woes?
8 In thee is all my hope. Stop vndelaid
This sink of sin whence all this mischief flows,
And leave me not to impious follies scorn,
Launc'd with their scoffs and taunts not to be born.
9 I held my peace, when I perceived these ills
Of thy fierce wrath for sin reuengers were,
10 Who made mankind, and guid'st their ways, and wills,
Thy lashes yet a little while forbear,
Since strength does fail, nor does my life suffice
To bear the growing pains that still arise.
11 When as thy plagues pursue our fretting sin,
Soon strength and beauty fade, and flit away,
As Mothes eat cloth when once they are got in.
O, man's a frail and brittle piece of clay.
12 Yet to my prayers thy ears, mild Father lend,
Nor scorn the words which to thy throane I send.
Turn not thy face from his bedewed eyes,
That lives a pilgrim, and a wandering guest,
Nor I, nor had my parents in like wise
A staid place here, where we our foot might rest:
But day by day, and every moment vexed,
We spent our short lives in long cares perplexed.
13 Then for a while forbear thy sharper hand,
That I afresh my fainting breath may draw,
Before that I at Deaths broad gates do stand,
Where entering once, there is no return in law:
For if he take never so little hold
There Is no redemption, go must young and old.
PSALM. XL.
When fear and threats about me bellowed round
And cruel Death shook his devouring dart,
Yet Hope from Heaven, though late, at last I found,
Which swag'd chill cares lay trembling at my heart.
2 The Lord perceived, and from the gulf me took,
Nor in the mire over head and ears forsook;
But on the tops of solid rocks he placed,
And showed me a fair way where I should go,
3 And in my breast (with ruins all defaced)
Inspired new breath, and did new matter show,
That I might sing his praise on sweet tuned strings,
In numbers smooth which no harsh discord brings.
Let them see this, who all events impute
To whirling Chance, or furious force of Fate,
And let them trembling when they have a suit
Rest on that Lord who keeps in heaven his state:
4 Thrice happy he who casts his looks on high,
That Faith and Hope may on the Lord rely.
And blessed he whom pomp of swelling pride
Leads not along with her alluring trains,
Nor draws the mind with seeming good aside.
5 But, sacred Sire, how many a pledge remains
Of thy great care to us, which our weak sight
Sees not, nor tongue their number can recite?
6 Thou pluck'st me closely by the ear, and tells
That neither gold buys out the guilt of sin,
Nor blood of harmless beasts the same repels,
Nor Holocausts can cleanse our crimes within:
Since then of me thou, Lord, seek'st no such thing,
But from thy Grace thy favors freely spring.
7 I come, said I, command thou me, and spare not,
Here, sacred Sire, to do thy will I stand,
Revealed in Volumes which the lewdest dare not
Or tax with nouelty, or error brand:
My mind to this, to this my study bends,
(Which is my first, all else are second ends)
8 That what I do, or say, or keep in mind,
I may conform all to thy sacred bent,
For in my heart deep graued thou may find
Thy sacred Law that shows thy wills extent.
9 I preach abroad to Nations far and wide
Thy Justice so renowned, so often tried.
Nor shall my lips take rest, nor tongue lie still,
But shall thy mercy and thy justice tell,
And with thy name all Nations will I fill,
Thou see it, Lord, and know it too right well,
10 For I concealed not thy just rage to sin,
Nor to the poor how good thou still have bin.
By my report thy goodness is made known
To all the lands abroad, thy truth withal,
11 Then let thy goodness, and thy faith, which none
Found ever yet to fail, or short to fall,
Save me beset with troops of mischief round,
Kept by thy hand which all things here did found.
12 Sore pains which pass the hayres upon my head,
Vex me on all sides, which the sharpest sight
Cannot so soon discry: My mind half dead,
And stupid grown, with cares is burned up quite:
13 Worlds sacred Founder, come, give present aid,
And draw me out with utmost ills o're-laid.
14 That of their plots ashamed may lewd men be,
Let them heartbreaking Infamy attend,
And who lays snares to have intrapped me,
Let all their drifts come to a shameful end,
15 And taking pleasure in my sad distress,
Be this the harvest of their wickedness,
That they themselves into the snares may fall
Which stily they had laid to catch me in,
And let them frustrate see their ends in all,
Be shame their crop, since what they sowed was sin.
And blush he still, and always let him grieve,
Who with my tears fed fat laughes in his sleeue.
16 But who commend them wholly to thy grace,
Let hope of help refresh their drooping limbs,
And let them always, and in every place
Extol IEHOVAHS lovely name with Hymns.
17 Though hopeless, poor, and comfortless I be,
Who guards all things he made wards over me.
The keeper of my life, and surest stay,
Come, vex me not with too too long delay.
PSALM. XLI.
Blessed is the man commiserates the poor,
And brings him help when hope begins to die,
And when he finds him trampled on the floor,
Scoules not at him with a disdainful eye.
Whom men would think to be in pieces rent,
Him God will rear, and cheer him wholly spent.
2 With faithful care God will him fence about,
And set him free from harms, that safe and sound
Amongst the living here enjoy he might
A blessed life where all contents abound,
3 When on his couch grief lays his aching head,
He help him then, and makes his easefull bed.
And all his grief that pained him so before,
4 He turns to sweet repose, So when decaid
With bitter (...) was full sore,
Of thee, O God, I craved relief, and said
My wounded soul of that foul sore recure,
Which sin has made so loathsome to endure.
5 My foe with direful imprecations sends
Me to the pit of hell, and in my loss
He triumph makes. And thus he says, When ends
That lothed life of his? When shall that dross
Of his impurer carcass in one night,
Together with his name be put out quite.
6 And if by chance one of this crew epsy
Me drooping go in body or in mind,
He faines as if he mourned in passing by,
And sighs, forsooth, after a sporting kind.
When going on, and that his backe's but turned,
He spits his gall, that in his bosom burned.
7 The wicked crew conspiring against me,
Whisper in one another ear their spite,
And closely plot their mischiefs, and agree
To join in one, and ouer-beare me quite:
8 And boast that heaven sent this dire plague to grieve
And bound me with his bonds, nor will relieve.
He lies, say they, dejected in his bed
Breathing his last breath in his latter night.
9 But he, in house, at board, who dwelt, and fed,
My Mate with whom my life I thought I might
And liuelihood have left in surest guard,
Even he, as fierce and fell as who most dared,
He taking part with my proud foes, did spurn
10 And kick at me. But thou (...) does give
Me help and health, and all base spite did turn
Unto my good, that I might sweetly live,
Thine eye of grace, and hand of help, Lord, tender,
That to my foes I like for like may render.
11 This of thy grace the surest pledge shall be,
And of thy constant purpose in mine aid,
When as my foe, shall not triumph over me,
And though he storm his courage shall be laid.
12 My body now his former strength retains,
My innocence still in my mind remains.
And all proceeds from this, that thou thy hand
Extend'st to me, who took'st me to thy charge,
That I might safe by thy protection stand,
And always fenced. Now set by thee at large,
13 Thee let the world acknowledge and adore,
(Whom Isa'chs race does serve, and no gods more)
And let them sing thy praise while day and night
Betwixt them share the darkness and the light.
FINIS.

