EW

THE book of the common prayer and administracion of the Sacraments, and
other rites and ceremonies of the Church: after the use of the Church of
England.

LONDON IN OFFICINA Edouardi Whitchurche.

Cum priuilegio ad imprime^^^^ solum.

ANNO DO. 1549. Mense Maij.





THE CON of this Book.
i. A preface. ii. A table and Calendar for Psalms and Lessons, with necessary
rules perteyning to the same. iii. The order for Mattins and Euensong,
throughout the year. iiii. The Introites, Collectes, Epistles and Gospelles,
to be used at the celebracion of the Lords Supper, and holy Communion through
the year, with proper Psalms and Lessons, for diverse feasts and days. v.
The Supper of the Lord and holy Communion, commonly called the Mass. vi. The
Letany and Suffrages. vii. Of Baptism, both public and private. viii. Of
Confirmacion, where also is a Cathechisme for children. ix. Of Matrimony. x. Of
visitacion of the sick, and Communion of the same. xi. Of Burial. xii. The
purificacion of women. xiii. A declaracion of scripture, with certain prayers
to be used the first day of Lent, commonly called Ashwednesdaie. xiiii. Of
Ceremonies omitted or retained. xv. Certain notes for the more plain
explicacion and decent ministracion of things contained in this book.
THE PREFACE.
THere was never any thing by the wie of man so well devised, or so surely
established, which (in continuance of time) has not been corrupted: as (among
other things) it may plainly appear by the common prayers in the Church,
commonly called divine service: the first original and ground whereof, if a man would search out by the ancient fathers, he shall find that the same
was not ordained, but of a good purpose, and for a great advancement of
godliness: For they so ordered the matter, that all the whole Bible (or the
greatest part thereof) should be read over once in the year, intendyng
thereby, that the Clergy, and specially such as were Ministers of the
congregation, should (by often readyng and meditacion of Gods word) be stirred
up to godliness themselfes, and be more able also to exhort other by wholesome
doctrine, and to confute them that were adversaries to the truth. And further,
that the people (by daily hearing of holy scripture read in the Church) should
continuallye profit more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the more
inflamed with the love of his true religion. But these many years passed, this
Godly and decent order of the ancient fathers, has be so altered, broken,
and neglected, by planting in uncertain stories, Lege^des, Respondes, Verses,
vain repeticions, Commemoracions and Synodalles, that commonly when any book
of the Bible was begone: before three or four Chapiters were read out, all the
rest were unread. And in this sort, the book of Esaie was begone in Aduent, and
the book of Genesis in Septuagesima: but they were only begone, and never read
through. After a like sort were other books of holy scripture used. And
moreover, whereas s. Paul would have such language spoken to the people in
the church, as they might understand and have profit by hearing the same:
the service in this Church of England (these many years) has been read in
Latin to the people, which they understood not, so that they have heard with
their cares only: and their hearts, spirit and mind, have not been edified
thereby. And furthermore, notwithstanding that the ancient fathers had divided
the psalms into seven porcions: whereof every one was called a nocturne: now of
late time a few of them have been dailye said (and often repeated) and the
rest utterly omitted. Moreover, the no^bre and hardness of the rules called the
pie, and the manifold chaunginges of the service, was the cause, yt to turn
the book only, was so hard and intricate a matter, that many times, there was
more business to find out what should be read, then to read it when it was
found out.

These inconveniences therefore considered: here is set forth such an order,
whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness in this matter, here is
drawn out a calendar for that purpose, which is plain and easy to be
understood, wherein (so much as may be) the readyng of holy scripture is so
set furthe, that all things shall be done in order, without breakyng one
piece thereof from another. For this cause be cut of Anthemes, Respondes,
Inuitatories, and such like things, as did break the continual course of
the readyng of the scripture. Yet because there is no remedy, but that of
necessity there must be some rules: therefore certain rules are here set forth,
which as they be few in no^bre: so they be plain and easy to be understood.
So yt here you have an order for prayer (as touching the readyng of holy
scripture) much agreeable to the mind and purpose of the old fathers, and a
great deal more profitable and commodious, then that which of late was used.
It is more profitable, because here are left out many things, whereof some be
untrue, some uncertain, some vain and supersticious: and is ordained nothing to
be read, but the very pure word of God, the holy scriptures, or that which is
evidently grounded upon the same: and that in such a language and order, as is
most easy and plain for the understanding, both of the readers and hearers.
It is also more commodious, both for the shortness thereof, and for the plains
of the order, and for that the rules be few and easy. Furthermore, by this
order, the curates shall need none other books for their public service, but
this book and the Bible: by the means whereof, the people shall not be at so
great charge for books, as in time past they have been.

And where heretofore, there has been great diversity in saying and synging
in churches within this realm: some following Salsbury use, some Herford use,
some the use of Bangor, some of York, and some of Lincoln: Now from
he^cefurth, all the whole realm shall have but one use.

And if any would judge this way more painful, because that all things must
be read upon the book, where as before, by the reason of so often repeticion,
they could say many things by heart: if those men will way their labor, with
the profit in knowledge, which daily they shall obtein by readyng upon the
book, they will not refuse the pain, in consideracion of the great profit
that shall ensue thereof.

And forsomuche as nothing can, almost, be so plainly set forth, but doubts
may rise in the use and practisyng of the same: to appease all such
diversity (if any arise) and for the resolucion of all doubts, concerning the
manner how to understand, do, and execute the things conteygned in this book:
the parties that so doubt, or diversely take any thing, shall always resort to
the Bishop of the Diocese, who by his discrecion shall take order for the
quietyng and appeasyng of the same: so that the same order be not contrary to
any thing conteigned in this book.

Though it be appointed in the before written preface, that al things shall be
read and song in the church, in the English tongue, to the end that the
congregation may be thereby edified: yet it is not meante, but when men say
Matins and Euensong privately, they may say the same in any language that
they themselves do understand. Neither that any man shall be bound to the
saying of them, but such as from time to time, in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, Parish Churches, and Chapelles to the same annexed, shall serve the
congregation.

THE TABLE AND Calendar, expressing the order of the Psalms and Lessons, to be
said at Matyns and Euensong, throughout the year, except certain proper
feasts, as the Rules following more plainlye declare.
THE ORDER how the Psalter is appointed to be read.
THe Psalter shall be red through, once every Month, and because that some
Months be longer then some other be: it is thought good, to make the^ even by
this means.

To every Month, as concerning this purpose, shall be appointed just.xxx. days.

And because January and March has one day, above the said nombre, and
February which is placed between them both, has only.xxviii. days,
February shall borowe of either of the Months of January and March one day,
and so the Psalter which shall be red in Februarye, must be begone the last
day of January, and ended the first day of March.

And whereas May, July, August, October, and December, have.xxxi. days a
piece, it is ordered that the same Psalms shall be read the last day of the
said Months, which were red the day before: so that the Psalter may be
begone again the first day of the next Months ensuing.

Now to know what Psalms shall be red every day, look in the Calendar the
nombre that is appointed for the Psalms, and then find the same noumbre in
this Table, and upon that noumbre shall you se, what Psalms shall be said at
Matyns, and Euensong.

And where the.C.xix. Psalm is divided into.xxii. porcions, and is over long
to be red at one time: it is so ordered that at one time shall not be red
above.iiii. or.v. of the said porcions, as you shall perceive to be noted in
this Table.

And here is also to be noted, that in this Table, and in all other parts of
the service, where any Psalms are appoincted, the nombre is expressed after
the great English Bible, which from the.ix. Psalm unto the.C.xlviii. Psalm
(following the division of the Ebrues) does vary in nombres from the common
Latin translacion.

A TABLE FOR the order of the Psalms, to be said at Matins and Euensong.
Matins. Euensong. i i.ii.iii.iiii.v. vi.vii.viii. ii ix.x.xi. xii.xiii.xiiii.
iii xv.xvi.xvii. xviii. iiii xix.xx.xxi. xxii.xxiii. v xxiiii.xxv.xxvi.
xxvii.xxviii.xxix. vi xxx.xxxi. xxxii.xxxiii.xxxiiii. vii xxxv.xxxvi. xxxvii.
viii xxxviii.xxxix.xl. xli.xlii.xliii. ix xliiii.xlv.xlvi. xlvii.xlviii.xlix. x
l.li.lii. liii.liiii.lv. xi lvi.lvii.lviii. lix lx.lxi. xii lxii.lxiii.lxiiii.
lxv.lxvi.lxvii. xiii lxviii. lxix.lxx. xiiii lxxi.lxxii. lxxiii.lxxiiii. xv
lxxv.lxxvi.lxxvii. lxxviii. xvi lxxix.lxxx.lxxxi.
lxxxii.lxxxiii.lxxxiiii.lxxxv. xvii lxxxvi.lxxxvii.lxxxviii. lxxxix. xviii
xc.xci.xcii. xciii.xciiii. xix xcv.xcvi.xcvii. xcviii.xcix.c.ci. xx cii.ciii.
ciiii. xxi cv. cvi. xxi cvii. cviii.cix. xxiii cx.cxi.cxii.cxiii. cxiiii.cxv.
xxiiii cxvi.cxvii.cxviii. cxix. Inde.iiii. xxv Inde.v. Inde.iiii. xxvi Inde.v.
Inde.iiii. xxvii cxx cxxi cxxii cxxiii cxxiiii cxxv
cxxvi.cxxvii.cxxviii.cxxix.cxxx.cxxxi xxviii cxxxii.cxxxiii.cxxxiiii.cxxxv.
cxxxvi.cxxxvii.cxxxviii. xxix cxxxix.cxl.cxli. cxlii.cxliii. xxx
cxliiii.cxlv.cxlvi. cxlvii.cxlviii.cxlix.cl.

THE ORDER how the rest of holy Scripture (beside the Psalter) is appointed to
be read.
The old Testament.
THe old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons, at Matins and Euensong,
and shall be read through every year once, except certain books and Chapiters,
which be least edifying, and might best be spared, and therefore are left
vnred.

The new Testament.
The new Testament is appointed for the second Lessons, at Matins and Euensong,
and shall be red over ordrely every year thrice, beside the Epistles and
Gospelles: except the Apocalips, out of the which there be only certain
Lessons appointed upon diverse proper feasts.

Lessons.
And to know what Lessons shall be red every day: find the day of the
Month in the Calendar following: and there ye shall perceive the books and
Chapiters, that shall be red for the Lessons, both at Matins and Euensong.

Proper Psalms.
And here is to be noted, that whenever there be any proper Psalms or
Lessons, appointed for any feast, moveable or immovable: the^ the Psalms and
Lessons appointed in the Calendar, shall be omitted for that time.

Ye must note also that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, appointed for the
Sundaye, shall serve all the week after, except there falsome feast that has
his propre.

The Leap year.
This is also to be noted, concerning the leap years, that the.xxv. day of
February, which in leap years is coumpted for two days, shall in those
two days, alter neither Psalm nor Lesson: but the same Psalms and Lessons,
which be said the first day, shall serve also for the second day.

Also, wheresoever the beginning of any Lesson, Epistle, or Gospel is not
expressed, there ye must begin at the beginning of the Chapter.

January.
January. Mtains. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson A Kalend. i Circumci. i Genesis xvii Roma. ii Deuteronomy. x Collos. ii. b iiii.
No ii ii Gene. i Math. i Gene. ii Roma. i c iii. No. iii iii iii ii iiii ii d
Pride. No iiii iiii v iii vi iii e Nonas. v v vii iiii viii iiii f viii. Id. vi
Epiphani. vi Esai. ix. Luke. iii Esai. xlix John. ii. g vii. Id. vii vii Genesis
ix. Math. v Genesis xi. Roma v A vi. Id. viii viii xii vi xiii vi b v. Id. ix ix
xiiii vii xv vii c iiii. Id. x x xvi viii xvii viii d iii. Id. xi xi xviii ix
xix ix e Pride. Id. xii xii xx x xxi x f Idus. xiii xiii xxii xi xxiii xi g xix.
kl. xiiii xiiii xxiiii xii xxv xii A xviii. kl. xv xv xxvi xiii xxvii xiii b
xvii. kl. xvi xvi xxviii xiiii xxix xiiii c xvi. kl. xvii xvii xxx xv xxxi xv d
xv. kl. xviii xviii xxxii xvi xxxiii xvi e xiiii. kl. xix xix xxxiiii xvii xxxv
i. Cor. i f xiii. kl. xx xx xxxvi xviii xxxvii ii g xii. kl. xxi xxi xxxviii
xix xxxix iii A xi kl. xxii xxii xl xx xli iiii b x. kl. xxiii xxiii xlii xxi
xliii v c ix. kl. xxiiii xxiiii xliiii xxii xlv vi d viii. kl. xxv Con. Paun.
xxv xlvi Act. xxii. xlvii Act. xxvi e vii. kl. xxvi xxvi xlviii mat xxiii xlix
i. Cor. vii f vi. kl. xxvii xxvii l xxiiii Exodus i viii g v. kl. xxviii xxviii
Exodus ii xxv iii ix A iiii. kl. xxix xxix iiii xxvi v x b iii kl. xxx xxx vi
xxvii vii xi c Pride. kl. xxxi i viii xxviii ix xii A.v.

February.
February. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson d Kalend. i ii Exodus x. Mark. i. Exodus xi. i. Cor. xiii e iii. No. ii
Purt. Ma. iii xii ii xiii xiiii f iii. No. iii iiii xiiii iii xv xv g Pride. No
iiii v xvi iiii xvii xvi A Nonas. v vi xviii v xix ii. Cor. i b viii. Id. vi
vii xx vi xxi ii c vii. Id. vii viii xxii vii xxiii iii d vi. Id. viii ix
xxiiii viii xxxii iiii e v. Id. ix x xxxiii ix xxxiiii v f iiii Id. x xi xxxv x
xl vi g iii. Id. xi xii leui. xviii xi leui. xix vii A Pride. Id. xii xiii xx
xii Nume. x viii b Idus. xiii xiiii Number. xi xiii xii ix c xvi. kl. xiiii xv
xiii xiiii xiiii x d xv. kl. xv xvi xv xv xvi xi e xiiii. kl. xvi xvii xvii xvi
xviii xii f xiii. kl. xvii xviii xix Luke di.i xx xiii g xii kl. xviii xix xxi
di.i xxii Galath. i A xi. kl. xix xx xxiii ii xxiiii ii b x. kl. xx xxi xxv iii
xxvi iii c ix. kl. xxi xxii xxvii iiii xxviii iiii d viii. kl. xxii xxiii xxix
v xxx v e vii. kl. xxiii xxiiii xxxi vi xxxii vi f vi. kl. xxiiii Mathias. xxv
xxxiii vii xxxiiii Ephesians. i g v. kl. xxv xxvi xxxv viii xxxvi ii A iiii. kl.
xxvi xxvii Deuteronomy. i ix Deuteronomy. ii. iii b iii kl. xxvii xxviii iii x iiii iiii c
Pride kl. xxviii xxix v xi vi v

March.
March. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. d Kalend. i xxx Deu. vii. Luke xii. Deu. viii Ephe. vi. e vi. No. ii i
ix xiii x Philip. i. f v. No. iii ii xi xiii xii ii g iiii. No. iiii iii xiii
xv xiiii iii A iii. No. v iiii xv xvi xvi iiii b Pride. No vi v xvii xvii xviii
Collos. i c Nonas. vii vi xix xviii xx ii d viii. Id. viii vii xxi xix xxii iii
e vii. Id. ix viii xxiii xx xxiiii iiii f vi. Id. x ix xxv xxi xxvi i. These. i
g v. Id. xi x xxvii xxii xxviii ii A iiii. Id. xii xi xxix xxiii xxx iii b iii.
Id. xiii xii xxxi xxiiii xxxii iiii c Pride. Id. xiiii xiii xxxiii John. i
xxxiiii v d Idus. xv xiiii Iosue. i ii Iosue. ii. ii. These. i e xvii. kl. xvi
xv iii iii iiii ii f xvi. kl. xvii xvi v iiii vi iii g xv. kl. xviii xvii vii v
viii i. Timo. i A xiiii. kl. xix xviii ix vi x ii.iii b xiii. kl. xx xix xi vii
xii iiii c xii. kl. xxi xx xiii viii xiiii v d xi. kl. xxii xxi xv ix xvi vi e
x. kl. xxiii xxii xvii x xviii ii. Tim. i f ix. kl. xxiiii xxiii xix xi xx ii g
viii. kl. xxv Annuncia. xxiiii xxi xii xxii iii A vii. kl. xxvi xxv xxiii xiii
xxiiii iiii b vi. kl. xxvii xxvi Iudic. i xiiii Iudic. ii Titus. i. c v. kl.
xxviii xxvii iii xv iiii ii.iii d iiii. kl. xxix xxviii v xvi vi Phile. i e
iii. kl. xxx xxix vii xvii viii Hebre. i f Pride. kl. xxxi xxx ix xviii x ii

April.
April. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. g Kalend. i i Iudi. xi. John. xix Iudi. xii Hebre. iii A iiii. No. ii
ii xiii xx xiiii iiii b iii. No. iii iii xv xxi xvi v c Pride. No iiii iiii xvii
Acts. i xviii vi d Nouas. v v xix ii xx vii e viii. Id. vi vi xxi iii Ruth. i
viii f vii. Id. vii vii Ruth. ii iiii iii ix g vi Id. viii viii iiii v i.
Regu^. i x A v. Id. ix ix i. Regu^ ii vi iii xi b iiii. Id. x x iiii vii v xii
c iii. Id. xi xi vi viii vii xiii d Pride. Id xii xii viii ix ix Jacob. i e
Idus. xiii xiii x x xi ii f xviii kl. xiiii xiiii xii xi xiii iii g xvii. kl.
xv xv xiiii xii xv iiii A xvi kl. xvi xvi xvi xiii xvii v b xv. kl. xvii xvii
xviii xiiii xix i. Peter. i c xiiii kl. xviii xviii xx xv xxi ii d xiii kl. xix
xix xxii xvi xxiii iii e xii kl. xx xx xxiiii xvii xxv iiii f xi kl xxi xxi
xxvi xviii xxvii v g x. kl. xxii xxii xxviii xix xxix ii. Peter. i A x. kl.
xxiii xxiii xxx xx xxxi ii b viii. kl. xxiiii xxiiii ii. Regu^ i xxi ii. Reg ii
iii c vii. kl. xxv Mat. Euan. xxv iii xxii iiii i. John. i d vi. kl. xxvi xxvi
v xxiii vi ii e v. kl. xxvii xxvii vii xxiiii viii iii f iiii kl. xxviii xxviii
ix xxv x iiii g iii. kl. xxix xxix xi xxvi xii v A Pride. kl. xxx xxx xiii xxvii
xiiii ii.iii. Iho^

May.
May. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii. Lesson b
Kalend. i Phil. and Ia. i ii. Re. xv Act. viii ii. Re. xvi Judas. i c vi No.
ii ii xvii xxviii xviii Roma. i d v No. iii iii xix Math. i xx ii e iiii No.
iiii iiii xxi ii xxii iii f iii. No. v v xxiii iii xxiiii iiii g Pride No vi vi
iii. Reg. i iiii iii. Re. ii v A Nonas. vii vii iii v iiii vi b viii. Id. viii
viii v vi vi vii c vii Id. ix ix vii vii viii viii d vi. Id. x x ix viii x ix e
v. Id. xi xi xi ix xii x f iiii. Id. xii xii xiii x xiiii xi g iii Id. xiii
xiii xv xi xvi xii A Pride. Id xiiii xiiii xvii xii xviii xiii b Idus xv xv xix
xiii xx xiiii c xvii kl. xvi xvi xxi xiiii xxii xv d xvi. kl. xvii xvii iiii.
Reg i xv iiii. Re. ii xvi e xv. kl. xviii xviii iii xvi iiii i. Cor. i f xiiii
kl. xix xix v xvii vi ii g xiii. kl. xx xx vii xviii viii iii A xii. kl. xxi
xxi ix xix x iiii b xi kl. xxii xxii xi xx xii v c x. kl. xxiii xxiii xiii xxi
xiiii vi d ix. kl. xxiiii xxiiii xv xxii xvi vii e viii kl. xxv xxv xvii xxiii
xviii viii f vii. kl. xxvi xxvi xix xxiiii xx ix g vi. kl. xxvii xxvii xxi xxv
xxii x A v. kl. xxviii xxviii xxiii xxvi xxiiii xi b iiii. kl. xxix xxix xxv
xxvii i. Esd. i xii c iii. kl. xxx xxx i. Esd. ii xxviii iii xiii d Pride. kl.
xxxi xxx iiii Mark. i v xiiii

June.
June. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii. Lesson e
Kalend. i i i. Esd. vi. Mark. ii. i. Esd. vii i. Cor. xv f iiii. No. ii ii viii
iii ix xvi g iii. No. iii iii x iiii ii. Esd. i ii. Cor. i A Pride. No iiii iiii
ii. Esd. ii v iii ii b Nonas. v v iiii vi v iii c viii. Id. vi vi vi vii vii
iiii d vii. Id. vii vii viii viii ix v e vi. Id. viii viii x ix xi vi f v. Id.
ix ix xii x xiii vii g iiii. Id. x x Hester. i xi Hester. ii viii A iii. Id. xi
Barna. apo. xi iii Act. xiiii. iiii Acts. xv b Pride. Id xii xii v Mar. xii vi
ii. Cor. ix c Idus. xiii xiii vii xiii viii x d xviii. kl. xiiii xiiii ix xiiii
Job. i xi e xvii. kl. xv xv Job. ii xv iii xii f xvi kl. xvi xvi iiii xvi v
xiii g xv. kl. xvii xvii vi Luke. i vii Gala. i A xiiii. kl. xviii xviii viii
ii ix ii b xiii kl. xix xix x iii xi iii c xii. kl. xx xx xii iiii xiii iiii d
xi kl. xxi xxi xiiii v xv v e x. kl. xxii xxii xvi vi xvii xviii vi f ix. kl.
xxiii xxiii xix vii xx Ephe. i g viii. kl. xxiiii Na. Io. ba. xxiiii Mala. iii
Mat. iii. Mala. iii math. xiiii A vii. kl. xxv xxv Job. xxi. Lu. viii Job. xxii
Ephe. ii b vi. kl. xxvi xxvi xxiii ix xxiiii xxv iii c v. kl. xxvii xxvii
xxvixxvii x xxviii iiii d iiii. kl. xxviii xxviii xxix xi xxx v e iii. kl. xxix
S. Peter. xxix xxxi Acts. iii xxxii Acts. iiii f Pride. kl. xxx xxx xxxiii
Luke. xii xxxiiii Ephe. vi

July.
July. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii. Lesson.
g kalend. i i job. xxxv Luke xiii job. xxxvi Philip. i. A vi. No. ii ii xxxvii
xiiii xxxviii ii b v. No. iii iii xxxix xv xl iii c iiii. No. iiii iiii xli xvi
xlii iiii d iii. No. v v Prouer. i xvii Prou. ii. Collos. i e Pride No vi vi iii
xviii iiii ii f Nonas. vii vii v xix vi iii g viii. Id. viii viii vii xx viii
iiii A vii. Id. ix ix ix xxi x i. These. i b vi. Id. x x xi xxii xii ii c v. Id.
xi xi xiii xxiii xiiii iii d iiii. Id. xii xii xv xxiiii xvi iiii e iii. Id.
xiii xiii xvii John. i xviii v f Pride. Id xiiii xiiii xix ii xx ii. These. i g
Idus. xv xv xxi iii xxii ii A xvii. kl. xvi xvi xxiii iiii xxiiii iii b xvi.
kl. xvii xvii xxv v xxvi i. Timo. i c xv. kl. xviii xviii xxvii vi xxviii
ii.iii d xiiii. kl. xix xix xxix vii xxx iiii e xiii. kl. xx xx xxxi viii
Eccles. i v f xii. kl. xxi xxi Eccles. ii ix iii vi g xi. kl. xxii Magdalen.
xxii iiii x v ii. Tim. i A x. kl. xxiii xxiii vi xi vii ii b ix. kl. xxiiii
xxiiii viii xii ix iii c viii. kl. xxv James ap. xxv x xiii xi iiii d vii. kl.
xxvi xxvi xii xiiii Iere. i Titus. i. e vi. kl. xxvii xxvii Iere. ii xv iii
ii.iii f v. kl. xxviii xxviii iiii xvi v Phile. i g iiii. kl. xxix xxix vi xvii
vii Hebre. i A iii. kl. xxx xxx viii xviii ix ii b Pride. kl. xxxi xxx x xix xi
iii

August.
August. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. c Kalend. i i Iere. xii John. xx Iere. xiii Hebr. iiii d iiii. No. ii
ii xiiii xxi xv v e iii. No. iii iii xvi Acts. i xvii vi f Pride. No iiii iiii
xviii ii xix vii g Nonas. v v xx iii xxi viii A viii. Id. vi vi xxii iiii xxiii
ix b vii. Id. vii vii xxiiii v xxv x c vi. Id. viii viii xxvi vi xxvii xi d v.
Id. ix ix xxviii vii xxix xii e iiii. Id. x x xxx viii xxxi xiii f iii. Id. xi
xi xxxii ix xxxiii Jacob. i g Pride Id xii xii xxxiiii x xxxv ii A Idus. xiii
xiii xxxvi xi xxxvii iii b xix. kl. xiiii xiiii xxxviii xii xxxix iiii c xviii.
kl. xv xv xl xiii xli v d xvii. kl. xvi xvi xlii xiiii xliii i. Peter. i e xvi
kl. xvii xvii xliiii xv xlv.xlvi. ii f xv. kl. xviii xviii xlvii xvi xlviii iii
g xiiii. kl. xix xix xlix xvii l iiii A xiii. kl. xx xx li xviii lii v b xii.
kl. xxi xxi Lament. i xix Lame^. ii ii. Peter. i c xi. kl. xxii xxii iii xx
iiii ii d x. kl. xxiii xxiii v xxi Ezech. ii iii e ix. kl. xxiiii Bart. apost
xxiiii Ezech. iii xxii vi i. John. i f viii. kl. xxv xxv vii xxiii xiii ii g
vii. kl. xxvi xxvi xiiii xxiiii xviii iii A vi. kl. xxvii xxvii xxxiii xxv
xxxiiii iiii b v. kl. xxviii xxviii Dani. i xxvi Dani. ii v c iiii. kl. xxix
xxix iii xxvii iiii ii.iii. Iho^ d iii. kl. xxx xxx v xxviii vi Jude. i e Pride.
kl. xxxi xxx vii Math. i viii Roma. i

September.
September. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson f Kalend. i i Dani. ix Math. ii Dani. x Roma. ii g iiii. No. ii ii xi
iii xii iii A iii. No. iii iii xiii iiii xiiii iiii b Pride. No iiii iiii Ose. i
v Ose. ii.iii v c Nonas. v v iiii vi v.vi vi d viii. Id. vi vi vii vii viii vii
e vii. Id. vii vii ix viii x viii f vi. Id. viii viii xi ix xii ix g v. Id. ix
ix xiii x xiiii x A iiii. Id. x x Joel. i xi Joel. ii xi b iii. Id. xi xi iii
xii Amos. i xii c Pride. Id xii xii Amos. ii xiii iii xiii d Idus. xiii xiii
iiii xiiii v xiiii e xviii. kl. xiiii xiiii vi xv vii xv f xvii. kl. xv xv viii
xvi ix xvi g xvi. kl. xvi xvi Abdias i xvii Jonas. i i. Cor. i A xv. kl. xvii
xvii Ion. ii.iii xviii iiii ii b xiiii. kl. xviii xviii Miche. i xix Miche. ii
iii c xiii. kl. xix xix iii xx iiii iiii d xii. kl. xx xx v xxi vi v e xi. kl.
xxi Mathewe. xxi vii xxii Naum. i vi f x. kl. xxii xxii Naum. ii xxiii iii vii
g ix. kl. xxiii xxiii Abacuc. i xxiiii Abacu. ii viii A viii. kl. xxiiii xxiiii
iii xxv Sopho. i ix b vii. kl. xxv xxv Soph. ii xxvi iii x c vi. kl. xxvi xxvi
Agge. i xxvii Agge. ii xi d v. kl. xxvii xxvii zacha. i xxviii. zach. ii.iii
xii e iiii. kl. xxviii xxviii iiii.v Mark. i vi xiii f iii. kl. xxix Michael.
xxix vii ii viii xiiii g Pride. kl. xxx xxx ix iii x xv

October.
October. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson^ i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson A Kalend. i i zacha. xi. Mark. iiii zacha. xii i. Cor. xvi b vi. No. ii
ii xiii v xiiii ii. Cor. i c v. No. iii iii Mala. i. vi Mala. ii ii d iiii. No.
iiii iiii iii vii iiii iii e iii. No. v v Toby. i viii Toby. ii iiii f Pride. No
vi vi iii ix iiii v g Nonas. vii vii v x vi vi A viii. Id. viii viii vii xi
viii vii b vii. Id. ix ix ix xii x viii c vi. Id. x x xi xiii xii ix d v. Id.
xi xi xiii xiiii xiiii x e iiii. Id. xii xii Judith. i xv Iudit. ii xi f iii.
Id. xiii xiii iii xvi iiii xii g Pride. Id xiiii xiiii v Lu. di. i vi xiii A
Idus. xv xv vii di. i viii Gala. i b xvii. kl. xvi xvi ix ii x ii c xvi. kl.
xvii xvii xi iii xii iii d xv. kl. xviii Luc. Euan. xviii xiii iiii xiiii iiii
e xiiii. kl. xix xix xv v xvi v f xiii. kl. xx xx Sap. i vi Sapi. ii vi g xii.
kl. xxi xxi iii vii iiii Ephe. i A xi. kl. xxii xxii v viii vi ii b x. kl.
xxiii xxiii vii ix viii iii c ix. kl. xxiiii xxiiii ix x x iiii d viii. kl. xxv
xxv xi xi xii v e vii. kl. xxvi xxvi xiii xii xiiii vi f vi. kl. xxvii xxvii xv
xiii xvi Philip. i g v. kl. xxviii Sy. and Iu. xxviii xvii xiiii xviii ii A
iiii. kl. xxix xxix xix xv Eccls. i. iii b iii. kl. xxx xxx Eccls. ii. xvi iii
iiii c Pride. kl. xxxi xxx iiii xvii v Collos. i

November.
November. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. d Kalend. i Al saints. i Sap. iii. He. xi. xii. Sap. v Apoc. xix e
iiii. No. ii ii Eccle. vi Lu. xviii Eccle. vii Collos. ii f iii. No. iii iii
viii xix ix iii g Pride No iiii iiii x xx xi iiii A Nonas. v v xii xxi xiii i.
These. i b viii. Id. vi vi xiiii xxii xv ii c vii. Id. vii vii xvi xxiii xvii
iii d vi. Id. viii viii xviii xxiiii xix iiii e v. Id. ix ix xx John. i xxi v f
iiii. Id. x x xxii ii xxiii ii. These. i g iii. Id. xi xi xxiiii iii xxv ii A
Pride. Id xii xii xxvi iiii xxvii iii b Idus. xiii xiii xxviii v xxix i. Timo. i
c xviii. kl. xiiii xiiii xxx vi xxxi ii.iii d xvii. kl. xv xv xxxii vii xxxiii
iiii e xvi kl. xvi xvi xxxiiii viii xxxv v f xv. kl. xvii xvii xxxvi ix xxxvii
vi g xiiii kl. xviii xviii xxxviii x xxxix ii. Tim. i A xiii. kl. xix xix xl xi
xli ii b xii. kl. xx xx xlii xii xliii iii c xi. kl. xxi xxi xliiii xiii xlv
iiii d x. kl. xxii xxii xlvi xiiii xlvii Titus. i. e ix. kl. xxiii xxiii xlviii
xv xlix ii.iii f viii. kl. xxiiii xxiiii l xvi li Phile. i g vii kl. xxv xxv
Barue. i xvii Barue. ii Hebre. i A vi. kl. xxvi xxvi iii xviii iiii ii b v. kl.
xxvii xxvii v xix vi iii c iiii. kl. xxviii xxviii Esaias. i. xx Esaias. ii. iiii d
iii. kl. xxix xxix iii xxi iiii v e Pride. kl. xxx Andre. apo. xxx v Acts. i vi
vi

December.
December. Matins. Euensong. Psalms. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. f Kalend. i. i Esai. vii Acts. ii Esai. viii Hebr. vii g iiii. No. ii
ii ix iii x viii A iii. No. iii iii xi iiii xii ix b Pride. No iiii iiii xiii v
xiiii x c Nonas. v v xv vi xvi xi d viii. Id. vi vi xvii di.vii xviii xii e
vii. Id. vii vii xix di.vii xx.xxi xiii f vi. Id. viii viii xxii viii xxiii
Jacob. i g v. Id. ix ix xxiiii ix xxv ii A iiii. Id. x x xxvi x xxvii iii b iii
Id. xi xi xxviii xi xxix iiii c Pride. Id xii xii xxx xii xxxi v d Idus. xiii
xiii xxxii xiii xxxiii i. Peter. i e xix. kl. xiiii xiiii xxxiiii xiiii xxxv ii
f xviii kl. xv xv xxxvi xv xxxvii iii g xvii. kl. xvi xvi xxxviii xvi xxxix
iiii A xvi kl. xvii xvii xl xvii xli v b xv. kl. xviii xviii xlii xviii xliii
ii. Peter. i c xiiii. kl. xix xix xliiii xix xlv ii d xiii kl. xx xx xlvi xx
xlvii iii e xii. kl. xxi Tho. Apost xxi xlviii xxi xlix i. John. i f xi kl.
xxii xxii l xxii li ii g x. kl. xxiii xxiii lii xxiii liii iii A ix. kl. xxiiii
xxiiii liiii xxiiii lv iiii b viii. kl. xxv Nati. dn^i. xxv Esaias. ix. Math. i
Esaias. vii Tit. iii c vii kl. xxvi Stephan. xxvi lvi act. vi.vii lvii Acts. vii
d vi kl. xxvii John. Euan xxvii lviii Apoc. i lix Apo. xxii. e v. kl. xxviii
Innocen. xxviii Ier. xxxi Act. xxv Esaias. lx i. John. v f iiii. kl. xxix xxix
Esaias. lxi xxvi lxii ii. John. i g iii kl. xxx xxx lxiii xxvii lxiiii iii. Iho^.
i. A Pride. kl. xxxi xxx lxv xxviii lxvi Jude. i

AN ORDER for Mattins daily through the year.
The priest being in the quier, shall begin with a loud voice the Lords
prayer, called the pater noster. OVRE father which art in heaven; hallowed be
thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptacion. But deliver
us from evil. Amen.


Then likewise he shall say. O Lord, open thou my lyppes.


Answer. And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Priest. O God, make speed to save me.


Answer O Lord make haste to help me.


Priest. Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost. As it
was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Praise ye the Lord.


And from Easter to Trinity Sunday. Alleluya.


Then shall be said or song without any Inuitatory this Psalm. Venite
exultemas. etc in English, as follows. O Come, let us sing unto the Lord:
Psalm. xc^.
let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thanks giving: and show our self glad
in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great king about all gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down: and knele before the Lord our maker.

For he is (the Lord) our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
prouocacion, and as in the day of temptacion in the wilderness

When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

Fortye years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: it is a
people that do err in their hearts: for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.


Then shall follow certain Psalms in order as they been appointed in a table
made for that purpose, except there be proper Psalms appointed for that day.
And at the end of every Psalm throughout the year, and likewise in the end
of Benedictus, Benedicite, Magnificat and Nunc dimittis shall be reapeted. Glory
be to the father, and to the son. etc.


The^ shall be read.ii. lessons distinctely with a loud voice, that the people
may hear. The first of the old testament the second of the new. Like as
they be appointed by the calendar, except there be proper lessons assigned for
that day: The minister that reads the lesson standing and turning him so as
he may best he heard of all such as be present. And before every lesson, the
minister shall say thus. The first, second.iii. or.iiii. Chapter of Genisis
or Exodus, Matthewe, Mark, or other like as is appointed in the Calendar. And
in the end of every Chapter he shall say. Here ends such a Chapter of
such a book.

And (to the end the people may the better hear) in such places where they
do sing, there shall the lessons be song in a plain tune after the manner of
distinct readyng: and likewise the Epistle and Gospel.
After the first lesson shall follow Te deum laudamus in English, daily
throughout the year, except in Lent, all the which time in the place of Te
deum shall be used Benedicite omnia opera Domini domino, in English as follows.
Te deum laudamus.
WE praise thee, O God, we knowlage thee to be the Lord.
All the yearthe does worship thee, the father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloude, the heavens and all the powers therein.
To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin continually do cry.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.
Heaven and earth are replenished with the majesty of of thy glory.
The glorious coumpany of the Apostles, praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets, praise thee.
The noble army of Martyrs praise thee.
The holy church throughout all the woorlde does knowlage thee.
The father of an infinite majesty.
Thy honorable, true, and only son.
The holy ghost also being the coumforter.
Thou art the king of Glory, O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting son of the father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver manne, thou dyddest not abhor the
virgins womb.
When thou had ouercomed the sharpenes of death, thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to all beleuers.
Thou sit on the ryghthande of God in the glory of the father.
We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.
We therefore pray thee, help thy servants whom thou haste redeemed with thy
precious blood.
Make them to be noumbred with thy saints, in glory everlasting.
O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage.
Govern them and lift them up for ever.
Day by day we magnify thee.
And we wurship thy name ever world without end.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.
O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.
O Lord let thy mercy lyghten upon us: as our trust is in thee.
O lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

Benedicite omnia opera domini domino.
O All ye works of the Lord, speak good of the Lord: praise him and set him
up for ever.
O ye Angels of the Lord, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye heavens, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.
O ye waters that be above the fyrmament, speak good of the Lord: praise him,
and set him up for ever.
O all ye powers of the Lord, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him
up for ever.
O ye Sun and Moon, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.
O ye stars of heaven, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye showers and dew, speak good of the lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.
O ye winds of God, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.
O ye fire and heat, praise ye the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.
O ye winter and summer, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye dewes and frostes, speak good of the Lord: praise him and set him up for
ever.
O ye frost and cold, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.
O ye yse and snow, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.
O ye nyghtes and days, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye light and darkness, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye lightenynges and clouds, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set
him up for ever.
O let the earth speak good of the Lord: yea, let it praise him, and set him
up for ever.
O ye mountains and hills, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him
up for ever.
O all ye grene things upon the earth, speak good of the Lord: praise him,
and set him up for ever.
O ye wells, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.
O ye seas and floudes, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, speak good of the Lord: praise
him, and set him up for ever.
O all ye fowls of the air, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him
up for ever.
O all ye beasts and cattle, speak ye good of the Lord: praise him, and set
him up for ever.
O ye children of men, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.
O let Israel speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.
O ye priests of the Lord, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him
up for ever.
O ye servants of the Lord, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set
him up for ever.
O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, speak good of the Lord: praise
him, and set him up for ever.
O ye holy and humble men of heart, speak ye good of the Lord: praise ye him,
and set him up for ever.
O Ananias, Asarias, and Misael, speak ye good of the Lord: praise ye him,
and set him up for ever.
Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.
As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

And after the second lesson, throughout the whole year, shall be used
Benedictus dominus deus Israel. etc. in English as follows. BLessed be the
Lord God of Israel: Benedictus. I(...)*
for he has visited and redeemed his people.
And has lyfted up an horn of salvation to us: in the house of his servant
David.
As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which has been sense the
world began.
That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that
hate us.
To perform the mercy promised to our fathers: and to remember his holy
covenant.
To perform the oath which he swear to our father Abraham: that he would
give us.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear.
In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.
And thou child, shall be called the Prophet of the highest: for thou shall
go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways.
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.
Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the day spring from an high has
visited us.
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and
to guide our fete into the way of peace.
Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.


Then shall be said daily through the year, the prayers following, as well at
Euensong as at Mattyns, all devoutly knelyng. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ
have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.


Then the minister shall say the Creed and the Lords prayer in English, with
a loud voice. etc. Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Priest. O Lord show thy mercy upon us.


Answer. And grant us thy salvation.


Priest. O Lord save the king.


Answer. And mercifully hear us, when we call upon thee.


Priest. Indue thy ministers with ryghteousnes.


Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest. O Lord save thy people.


Answer. And bless thine inheritance.


Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


Answer. Because there is none other that fyghteth for us, but only thou, O
God.


Priest. O God, make clean our hearts within us.


Answer. And take not thine holy spirit from us.


Priest. The Lord be with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit.


Then shall daily follow three Collectes. The first of the day, which shall be
the same that is appointed at the Communion. The second for peace. The third
for grace to live well. And the two last Collectes shall never alter, but
daily be said at Mattyns throughout all the year, as follows. The priest
standing up, and saying. Let us pray.


Then the Collect of the day. The second Collect: for peace. O God, which art
author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom stands our
eternal life, whose service is perfect fredome: defend us thy humble
servants, in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trustyng in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries: through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The third Collect: for grace. O Lord our heavenly father, almighty and
euerlyuyng God, which haste safely brought us to the beginning of this day:
Defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall
into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all our
doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is ryghteous in
thy sight: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


AN ORDER For Euensong throughout the year.
The priest shall say. OVRE FATHER, etc, Then likewise he shall say. O God
make speed to save me.


Answer. O Lord make haste to help me.


Priest. Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen. Praise ye the Lord.

And from Easter to Trinity Sunday. Alleluya.

As before is appointed at Mattyns.
Then Psalms in order as they be appointed in the Table for Psalms, except
there be propre Psalms appointed for that day. Then a lesson of the old
testamente, as it is appointed likewise in the calendar, except there be
proper lessons appointed for that day. After that (Magnificat anima mea
dominum) in English, as follows. Magnificat Luc. i.
My soul does magnify the Lord.

And my spirit has reioysed in God my savior. For he has regarded the
lowelynesse, of his ha^dmaiden.

For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is myghtie has magnifyed me: and holy is his name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scatered the proud in the
imaginacion of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble
and meke.

He has filled the hungry, with good things: and the rich he has sent
empty away.

He remembering his mercy, has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to
our fathers, Abraham and his sede for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.


Then a lesson of the new testamente. And after that (Nune dimittis seruum
tuum) in English as follows. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart
in peace: according to thy word. Nunc dimittis. Luc. ii.


For mine iyes have seen: thy salvation.

Which thou haste prepared: before the face of all people.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles: and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.


Then the suffrages before assigned at Mattyns, the clerks knelyng likewise,
with three Collectes. First of the day: Second of peace: Third for aid
against all perilles, as here follows. Which.ii. last Collectes shall be
daily said at Euensong without alteracion. The second Collect at Euensong. O
God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsayles, and all just works do
proceed: Give unto thy servants that peace, which the world cannot give,
that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that
by thee, we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time
in rest and quietness: through the merits of Jesus Christ our savior. Amen.

The third Collect for aid against all perils. LYghten our darkness we
beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy, defend us from all perils and
dangers of this night, for the love of thy only son our savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.


In the feasts of Christmas, Thepiphanie, Easter, Thascencion, Penticost, and
upon Trinity Sunday, shall be song or said immediately after Benedictus this
confession of our christian faith. Quicunque vult. etc.
Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholyke faith.

Which faith, except every one do keep holy and undefiled: without doubt he
shall peryshe euerlastyngly.

And the Catholic faith is this: that we wurshippe one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in unity.

Neither confoundyng the persons: nor deuydyng the substance.

For there is one person of the father, another of the son: and an other of
the holy ghost.

But the Godhead of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, is all one:
the glory equal, the majesty coeternal.

Such as the father is, such is the son: and such is the holy ghost.

The father uncreate, the son uncreate: and the holy ghost uncreate.

The father incomprehensible, the son incomprehensible: and the holy ghost
incomprehensible.

The father eternal, the son eternal: and the holy ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternalles: but one eternal.

As also there be not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise, the father is almighty: the son almighty, and the holy ghost
almighty.

And yet are they not three almighties: but one almighty.

So the father is God, the son God: and the holy ghost God.

And yet are they not three Gods: but one God.

So likewise the father is Lord, the son Lord: and the holy ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by the christian verity: to acknowledge every
person by himself to be God and Lord:

So are we forbidden by the Catholic religion: to say there be three Gods, or
thee Lords.

The father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.

The son is of the father alone: not made nor created, but begotten.

The holy ghost is of the father and of the son: neither made nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one father, not three fathers: one son, not three sons: one
holy ghost, not three holy gostes.

And in this trinity, none is before nor after other: none is greater nor less
then other.

But the whole three persons: be coeternall together and coequall.

So that in all things, as it is before said: the unity in trinity, and the
trinity in unity, is to be wurshipped.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightly in the incarnacion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the son of God, is God and manne.

God of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds: and manne of
the substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect God and perfect manne: of a reasonable soul, and humayne flesh
subsisting.

Equal to the father as touching his Godhead: and inferior to the father
touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and manne: yet he is not two, but one Christ.

One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking of the
manhood into God.

One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one manne: So God and man is one
Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation: descended into hell, rose again the third
day from the dead.

He ascended into heaven, he sits on the righthande of the father, God
almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
account of their own works.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholyke faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he
cannot be saved:

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.


THVS Ends the order of Mattyns and Euensong through the whole year. ()
THE INTROITES Collectes, Epistles, and Gospels, to be used at the celebracion
of the Lords supper and holy Communion, through the year: with proper
Psalms, and lessons for diverse feasts and days.
The first Sunday in Aduente.
BLessed is that manne that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly:
Beatus Vir. psalm. i.
nor stand in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the
skornefull.

But his delight is in the law of the lord: and in his law will he exercise
himself day and night.

And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side: that will bring forth
his fruit in due season.

His leaf also shall not wither: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prospere.

As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chafe,
which the wind skattreth away (from the face of the earth.)

Therefore the ungodly shall not be hable to stand in the judgment: neither the
sinners in the congregation of the righteous.

But the Lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

And so must every Introite be ended.

Let us pray.
The Collect.
Almighty God, give us grace, that we may cast away the works of darkness,
and put upon us the armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life, (in
the which thy son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility:) that
in the last day, when he shall come again in his glorious majesty, to judge
both the quick and the dead: we may rise to the life immortal, through him,
who lives and reigns with thee and the holy ghost, now and ever. Amen.

The Epistle.
Rome, xiii.
OWe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another. For he that loves
another, fulfilleth the law. For these commandments: Thou shall not commit
adultrie: Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall bear no false
witness: Thou shall not lust: and so forth (if there be any other
commandment) it is al comprehended in this saying: namely, love thy neighbor
as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor: therefore is love the fulfillyng of
the law. This also, we know the season, how that it is time that we should
now awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nerer, then when we believed.
The night is passed, the day is come nigh: let us therefore cast away the
deeds of darkness, and let us put on the armoure of light. Let us walk
honestly, as it were in the day light: not in eating and drinkyng, neither in
chambouryng and wantonness, neither in strife and envying: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ. And make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
of it.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxi.
ANd when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage unto Mount
Oliuete, the^ sent Jesus two disciples, saying unto the^: Go into the town
that lies over against you, and anon ye shall find an Ass bound, and a
Colte with her: looce them and bring them unto me.

And if any man say ought unto you, say ye, the lord has need of them: and
straight way he will let them go. All this was done that it might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of
Sion, behold, thy king cummeth unto thee meek, sitting upon an Ass and a
colte, the fool of the Ass used to the yoke. The disciples went and did as
Jesus commanded them, and brought the Ass and the colte, and put on them
their clothes, and set him thereon. And many of the people spread their garments
in the way. Other cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the
way. Moreover the people that went before, and they that came after cried,
saying: Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. And when he was come to Jerusalem, all
the city was moved, saying: who is this? And the people said: this is Jesus
the Prophet of Nazareth a city of Galile. And Jesus went into the temple of
God, and cast out al them that sold and bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe
the tables of the money chaungers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and
said unto them: It is written: My house shall be called the house of prayer, but
ye have made it a den of thieves.

The second Sunday.
WHen I was in trouble, Ad dominu^ cum tribularer. psalm. cxx
I called upon the Lord and he heard me.

Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lyppes: and from a deceyptfull tongue.

What reward shall be given unto thee, thou false tongue? even mighty and
sharp arowes, with hot burning coals.

Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine
habitacion among the tents of Cedar.

My soul has long dwelt among them: that be enemies unto peace.

I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them to
battle.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
BLessed Lord, which haste caused all holy scriptures to be written for our
learning: grant us that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark,
learn, and inwardly digeste them, that by patience and coumforte of thy holy
word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting
life, which thou haste given us in our savior Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
Roma. xv.
Whatsoever things are written before time, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and coumforte of the scriptures, might have hope. The
God of patience and consolacion, grant you to be like minded one toward an
other, after the ensaumple of Christ Jesus: that ye all agreeyng together, may
with one mouth praise God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ: wherefore
receive ye one an other as Christ received us, to the praise of God. And this
I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of
God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers: and that the Gentiles
might praise God for his mercy, as it is written. For this cause I will praise
thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And again he says: rejoice
ye Gentiles with his people. And again: praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and
laud him all ye nations together. And again Esai says: there shall be the
root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to reygne over the Gentiles: in him shall
the Gentiles trust. The God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace in
beleuyng, that ye may be rich in hope, through the power of the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
Luc. xxi.
THere shall be signs in the Sun and in the Moon, and in the stars: and in
the earth the people shall be at their wits end, through despair. The sea and
the water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for
looking after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of
heaven shall move. And then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud,
with power and great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then
look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. And he
showed them a similitude: behold the figtree, and all other trees, when they
shoot forth their buddes, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is
then nigh at hand. So likewise ye also (when ye se these things come to pass)
be sure, that the kingdom of God is nigh. Verily I say unto you: this generation
shall not pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass: but my
words shall not pass.

The third sunday.
Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: Cum i^^earem. Psalm. iiii.
thou have set me at liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and
hearken unto my prayer.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor: and have such
pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasyng?

Know this also, that the Lord has chosen to himself the manne that is
godly: when I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.

Stand in awe and sin not: common with your own heart, and in your chamber,
and be still.

Offer the sacrifice of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.

There be many that will say: who will show us any good?

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

Thou have put gladness in mine heart: sense the time that their corn and wine
(and oil) increased.

I will lay me down in peace and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only,
that make me to dwell in safety.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Lord, we beseech thee, give ear to our prayers, and by thy gracious
visitacion lyghten the darkness of our heart, by our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
^. Cori. iiii.
LEt a man this wise esteem us, eue^ as the ministers of Christ, and stewardes
of the secrets of God. Furthermore, it is required of the stewardes, that a
man be found faithful: with me it is but a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, either of man's judgment: no I judge not mine own self, for
I know naught by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. It is the Lord
that judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the lord come,
which will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and open the counsayls
of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of god.

The Gospel.
Math. xi.
WHen John being in prieson heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him: Art thou he that shall come? or do we look for
an other? Jesus answered and said unto them: Go, and show John again, what
ye have heard and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
receive the glad tydinges of the gospel: and happy is he that is not offended
by me. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people concerning
John: what went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed that is shaken with
the wind? or what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raymet?
behold, they that wear soft clothyng, are in kings houses. But what went
ye out for to see? a Prophet? verily I say unto you, and more then a
Prophet. For this is he of whom it is written: behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

The fourth Sunday.
Verba mea ^uribus. psalm. v.
POnder my words, O Lord: consider my meditacion.

O harken thou unto the voice of my calling, my king and my God: for unto thee
will I make my prayer.

My voice shall thou hear betymes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

For thou art the God that has no pleasure in wyckednes: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

Such as be foolyshe shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all them
that work vanity.

Thou shall destroy them that speak leasyng: the Lord will abhor both the
blood thirsty, and deceyptfull man.

But as for me, I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy, and in thy fear will I wurship toward thy holy temple.

Lead me, O Lord, in thy ryghteousnes, because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

For there is no faithfulness in his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

Destroy thou them, O God, let them peryshe through their own imaginacions:
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for they have rebelled
against thee.

And let all them that put their trust in thee rejoice: they shall ever be
giving of thanks because thou defendest them, they that love thy name shall be
joyful in thee.

For thou Lord wylt give thy blessyng unto the ryghteous: and with thy
favorable kyndnes wylt thou defend him, as with a shield.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Lord raise up (we pray thee) thy power, and come among us, and with great
might succor us, that where as through our sins and wickedness we be fore
let and hyndred, thy bountiful grace and mercy, through the satisfaccion of
thy son our Lord, may spedely deliver us: to whom with thee, and the holy
ghost be honor and glory world without end.

The Epistle.
Philip. iiii.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice. Let your softnes be
known unto all men: the Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing: but in
all prayer and supplicacion let your peticions be manifest unto God, with
giving of thanks. And the peace of God (which passes al understanding) keep
your hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus.

The Gospel.
^ohn. i.
This is the record of John: when the Jews sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him: what art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him: what then? art thou Helyas?
and he says: I am not. Art thou that Prophet? and he answered, no. Then
said they unto him: what art thou, that we may give an answer unto them that
sent us? what say thou of thy self? he said: I am the voice of a crier in
the wyldernes: make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias.
And they which were sent were of the Phariseis: and they asked him and said
unto him: why baptisest thou then, if thou be not Christ, nor Helias, neither
that Prophet? John answered them, saying: I baptize with water, but there
stands one among you, whom ye know not: he it is which though he came after
me, was before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to vnlooce. These
things were done at Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John did baptize.

Proper Psalms and lessons on Christmas day.
At Mattins.
Psalm. xix. Psalm. xlv. Psalm. lxxxv.
The first lesson Esai. ix. unto the end.

The second lesson. Mat. i. unto the end.

At the first Communion.
Cantate domino. psalm. xcviii.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done meruaylous things.

With his own right hand and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in the
sight of the heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all
the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoice, and
give thanks.

Praise the lord upon the Harp: sing to the Harp with a Psalm of
thankesgeuing.

With trumpettes also and shawmes: O show your selves joyful before the Lord
the king.

Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world and
they that dwell therein.

Let the fluddes clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together
before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
GOd, which makeste us glad with the yearly remembrance of the birth of thy
only son Jesus Christ: grant that as we joyfully receive him for our
redemer, so we may with sure confidence behold him, when he shall come to be
our judge, who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
THe grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, Tit.
ii.
and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that
we should live soberly, and righteousely, and godly in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God, and
of our savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to pourge us a peculiare people unto himself, fervently
given unto good works. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
feruentnes of commaundyng. See that no man despise thee.

The Gospel.
Luc. ii.
ANd it chaunsed in those days, that there went out a commandment from
Augustus the Emperor, that all the world should be taxed. And this taxing
was the first, and executed when Sirenius was lieutenaunt in Siria. And every
man went unto his own city to be taxed. And Joseph also ascended from Galile,
out of a city called Nazareth, into Iewry, unto the city of David, which is
called Bethleem, because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be taxed,
with Mary his spoused wife, which was with child. And it fortuned that while
they were there, her time was come that she should be delivered. And she
brought forth her first begotten son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes,
and laid him in a Maunger, because there was no room for them in the Inn.
And there were in the same region shepeheardes watching and keeping their flock
by night. And lo, the Angel of the lord stood hard by them, and the
brightness of the lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid.
And the Angel said unto them: Be not afraid: for behold, I bring you tydinges
of great joy that shall come to all people: for unto you is borne this day, in
the city of David, a savior which is Christ the lord. And take this for a
sign: ye shall find the child wrapped in swadlyng clothes, and laid in a
mau^ger. And straight way there was with the Angel, a multitude of heavenly
soldiers, praysyng god, and saying: Glory to god on hye, and peace on the
earth, and unto men a good will.

At the second Communion.
Domine dominus noster. psalm. viii.
O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world: thou that
haste set thy glory above the heavens?

Out of the mouth of very babes and suckelynges, have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies: that thou might still the enemy and the auenger.

For I will considre thy heavens, even the works of thy fyngers: the Moon
and the stars which thou have ordained.

What is man that thou art so myndefull of him: and the son of man, that thou
visitest him?

Thou made him lower then the Angels: to croune him with glory and worship.

Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou haste
put all things in subieccion under his feet.

All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field.

The fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea: and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

O Lord our gouernoure: how excellent is thy name in all the world.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
ALmyghtie God, which haste given us thy only begotten son to take our nature
upon him, and this day to be borne of a pure virgin: Grant that we being
regenerate and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renewed by
thy holy spirit, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
GOD in times paste, dyuerslye and many ways spoke unto the fathers by
Prophets: Hebre. ^.
but in these last days, he has spoken to us by his own son, whom he has
made heir of all things, by whom also he made the world. Which (son)
being the brightness of his glory, and the very image of his substance,
rulyng all things with the word of his power, has by his own person pourged
our sins, and sytteth on the right hand of the majesty on high: being so
much more excellent then the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a
more excellent name then they. For unto which of the Angels said he at any
time? Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, I will be
his father, and he shall be my son. And again, when he brings in the
first begotten son into the world, he says: and let all the Angels of God
wurship him. And unto the Angels he sayethe: He makes his Angels spirits, and
his ministers a flame of fire. But unto the son he sayethe: thy seat (O God)
shall be for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thou
have loved righteousness and hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou Lord in the
beginning haste laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the
works of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou endurest: But they all shall
wax old as does a garmente, and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and
they shall be changed. But thou art even the same, and thy years shall not
fail.

The Gospel.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God: and God was the
word. The Same was in the beginning with God. John. i.
All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing that was made. In
it was life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. There was sent from God a man
whose name was John. The Same came as a witness, to bear witness of the light,
that al men through him might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to
bear witness of the light. That light was the true light, which lights every
man that comes into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made
by him: and the world knew him not. He came among his own, and his own
received him not: But as many as received him, to them gave he power to be the
sons of God: eue^ them that believed on his name, which were borne, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God:
And the same word became flesh and dwelt among us: and we saw the glory of
it, as the glory of the only begotten son of the father, full of grace and
truth.

Propre Psalms and lessons at Euensong.
Psalm. lxxxix. Psalm. cx. Psalm. cxxxii.


The first Lesson. Esaias. vii. God spoke once again to Achas. etc. unto the end

The second Lesson. Tit. iii. The kyndnes and love of our savior. etc. unto.
foolish questions.

Saint Stephins day.
At Mattins.
The second Lesson. Acts.vi.vii. Stephin full of faith and power ( unto) and
when.xl. years.

At the Communion.
WHy boastest thou thy self, thou tyrant: Quid gloriaris in malicia. psalm.
lii.
that thou can do mischief?

Where as the goodness of God: endures yet daily.

Thy tongue imagines wickedness: and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp rasor.

Thou have loved ungraciousness more then goodness: and to talk of lies more
then righteousness.

Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue.

Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling: and root thee out of the land of the living.

The ryghteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to skorne.

Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthed himself in his wickedness.

As for me I am like a green Olive tree in the house of God: my trust is in
the tender mercy of God for ever and ever.

I will always give thanks unto thee, for that thou have done: and I will hope
in thy name, for thy saints like it well.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

Grant us, O lord, to learn to love our enemies by the exaumple of thy
martyr Saint Stephin, who prayed to thee for his persecutours: which live
and reignest. etc.

Then shall follow a collect of the Nativity. The Epistle.
Acts.vii.
ANd Stephin being full of the holy ghost, looked up steadfastly with his iyes
into heaven, and saw the glory of god, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
god, and said: behold, I se the heavens open, and the son of man standing
on the right hand of God. Then they gave a shoute with a loud voice, and
stopped their ears, and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out of the
city, and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young
man's feet, whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephin, calling on and
saying: Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a
loud voice: Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had thus
spoken, he fell a sleep.

The Gospel.
Math. xxiii.
Behold, I send unto you prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and some of them
ye shall kill and crucifye: and some of the^ shall ye scourge in your
Sinagogues, and persecute them from city to city: that upon you may come all
the righteous blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye
slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you: al these things
shall come upon this generation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killeste the
Prophets and stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and ye would not? Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For
I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till that ye say: Blessed is
he that cummeth in the name of the Lord.

The second lesson at Euensong.
Act. vij. And when.xl. years were expired, there appeared unto Moses. unto.
Stephin full of the holy ghost. etc.

Saint John Evangelists day.
At Mattins.
The second lesson, Apoca. i. unto the end.

At the Communion.
IN the Lord put I my trust: In domino confido. psalm. xi.
how say ye then to my soul, that she should fly as a bird to the hyl?

For lo, the ungodly bend their bow: and make ready their arowes within the
bow, that they may prieuely shoot at them which are true of heart.

For the foundacions will be cast down: and what has the righteous done?

The Lord is in his holy temple: the Lords seat is in heaven.

His eyes considre the poor: and his eye liddes tries the children of men.

The Lord allows the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delyteth in
wickedness, does his soul abhor.

Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and
tempeste: this shall be their portion to drink.

For the righteous Lord, loves righteousness: his countenance will behold
the thing that is just.

Glory be the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Merciful Lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bryghte beams of light upon
thy Church: that it being lyghtened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle
and Evangelist John, may attain to thy everlasting gifts: Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard, i. Jhon. i.
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled, of the word of life. And the life appeared, and we have seen
and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with the
father, and appeared unto us. That which we have seen and heard, declare we
unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may
be with the father and his son Jesus Christ. And this write we unto you,
that ye may rejoice, and that your joy may be full. And this is the tydinges
which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him
is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But and if we walk in light, eue^
as he is in light, then have we fellowship with him, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we knowledge our sins, he
is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from al
unrighteousness. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us.

The Gospel.
Jesus said unto Peter: follow thou me. Peter turned about, John. xxi.
and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved, following (which also leaned on his
breaste at Supper, and said: Lord which is he that betrayeth thee?) when
Peter therefore saw him, he said to Jesus: Lord what shall he here do?
Jesus said unto him: If I will have him to tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that
that disciple should not dye. Yet Jesus said not to him, he shall not die: but
if I will that he tarry til I come, what is that to thee? The same disciple is he
which testifies of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that
his testimony is true. There are also many other things which Jesus did, the
which if they should be written every one, I suppose the world could not
co^teine the books that should be written.

At Euensong.
The second lesson. Apoca. xxii. unto the end.

The Innocents day.
At Mattins.
The first lesson, Hiere.xxxi. unto Moreover I heard Effraym.

O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they
defiled, Deus venerunt gentes. psalm. lxxix.
and made Jerusalem an heap of stones.

The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls
of the air: and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the land.

Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem: and there
was no man to bury them.

We are become an open shame to our enemies: a very skorne and derision unto
them that are round about us.

Lord, how long will thou be angry: shall thy gelousye burn like fire for
ever?

Power out thine indignacion upon the Heathen that have not known thee: and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

For they have devoured Jacob: and laid waste his dwelling place.

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us and that soon: for we
are come to great misery.

Help us, O GOD of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

Wherefore do the Heathen say: where is now their God?

O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed: be openly showed
upon the Heathen in our sight.

O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according unto
the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to dye.

And as for the blasphemye (wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee:)
reward thou them, O Lord, seven fold into their bosom.

So we that be thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for
ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generation to generation.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God whose praise this day, the young innocents thy witnesses has
confessed, and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying: mortifye and kill
all vices in us: that in our conversation, our life may express thy faith,
which with our tongues we do confess: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Apoca. xiiii.
I Looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
and.xliiij. thousand having his name and his fathers name written in their
foreheades. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and
as the voice of a great thundre. And I heard the voice of harpers harping with
their harpes. And they so^g as it were a new song before the seat, and before
the.iiij. beasts and the elders, and no man could learn the song but the.C.
and xliiij. thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which
were not defiled with weomen, for they are virgins. These follow the lamb
whithersoeuer he goes. These were redeemed from men being the first fruits
unto God, and to the lamb, and in their mouths was found no guile: for they
are without spot before the throne of God.

The Gospel.
THe Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a sleep, saying: Math. ii.
arise and take the child and his mother, and fly into Egypt, and be thou
there till I bring thee word. For it will come to pass that Herod shall
seek the child to destroy him. So when he awoke, he took the child and his
mother, by night, and departed into Egypt, and was there unto the death of
Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord by the
prophet, saying: out of Egypt have I called my son. Then Herod when he saw
that he was mocked of the wise men, he was exceadyng wroth, and sent forth men
of war, and slew all the children that were in Bethleem, and in all the
coasts as (many as were.ii. year old or under) according to the time which he
had diligently known out of the wisemen. Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by the prophet Jeremy, where as he said: in Rama was there a voice
heard, lamentacion, weeping, and great mourning: Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not be coumforted, because they were not.

The Sunday after Christmas day.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: Leuaui oculos. psalm. cxxi.
from whence cummeth my help?

My help cummeth even from the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee, will not
sleep.

Behold, he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord himself is thy keeper: the lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the Moon by night.

The lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall
keep thy soul.

The lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time
forth for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God which have given us. etc. As upon Christmas day.

The Epistle.
Gala. iiii.
ANd I say, that the heir (as long as he is a child) differs not from a
servant, though he be lord of all, but is under tutours and governors,
until the time that the father has appointed. Even so we also, when we were
children, were in bondage under the ordinances of the world: But when the
time was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond unto
the law, to redeem them which were bond unto the law: that we through
eleccion might receive the inheritance that belongs unto the natural
sons. Because ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our
hearts, which cries Abba father. Wherefore now, thou art not a servant,
but a son: If thou be a son, thou art also an heir of GOD through Christ.

The Gospel.
Math. i.
THis is the book of the generacio^ of Jesus Christ the son of David, the
son of Abraham: Abraham begat Isaac: Isaac begat Jacob: Jacob begat Judas and
his brethren: Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar: Phares begat Esro^: Esrom
begat Aram: Ara^ begat Aminadab: Aminadab begat Naasson: Naasson begat Salmo^:
Salmo^ begat Boos of Rahab: Boos begat Obed of Ruth: Obed begat Iesse: Iesse
begat David ye king: David the king begat Salomo^, of her that was the wife of
Vrie: Salamo^ begat Roboam: Roboam begat Abia: Abia begat Asa: Asa begat
Iosaphat: Iosaphat begat Ioram: Ioram begat Osias: Osias begat Ioatham: Ioatham
begat Achas: Achas begat Ezechias: Ezechias begat Manasses: Manasses begat
Amon: Amon begat Josias: Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren, about the time
that they were carried away to Babylon. And after they were brought to Babylon,
Ieconias begat Salathiell: Salathiell begat Zorobabel: Zorobabel begat Abiud:
Abiud begat Eliachim: Eliachim begat Azor: Azor begat Sadoc: Sadoc begat
Achin: Achin begat Eliud: Eliud begat Eleasar: Eleasar begat Matthan: Matthan
begat Jacob: Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Marie: of whom was borne
Jesus, even he that is called Christ. And so all the generacyons from Abraham
to David, are.xiiii. generacions. And from David unto the captivity of
Babylon, axe.xiiii. generacions. And from the captivity of Babylon unto
Christ, are.xiiii. generacions.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary was married
to Joseph (before they came to dwell together) she was found with child by
the holy ghost. Then Joseph her husband (because he was a righteous manne, and
would not put her to shame) was minded prieuely to depart from her. But while
he thus thought, behold, the Angel of the lord appeared unto him in sleep,
saying: Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife:
for that which is conceived in her, cummeth of the holy ghost. She shall bring
forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people
from their sins.

All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the lord
by the Prophet, saying: Behold, a maid shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emanuell, which if a man interpret, is as much to say as God with us. And Joseph as soon as he
awoke out of sleep, did as the Angel of the lord had bidden him: and he took
his wife unto him, and knew her not, til she had brought forth her first
begotten son, and called his name Jesus.

The Circumcision of Christ.
At Mattins.
The first lesson. Gene. xvii. unto the end.

The second lesson. Romans ii. unto the end.

At the Communion.
Letatus sum. psalm. cxxii.
I Was glad, when they said unto me: we will go into the house of the Lord.

Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is builded as a city: that is at unity in it self.

For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the Lord: to testifye unto
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

For there is the seat of judgment: even the seat of the house of David.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

Peace be within thy walls: and plenteousnes within thy palaces.

For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity.

Yea because of the house of the Lord our God: I will seek to do thee good.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which made thy blessed son to be circumcised and obedyente
to the law for manne: grant us the true circumcision of thy spirit, that
our hearts and all our members being mortifyed from all worldly and carnal
lusts, may in all things obey thy blessed will, through the same thy son
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Romans iiii.
BLessed is that man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Came this
blessedness then upon the vncircu^cisio^, or upon the circu^cisio^ also? for we
say, that faith was rekoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it then
rekoned? when he was in the circumcision, or when he was in the vncircumcisyon?
not in the time of circumcision: but when he was yet uncircumcised. And he
received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith,
which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he should be the father of all them
that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be
imputed to them also: and that he might be the father of circumcision, not
unto them only which came of the circumcised, but unto them also that walk
in the steps of the faith that was in our father Abraham before the time of
circumcision. For the promise (that he should be the heir of the world)
happened not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith. For if they, which are of the law, be heirs, then is
faith but vain, and the promise of none effect.

The Gospel.
ANd it fortuned, Luc. ii.
as soon as the Angels were gone away from the shepeheardes into heaven, they
said one to another: let us go now even unto Bethleem, and see this thing
that we hear say is happened, which the lord has showed unto us. And they
came with haste, and found Marye and Joseph, and the Babe laid in a maunger.
And when they had seen it, they published abroad the saying which was told
them of that child. And all they that heard it wondered at those things
which were told them of the shepeheardes. But Mary kept all those sayings,
and pondered them in her heart. And the shepheardes returned, praising and
lauding God, for all the things that they had heard and seen, even as it was
told unto them. And when the eight day was come that the child should be
circumcised, his name was called Jesus, which was named of the Angel before
he was conceived in the woumbe.

At Euensong.
The first lesson. Deute. x. And now Israel. unto the end.

The second Lesson. Coloss. ii. unto the end.

The Epiphanie.
At Mattins.
The first Lesson, Esai.lx. unto the end.

The second lesson. Luke.iii. And it fortuned. unto the end.

At the Communion
Cantate dos mino psalm. xcvi.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the whole earth.

Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name: be telling of his salvation from
day to day.

Declare his honor unto the Heathen: and his woonders unto all people.

For the lord is great, and cannot woorthely be praised: he is more to be
feared then all Gods.

As for all the Gods of the Heathen, they be but ydolles: but it is the
Lord that made the heavens.

Glory and wurship are before him: power and honor are in his sanctuary.

Ascribe unto the Lord (O ye kynreds of the people:) ascribe unto the Lord,
worship and power.

Ascribe unto the Lord, the honor due unto his name: bring presents and come
into his courts.

O woorshyp the Lord in the beauty of holiness: let the whole earth stand in
awe of him.

Tell it out among the Heathen, that the lord is king, and that it is he
which has made the round world so fast, that it cannot be moved: and how
that he shall judge the people righteously.

Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a noise
and all that therein is.

Let the field be joyful and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of
the wood rejoice before the Lord.

For he cummeth, for he cummeth to judge the earth: and with righteousness to
judge the world, and the people with his truth.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
O God which by the leadyng of a star did manyfeste thy only begotten
son to the Gentiles: Mercifully grant that we which know thee now by faith,
may after this life have the fruicion of thy glorious Godhead, through Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
FOr this cause I Paul am a pryesoner of Jesus Christ for you heathen: Ephe.
iii.
if ye have heard of the ministracion of the grace of god, which is given me
to you ward. For by reuelacyon showed he the misterye unto me, as I wrote
before in few words, whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knoweledge
in the mysterye of Christ: which mysterye in times passed was not opened unto
the sons of men, as it is now declared unto his holy Apostles and
Prophets by the spirit: that the Gentiles should be inheritours also, and of
the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ, by the means of the
Gospel, whereof I am made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of
God, which is given unto me after the woorkyng of his power. Unto me the least
of all saints is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what the
felowshyppe of the mystery is, which from the beginning of the world, has
been hid in God, which made all things through Jesus Christ: to the
entente, that now unto the rulers and powers in heavenly things, might be
known, by the congregacyon, the manifold wisdom of God, according to the
eternal purpose which he wrought in Christ Jesus our lord, by whom we have
boldenes and entrance, with the confidence which is by the faith of him.

The Gospel.
WHen Jesus was borne in Bethlee^ a city of Jury, Mat. iii.
in the time of Herod the king: Behold, there came wise men from the East to
Jerusalem, saying: where is he that is borne king of Jews? For we have seen
his star in the East, and are come to wurship him. When Herod the king had
heard these things, he was troubled and all the city of Jerusalem with him.
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be borne. And they said
unto him: at Bethleem in Jury.

For thus it is written by the Prophet: And thou Bethleem in the land of Jury,
art not the least among the princes of Judah, for out of thee there shall come
unto me the captain that shall govern my people Israel. Then Herod (when he
had prieuelye called the wise men) he inquired of them diligently what time
the star appeared, and he bad them go to Bethleem, and said: go your way
thither and search dilygentlye for the child. And when ye have found him,
bring me word again, that I may come and woorship him also. when they had
heard the king, they departed: and lo, the star which they saw in the
East, went before them till it came and stood over the place wherein the
child was. When they saw the star, they were exceading glad and went into
the house, and found the child with Mary his mother, and fell down flat and
wurshypped him, and opened their treasures and offered unto him gifts: Gold,
Frankincense, and Mirre. And after they were warned of God in sleep (that they
should not go again to Herod) they returned into their own country another
way.

At Euensong.
The first lesson, Esai. xlix. unto the end.

The second lesson. John.ii. After this he went down to Capernaum. unto the
end.

The first Sunday after the Epiphanie.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hyde thy
face from me? Vsque quo domine psalm. xiii.


How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? how
long shall mine enemy triumph over me?

Consider and hear me, O lord my God: lyghten mine eyes that I sleep not in
death.

Lest mine enemy say, I have prenayled against him: for if I be cast down,
they that trouble me will rejoice at it.

But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

I will sing of the lord, because he has dealt so louyngly with me: (yea I
will praise the name of the Lord the most highest.)

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee, mercifullye to receive the prayers of thy people which
call upon thee: and grant that they may both perceive and know what things
they ought to do, and also have grace and power faithully to fullfyll the same.

The Epistle.
I Beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercifulnes of God, Roma, xii.
that ye make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable seruyng of god, and fashion not your selfs like unto
this world: but be ye changed in your shape by the renewing of your mind,
that ye may prove what thing that good and acceptable and perfect will of god
is. For I say (through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among
you, that no man stand high in his own conceit, more then it becomes him to
esteem of himself: but so judge of himself, that he be gentle and sobre,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith: for as we have
many members in one body and all members have not one office: so we being many,
are one body in Christ, and every man among our selves, one another members.

The Gospel.
THe father and mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem after the custom of the
feast day. Luc. ii.
And when they had fulfilled the days: as they returned home, the child Jesus
abode still in Jerusalem, and his father and mother knew not of it: but they
supposing him to have been in the cumpanye, came a days journey and sought
him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found him not, they
went back again to Jerusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned that after
three days they found him in the temple, sytting in the midst of the
doctors, hearing them and posing them. And all that heard him, were astonished
at his understanding and answers. And when they saw him, they meruailed, and
his mother said unto him: Son, why haste thou thus dealte with us? Behold,
thy father and I have sought thee sorowing. And he said unto them: how happened
it that ye sought me? wiste ye not that I must go about my fathers business?
And they understood not that saying, which he spoke unto them. And he went
down with the^, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient unto them: but his
mother kept all these sayings together in her heart. And Jesus prospered in
wisdom and age, and in favor with god and men.

The second Sunday.
Dixit insipiens psalm. xiiii.
THe fool has said in his heart: there is no god. They are corrupt and become
abominable in their doings: there is not one that does good (no not one.)

The lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there
were any that would understand and seek after God.

But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is none that does good (no not one.)

Their throat is an open sepulcher: with their tongues they have deceived, the
poison of Aspes is under their lips.

Their mouth is full of curssyng and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed
blood.

Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways: and the way of peace have they
not known, there is no fear of God before their eyes.

Have they no knowledge, that they are all such woorkers of mischief, eating
up my people as it were bread, and call not upon the Lord?

There were they brought in great fear (even where no fear was) for god is in
the generation of the righteous. As for you, ye have made a mock at the
counsayl of the poor: because he puts his trust in the lord.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion? when the lord turns the
captivity of his people: then shall Jacob rejoice and Israel be glad.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, which dooest govern all things in heaven and
earth: mercifully hear the supplicacions of thy people, and grant us thy
peace all the days of our life.

The Epistle.
Seeing that we have diverse gifts, Romans xii.
according to the grace that is given unto us: if any man have the gift of
prophecy, let him have it, that it be agreeing to the faith. Let him that has
an office wait on his office. Let him that reaches, take heed to his
doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendaunce to his exhortacion. If any
man give, let him do it with singlenes. Let him that rules, do it with
diligence. If any man show mercy, let him do it with cherefulnes. Let love be
with out dissimulacion. Hate that which is evil, and cleave unto that which
is good. Be kind one to an other with brotherly love. In giving honor go one
before an other. Be not slothefull in the business which ye have in hand. Be
fervent in the spirit. Apply your selves to the time. Rejoice in hope. Be
pacient in tribulacion. Continue in prayer. Distribute unto the necessity of
the saints. Be ready to harbor. Bless them which persecute you: bless, I
say, and curse not. Be merry with them that are merry: weep also with them that
weep: be of like affeccion one toward another. Be not hie minded, but make
your selves equal to them of the lower sort.

The Gospel.
ANd the third day was there a marriage in Cana a city of Galile, and the
mother of Jesus was there. Ihon. ii.
And Jesus was called (and his disciples) unto the marriage. And when the wine
failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: they have no wine. Jesus said unto
her: woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. His
mother said unto the ministers: whatsoever he says unto you, do it. And there
were standing there vi. waterpottes of stone, after the manner of the purifying
of the Jews, containing.ii. or.iii. fyrkyns a piece. Jesus said unto them:
fill the watter pottes with water. And they filled them up to the brimme. And
he said unto them: draw out now, and bear unto the Governor of the feast.
And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was
turned into wine, and knew not whence it was (but the ministers, which drew
the water, knew) he called the bridegroom, and said unto him: Every man at
the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men be drunk, then that which
is worse, but thou haste kept the good wine until now. This beginning of
miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile, and showed his glory, and his disciples
believed on him.

The.iii. Sunday.
Domie quis habitabit psalm. xV.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest upon thy holy hill?

Even he that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing which is right:
and speaks the truth from his heart.

He that has used no deceyt in his tongue: nor done evil to his neighbor, and
has not slaundered his neighbors.

He that sets not by himself, but is lowelye in his own iyes: and makes
much of them that fear the lord.

He that swears unto his neighbor and disapointeth him not: though it were
to his own hinderaunce.

He that has not given his money unto usury: nor taken reward against the
innocente.

Whosoever does these things: shall never fall.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, mercyfullye look upon our infirmities, and in
all our daungiers and necessities, stretche forth thy right hand to help
and defend us, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
BE not wise in your own opinions. Romans xii.
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide aforehande things honest, not
only before God, but also in the syghte of all men. If it be possible (as much
as is in you) live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath. For it is written: vengeance is
mine, I will reward says the lord. Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed
him: if he thirst, give him drink. For in so dooyng, thou shalt heap coals
of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

The Gospel.
WHen he was come down from the mountain, Math. vi^
much people followed him. And behold there came a Leper and wurshipped him,
saying? Master, if thou will, thou can make me clean. And Jesus put
forth his hand and touched him, saying: I will, be thou clean: and
immediatelye his Leprosye was cleansed. And Jesus said unto him: see thou tell
no man, but go and show thy self to the priest, and offer the gift (that
Moses commanded to be offered) for a witness unto them.

And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion, and
besoughte him, saying: Master, my servant lies at home sick of the paulsey,
and is grievously payned. And Jesus said: when I come unto him I will heal
him. The Centurion answered, and said: Sir I am not woorthye that thou
shouldeste come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed. For I also my self am a man subject to the authority of
another, and have soldiers under me: and I say to this manne, go, and he
goes: and to another manne, come, and he cummeth: and to my servant, do
this, and he does it. When Jesus heard these words, he merueyled, and said
to them that followed him: verily I say unto you, I have not found so great
faith in Israel. I say unto you, that many shall come from the East, and
Weste, and shall rest with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven: but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashyng of teeth. And Jesus said unto the
Centurion: Go thy way, and as thou beleueste so be it unto thee: and his
servant was healed in the self same hour.

The.iiii. Sunday.
Quare freinuerunt gentes. psalm. ii.
WHy do the Heathen so furiously rage together? and why do the people imagine a
vain thing?

The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together:
against the Lord and against his anointed.

Let us break their bonds a sunder: and cast away their coardes from us.

He that dwells in heaven, shall laugh them to skorne: the Lord shall have
them in derision.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

Yet have I set my king: upon my holy hill of Sion.

I will preach the law, whereof the Lord has said unto me: thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee.

Desire of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance: and the
vttermoste parts of the earth for thy possession.

Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

Be wise now therefore, o ye kings: be learned ye that are judges of the
earth.

Serve the Lord in fear: and rejoice (unto him) with reverence.

Kiss the son lest he be angry, and so ye peryshe from the right way: if
his wrath be kiendled (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be. etc.

The Collect.
GOd, which knoweste us to be set in the myddeste of so many and great
dangers, that for man's fraylnesse we cannot always stand uprightly: Grant
to us the health of body and soul, that all those things which we suffer for
sin, by thy help we may well pass and overcome, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
LEt every soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher powers: Romans
xiii.
for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God,
whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God: But they
that resyste, shall receive to themselves da^nacion. For rulers are not
fearful to them that do good but to them that do evil. Will thou be without
fear of the power? do well then, and so shall thou be praised of the same: for
he is the minister of God, for thy wealth. But and if thou do that which is
evil, then fear, for he bears not the sweorde for naught: for he is the
minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore, ye must
needs obey, not only for fear of vengeance, but also because of conscience:
and even for this cause pay ye tribute: For they are gods ministers serving
for the same purpose. Give to every man therefore his duetye: tribute, to whom
tribute belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to whom fear
belongs: honor, to whom honor pertayneth.

The Gospel.
ANd when he entered into a ship, Math. viii.
his disciples followed him. And behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea,
insomuche that the ship was covered with waves, but he was aslepe. And his
disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying: Master save us, we perish. And
he says unto them: why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose,
and rebuked the winds and the sea and there followed a great calm. But the
men meruailed, saying: what manner of man is this, that both wyndes and sea obey
him? And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesites, there met him.ii. possessed of deuilles, which came out of the
graves, and were out of measure fierce, so that no man might go by that way.
And behold, they cried out, saying: O Jesus, thou son of God, what have we to
do with thee? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? And there
was a good way of from them, a heerd of many Swyne feeding. So the devils
besoughte him, saying: If thou cast us out, suffer us to go into the heerde
of Swyne. And he said unto them: go your ways. Then went they out and
departed into the heerde of Swine. And behold, the whole heerd of Swine was
carried hedlong into the sea and peryshed in the waters. Then they that kept
them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what
had happened unto the possessed of the devils. And behold, the whole city came
out to mete Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him that he would
depart out of their coasts.

The.v. Sunday.
Exaudiat te dominus. psalm. xx
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

Send thee help from the Sanctuary: and strength thee out of Sion.

Remember all thy offerynges: and accept thy burnt sacrifice

Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fulfill all thy mind.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, and tryumphe in the name of the Lord our
God: the Lord perform all thy peticions.

Now know I that the Lord helps his anointed, and will hear him from his
holy heaven: even with the wholesome strength of his right hand.

Some put their trust in Chariotes, and some in horses: but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God.

They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen and stand upright.

Save Lord, and hear us, O king of heaven: when we call upon thee.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee to keep thy Church and household continually in thy
true religion: that they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly
grace, may evermore be defended by thy myghtie power: Through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
PVt upon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, Colos. iii.
kyndnes, humblenes of mind, mekenes, long sufferyng, forbearyng one an other,
and forgeuyng one an other, if any man have a querell against another: as
Christ forgave you, even so do ye. Above al these things, put on love, which
is the bond of perfectnes. And the peace of God rule in your hearts: to the
which peace ye are called in one body: And see that ye be thankful. Let
the word of Christ dwell in you plenteouslye, with all wisdom. Teach and
exhort your own selves in Psalms and Himnes and spiritual songs, syngyng
with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed,
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the father by him.

The Gospel.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his
field: Math. Xiii.
but while men slepte, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and had brought furthe
fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came,
and said unto him: Sir, dydst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then has it tares? he said unto them: the enuyous manne has done
this. The servants said unto him: will thou then that we go and wede them
up? But he said, nay lest while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up also
the wheat with them: let both grow together until the harvest: and in
time of harueste, I will say to the reapers: gather ye first the tares and
bind them together in sheaues to be burnt: but gather the wheat into my
barn.

The.vi. sunday (if there be so many) shall have the same Psalm, Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel, that was upon the.v.

The Sunday called Septuagesima.
Dominus regit. psalm. xxiii.
THe Lord is my shepehearde: therefore can I lack nothing.

He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of
coumforte.

He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of
righteousness, for his names sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death: I will fear
no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff coumfort me.

Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble me: thou haste
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.

But thy loving kyndenes and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy people, that we
which are iustlye punyshed for our offenses: may be mercyfully delivered by
thy goodness, for the glory of thy name: through Jesus Christ our savior, who
lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. ix.
Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a course, run all, but one
receives the reward? So run that ye may obtain: Every man that proves
masteryes, abstayneth from all things. And they do it to obtayn a crown that
shall perish, but we to obtain an everlasting crown. I therefore so run,
not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as one that beats the air:
but I tame my body, and bring it into subieccion, lest by any means it come
to pass, that when I have preached to other, I my self should be a castawaye.

The Gospel.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, Math. xx.
which went out early in the morning to hyre laborers into his vineyard. And
when the agremente was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyarde. And he went out about the third hour, and saw other
standing idle in the markette place, and said unto them: Go ye also into the
vineyarde, and whatsoever is right, I will give you. And they went their way.
Again he went out about the vi. and ix hour, and did likewise. And about
the.xi. hour he went out, and found other standing idle, and said unto them:
why stand ye here all the day idle? They said unto him: because no man has
hired us. He says unto them: Go ye also into the vineyarde, and whatsoever
is right, that shall ye receive. So, when even was come, the Lord of the
vineyarde said unto his steward: call the laborers and give them their hyre,
beginning at the last until the first. And when they did come that came about
the xi. hour, they received every man a penny: But when the first came also,
they supposed that they should have received more, and they likewise received
every man a penny. And when they had received it, they murmured against the
goodman of the house, saying: these last have wrought but one hour, and thou
haste made them equal with us, which have borne the burden and heat of the
day. But he answered unto one of them, and said: Friend, I do thee no wrong,
did thou not agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way:
I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as
me lusts with mine own goods? Is thine eye evil because I am good? So the
last shall be first, and the first shall be last. For many be called but few be
chosen.

The sunday called Sexagesima. The Sunday called Sexagesima. At the Communion.
Dominiest terra. psalm. xxiiii.
THe earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein.

For he has founded it upon the seas: and prepared it upon the fluddes.

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall rise up in his holy
place?

Even he that has clean hands and a pure heart: and that has not lift up
his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.

He shall receive the blessyng from the Lord: and righteousness from the God of
his salvation.

This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy face,
O Jacob.

Lift up your heads (O ye gates) and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors:
and the king of glory shall come in.

Who is this king of glory? it is the Lord, strong and mighty: even the Lord
mighty in battayll.

Lift up your heads (O ye gates) and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors:
and the king of glory shall come in.

Who is this king of glory? even the Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
Lord God, which see that we put not our trust in any thing that we do:
mercifully grant that by thy power we may be defended against all adversity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
ii. Cor. xi.
YE suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise. For ye suffer if a
man bring you into bondage: if a man devour: if a man take: if a man exalt
himself: if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning rebuke, as
though we had been weak in this behalf. Howbeit, wherinsoeuer any man dare
be bold (I speak folishly) I dare be bold also. They are Hebrews, even so am
I. They are Israelytes, even so am I. They are the seed of Abraham, even so am
I. They are the ministers of Christ, (I speak as a fool) I am more: In
labors more aboundaunte: In stripes above measure: In prison more plenteously:
In death often: Of the Jews five times received I xl. stripes save one: Thrice
was I beaten with rods: I was once stoned: I suffered thrice ship wrack: Night
and day have I been in the deep sea. In iorneying often: in parels of waters:
in parels of robbers: in ieopardyes of mine own nation: in ieopardyes among
the heathen: in parels in the city: in parels in wyldernes: in parels in the
sea: in parels among false brethren: in labor and travail: in watchynges
often: in hunger and thyrste: in fastinges often: in cold and nakedness: beside
the things which outwardly happen unto me, I am combred daily, and do care
for all congregacions. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I
burn not? If I must needs boast, I will boast of the things that concern
mine infirmities. The God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not.

The Gospel.
WHen much people were gathered together, Luc. viii.
and were come to him out of all cities, he spoke by a similytude. The sower
went out to sow his sede: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it
was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it up. And some fell on
stones, and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked
moistnes. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns spra^g up with it and
choked it. And some fell on good ground, and sprang up and bare fruit an
hundredth fold. And as he said these things, he cried: he that has ears to
hear, let him hear. And his disciples asked him, saying: what mane^ of
similitude is this? And he said: unto you it is given to know the secrets of
the kingdom of God: but to other by parables, that when they see, they should
not see, and when they hear, they should not understand. The parable is this:
The sede is the word of God: those that are beside the way, are they that
hear: the^ comes the devil and takes away the word out of their hearts,
lest they should believe and be saved. They on the stones, are they which when
they hear, receive the word with joy: and these have no roots, which for a
while believe, and in time of temptacion go away. And that which fell among
thorns, are they which when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with
cares and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. That which
fell in the good ground, are they which with a pure and good heart, hear the
word and keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima.
BE thou my judge, O Lord, for I have walked innocently: Iudica me domine.
psalm. xxvi.
my trust has been also in the Lord therefore shall I not fall.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my raynes and my heart.

For thy loving kindness is before mine iyes: and I will walk in thy truth.

I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship with the
deceiptfull.

I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly.

I ^ill wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine alter.

That I may show the voice of thankesgeuyng: and tell of all thy wondrous
works.

Lord, I have loved the habitacion of thy house: and the place where thine
honor dwells.

O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the bloudthursty.

In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hand is full of gifts.

But as for me I will walk innocently: O Lord deliver me, and be merciful
unto me.

My foot stands right: I will praise the Lord in the congregacions.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
O Lord which do teach us, that all our doings without charity are
nothing worth: send thy holy ghost and power into our hearts that most
excellent gift of charity, the very bond of peace and all virtues, without
the which, whosoever lives is counted dead before thee: Grant this, for thy
only son Jesus Christ's sake.

The Epistle.
THough I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have no love, i.
Cor. xiii.
I am even as sounding brass, or as a tynklyng Cimball. And though I could
prophecy, and understood all secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if I have al
faith, so that I can move mountains out of their places, and yet have no love,
I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though
I gave my body even that I burned, and yet have no love, it profits me
nothing. Love suffers long, and is courteous: love enuieth not: love does not
frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not
provoked to anger, thinks none evil, reioyseth not in iniquity. But
reioyseth in the truth, suffers al things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things. Though that prophesying fail, either tongues
cease, or knowledge vanishe away, yet love falls never away. For our
knowledge is imperfect, and our propheciyng is imperfect: But when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. When I was
a child, I spoke as a child: I understood as a child: I imagined as a
child. But as soon as I was a man, I put away childishnes. Now we see in a
glass, even in a dark speaking: but then shall we see face to face. Now I
know imperfectly: but then shall I know even as I am known. Now abides
faith, hope, and love, even these three: but the chief of these is love.

The Gospel.
Jesus took unto him the.xii. and said unto them: Luc. xviii.
behold we go up to Jerusalem, and al shall be fulfilled that are written by the
Prophets of the son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentyles, and
shall be mocked, and despitefully entreated, and spitted on. And when they have
scourged him, they will put him to death, and the third day he shall rise
again. And they understood none of these things. And this saying was hid from
the^, so that they perceived not the things which were spoken. And it came to
pass, that as he was come nigh unto Hierico, a certain blind man sat by the
hye way side, beggyng. And when he heard the people pass by, he asked what it
meant. And they said unto him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. And he cried,
saying: Jesus thou son of David, have mercy on me. And they which went before
rebuked him, that he should hold his peace. But he cried so much the more:
thou son of David have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded
him to be brought unto him. And when he was come nere, he asked him, saying:
what will thou that I do unto thee? and he said: Lord, that I may receive my
sight. And Jesus said unto him: receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee.
And immediately he received his sight, and followed him praising God. And all the
people, when they saw it, gave praise unto God.

The first day of Lent, commonly called Ashwednesdaye.
Domine ne. psalm. vi.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignacion: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

My soul also is soore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: Oh save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pyt?

I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couche with
my tears.

My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

Away fro me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

The Lord has heard my peticion: the Lord will receive my prayer.

All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned back
and put to shame suddenly.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou haste made, and
do forgive the sins of al them that be penitent: Create and make in us
new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and
knowlegyng our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy,
perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
TVrne you unto me with all your hearts, with fasting, weping and mourning:
rent your hearts, Ioes. ii.
and not your clothes. Turn you unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious
and merciful, long sufferyng, and of great compassion, and ready to pardon
wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn and forgive: and after his
chastening he shall let your increase remain for meat and drink offeringes
unto the Lord your God. Blow out with the trompet in Sion, proclaim a
fasting, call the congregation, and gather the people together: warn the
congregation, gather the elders, bring the children, and sucklinges together.
Let the brydgrome go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let
the priests serve the Lord between the Porche and the alter, weping and
saying: be favorable, O Lord, be favorable unto thy people: let not thine
heritage be brought to such confusion, lest the heathen be Lords thereof.
Wherefore should they say among the Heathen: where is now their God?

The Gospel.
WHen ye fast, be not sad as the Hipocrites are, Math. vi.
for they disfigure their faces that it may appear unto men how that they
fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou
fasteste, annoynte thine head, and wash thy face, that it appear not unto men
how that thou fasteste, but unto thy father which is in secret: and thy
father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. Lay not up for your
selves treasure upon earth, where the rust and moth does corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal. But lay up for you treasures in heaven,
where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

The first Sunday in Lent.
Beati quoru^ psalm. xxxii.
BLessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgeuen: and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away thorough my daily
complaining.

For thy hand is heavy upon me both day and night: and my moisture is like
the drought in Somer.

I will knowlage my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hyd.

I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin.

For this shall every one that is Godly, make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water floudes, they shall not come
nigh him.

Thou art a place to hyde me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

I will inform thee and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

Be not ye like horse and Mule, which have no understanding: whose mouths
must be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whosoever puts his trust in the
Lord mercy embraces him on every side.

Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, which for our sake, dyddeste fast fortye days and fourtye
nyghtes: Give us grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued
to the spirit, we may ever obey thy Godly mocyons, in righteousness and
true holiness, to thy honor and glory: which live and reignest. etc.

The Epistle.
WE as helpers exhort you, ii. Cor. vi.
that ye receive not the grace of god in vain. For he says: I have heard thee
in a time accepted: and in the day of salvation have I succored thee.
Behold, now is that accepted time: behold, now is that day of salvation.
Let us give no occasyon of evil, that in our office be found no fault, but
in all things let us behave our selves as the ministers of God: In much
patience, in affliccions, in necessities, in anguishes, in stripes, in
prieso^me^tes, in strifes: in labors, in watchynges, in fastings, in pureness,
in knowledge, in long suffering, in kyndenes, in the holy ghost, in love
unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God: by the armor of
ryghteousnes of the right hand and on the left: by honor and dishonor: by
evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true: as unknown, and
yet known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastened and not killed: as
sorowyng and yet always merry: as poor and yet make many rich: as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things.

The Gospel.
THen was Jesus led away of the spirit into wilderness, to be tempted of
the devil. Math. iiii.
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at the last an
hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said, if thou be the son of
God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and said: it
is written, man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of god. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city,
and sets him on a pynacle of the temple, and says unto him: if thou be the
son of God, cast thy self down headlong. For it is written: he shall give
his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall hold thee up,
lest at any time thou dashe thy foot against a stone. And Jesus said unto him:
it is written again: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Again, the
devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says unto him: all these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and wurship me. Then says Jesus
unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shall wurship the Lord thy
God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaves him, and behold,
the Angels came and ministered unto him.

The second Sunday.
OVt of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice. De
profundis psalm. cxxx.


Oh let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaynte.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amysse: Oh Lord who may
abide it?

For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

My soul flies unto the Lord, before the morning watch: I say, before the
morning watch.

O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel, from all his sins.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which doeste see that we have no power of our selves to help
our selves: keep thou us both outwardelye in our bodies, and inwardelye in our
souls, that we may be defended from all aduersityes which may happen to the
body, and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul:
through Jesus Christ. etc.

The Epistle.
WE beseech you brethren, and exhort you by the lord Jesus, that ye increase
more and more, i. Tess. iiii.
even as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and to please God. For
ye know what commandments we gave you by our Lord Jesus Christ. For this is
the will of God, even your holiness, that ye should abstain from fornicacion,
and that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence as do the Heathen, which know not
God: that no man oppress and defraude his brother in bergaynyng: because that
the lord is the aue^ger of al such things, as we told you before, and
testified. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. He
therefore that despyseth, despyseth not manne, but God which has sent his
holy spirit among you.

The Gospel.
Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon: and
behold, Math. xv.
a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto him,
saying: have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David: My daughter is
pieteously vexed with a devil. But he answered her nothing at all. And his
disciples came and besought him, saying: send her away, for she cries after
us. But he answered, and said: I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Then came she and wurshipped him saying: Lord, help me. He
answered and said: it is not mete to take the childrens bread, and cast it to
dogs. She answered and said: truth Lord, for the dogs eat of the crummes
which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus answered, and said unto her: O
woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her
daughter was made whole even at the same time.

The.iii. Sunday.
Iudica me Deus. psalm. xliii.
Give sentence with me (O God) and defend my cause against the ungodly people:
Oh deliver me from the deceiptfull and wicked man.

For thou art the God of my strength, why haste thou put me from thee? and
why go I so heauely, while the enemy oppresses me?

Oh send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me: and bring me
unto thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling.

And that I may go unto the aultare of God, even unto the God of my joy and
gladness: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee (O God) my God.

Why art thou so heavy (O my soul:) and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks which is the help of
my countenance and my God.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
WE beseech thee almighty God look upon the hartye desires of thy humble
servants: and stretche forth the right hand of thy majesty, to be our
defense against all our enemies: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. v
BE you the folowers of god as dear children, and walk in love, even as Christ
loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet savor
to god. As for fornication and al uncleanness or covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as it becu^meth saints: or filthiness, or folish talking, or
iestyng, which are not comely, but rather geuyng of thanks. For this ye
know, that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or covetous person
(which is a wurshypper of images) has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words. For because of
such things, cummeth the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be
not ye therefore companions of them. Ye were sumtyme darkness, but now are ye
light in the Lord: walk as children of light, for the fruit of the spirit
consists in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. Accept that which is
pleasyng unto the Lord, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather rebuke them. For it is a shame even to name those things,
which are done of them in secret: but all things when they are brought forth
by the light are manifest. For whatsoever is manifest, the same is light:
wherefore he says: awake thou that slepest, and stand up from death, and
Christ shall give thee light.

The Gospel.
Jesus was casting out a devil that was dumme. Luc. Xl.
And when he had cast out the devil, the dumme spoke, and the people
woondered. But some of them said: he casts out devils through Beelzebub the
chief of the devils. And other tempted him, and required of him a sign from
heaven. But he knowing their thoughts, said unto them: Every kingdom divided
against it self, is desolate: and one house does fall upon another. If
Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom endure?
Because ye say that I cast out deuilles through Beelzebub. If I by the help
of Beelzebub cast out devils, by whose help do your children cast them out?
Therefore shall they be your judges. But if I with the finger of God cast out
deuilles, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you. When a strong manne
armed watches his house, the things that he possesses are in peace. But when
a stronger then he comes upon him, and ouercummeth him, he takes from him al
his harnes (wherein he trusted) and deuydeth his goods. He that is not with
me, is against me. And he that gathers not with me, scattreth abroad. When
the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest. And when he fyndeth none, he says: I will return again into my
house whence I came out. And when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished.
Then goes he and takes to him.vii. other spirits worse then himself: and
they enter in and dwell there. And the end of that man is worse then the
beginning. And it fortuned that as he spoke these things, a certain woman of
the cumpany lift up her voice, and said unto him: happy is the woumbe that bare
thee, and the pappes which gave thee suck. But he said: yea, happy are they
that hear the word of God, and keep it.

The.iiii. Sunday.
Deus noster refugium. psalm. xlvi.
GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be moved: and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea.

Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

The rivers of the floude thereof shall make glad the city of God: the holy
place of the tabernacle of the most highest.

God is in the middeste of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall
help her, and that right early.

The heathen make much a do, and the kingdoms are moved: but God has
showed his voice, and the earth shall mealte away.

The Lord of hoostes is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow, and
knappeth the spear in sunder, and burns the Chariotes in the fire.

Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen, and
I will be exalted in the earth.

The Lord of hoostes is with us, the God of Jacob is our defense.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Grant we beseech thee almighty God, that we, which for our evil deeds are
worthily punyshed: by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
TEll me (ye that desire to be under the law) do ye not hear of the law?
Gala. iiii.
for it is written that Abraham had.ii. sons, the one by a bondemayde, the
other by a freewoman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondewoman, was borne
after the flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by
promise: which things are spoken by an allegory. For these are two testamentes,
the one from the mount Sina, which gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar: For
mount Sina is Agar in Arabia, and bordreth upon the city, which is now
called Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem, which is
above, is free, which is the mother of us all. For it is written: Rejoice thou
barren that beareste no children: break forth and cry, thou that trauaylest
not. For the desolate has many more children then she which has an housbande.
Brethren we are after Isaac the children of promise. But as then he that was
borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: Eue^
so is it now. Nevertheless, what says the scripture? put away the bond
woman and her son. For the son of the bondewoman shall not be heir with
the son of the freewoman: So then brethren, we are not children of the
bondewoman, but of the freewoman.

The Gospel.
Jesus departed over the sea of Galile, John. vi.
which is the sea of Tiberias, and a great multitude followed him, because they
saw his miracles which he did on them that were dyseased. And Jesus went up
into a mountain, and there he sat with his Disciples. And Easter, a feast of
the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus then lift up his eyes and saw a great company
come unto him, he says unto Philip: whence shall we bye bread that these may
eat? This he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do.
Philip answered him: two hundredth peniwoorth of bread, are not sufficyente
for them, that every manne may take a little. One of his disciples (Andrewe,
Simon Peter's brother) says unto him: There is a lad here which has five
barley loaves and two fyshes: but what are they among so many? And Jesus said:
make the people sit down. There was much grass in the place: so the men
sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the bread, and when
he had given thanks, he gave to the Disciples, and the Disciples to them that
were set down: and likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When they had
eaten enough, he said unto his Disciples: gather up the broken meat which
remains, that nothing be lost. And they gathered it together and filled.xii.
baskettes with the broken meat of the five barley loaves: which broken meat
remained unto the^ that had eaten. Then those men (when they had seen the
miracle that Jesus did) said: this is of a truth the same Prophet that
should come into the world.

The.v. Sunday.
Deus in nomine tuo psalm liiii.
Save me (O God) for thy names sake: and avenge me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer (O God:) and harken unto the words of my mouth.

For strangers are risen up against me: and Tirauntes (which have not god
before their eyes) seek after my soul.

Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name (O Lord:)
because it is so coumfortable.

For he has delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
WE beseech thee almighty God, mercifullye to look upon thy people: that by
thy great goodness, they may be governed and preserved evermore both in body
and soul: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Christ being an hye priest of good things to come, Hebrews.ix.
came by a greater and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that
is to say, not of this buildyng, neither by the blood of goats and calves,
but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, and found
eternal redemption. For if the blood of oxen and of goats, and the ashes of a
young kowe, when it was sprinkled, purifyeth the unclean as touching the
purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ (which
through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to god) purge your
conscience from dead works, for to serve the living god? And for this cause is
he the mediator of the new testament: that through death, which chaunsed for
the redemption of those trangressio^s that were under the first testament, they
which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

The Gospel.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? John. viii.
If I say the truethe, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God hears
Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Then
answered the Jews, and said unto him: say we not well that thou art a
Samaritan and have the devil? Jesus answered: I have not the devil, but I
honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise:
there is one that seeks and judges. Verily, verily, I say unto you: if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Then said the Jews unto him:
now know we that thou haste the devil. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets,
and thou say: If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death. Art
thou greater then our father Abraham, which is dead? And the Prophets are
dead: whom make thou thy self? Jesus answered: if I honor my self, mine
honor is nothing: It is my father that honoreth me, which ye say is your God,
and yet ye have not known him: but I know him: And if I say I know him not, I
shall be a liar, like unto you. But I know him and keep his saying. Your father
Abraham was glad to see my day: and he saw it and reioysed. Then said the
Jews unto him. Thou art not yet.l. year old, and haste thou seen Abraham?
Jesus said unto them: Verily, verily, I say unto you: ere Abraham was borne,
I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and
went out of the temple.

The Sunday next before Easter.
Hear my crying, O GOD: give ear unto my prayer. Exaudi deus deprecatione^
psalm. lxi.


From the ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in
heaviness.

Oh set me up upon the rock that is higher then I: for thou haste been my
hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemy.

I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the
coueryng of thy wings.

For thou, O Lord, have heard my desires: and have given an heritage unto
those that fear thy name.

Thou shall grant the king a long life: that his years may endure throughout
all generacions.

He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and faythfulnes,
that they may preserve him.

So will I always sing praise unto thy name: that I may daily perform my vows.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
ALmyghtye and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, have
sent our savior Jesus Christ to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer
death upon the cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his
great humility: mercyfully grant, that we both follow the example of his
patience, and be made partakers of his resurreccion: through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Let the same mind be in you, philip. ii.
that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he was in the shape of God, thought
it no robbery to be equal with god: nevertheless he made himself of no
reputacio^, taking on him the shape of a servant, and became like unto men,
and was found in his apparel as a man. He humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God has also
exalted him on high, and given him a name which is above all names: that in the
name of Jesus, every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things
in earth, and things under the earth, and that all tongues should confess,
that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the praise of God the father.

The Gospel.
ANd it came to pass, when Jesus had fynyshed all these sayings, he said unto
his disciples: Math. xxvi
ye know that after two days shall be Easter, and the son of man shall be
delivered over to be crucified. Then assembled together the chief Priests,
and the Scrybes, and the Elders of the people, unto the palace of the high
priest (which was called Caiphas) and held a counsel that they might take
Jesus by subteltie, and kill him. But they said: not on the holy day, lest
there be an vproare among the people.

When Jesus was in Bethanie in the house of Simon the Leper, there came unto
him a woman having an Alabaster box of precious ointment, and powered it on his
head, as he sat at the bourde. But when his disciples saw it, they had
indignacion, saying: whereto serves this waste? This ointment might have been
well sold, and given to the poor. When Jesus understood that, he said unto
them: why trouble ye the woman? for she has wroughte a good work upon me. For
ye have the poor always with you: but me shall ye not have always. And in
that she has cast this ointment on my body, she did it to bury me. Verily I
say unto you: whersoeuer this gospel shall be preached in all the world, there
shall also this that she has done, be told for a memorial of her. Then one of
the.xii. (which was called Judas Iscarioth) went unto the chief priests, and
said unto the^: what will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they
appointed unto him.xxx. pieces of silver. And from that time forth, he sought
opportunity to betray him: The first day of sweet bread, the disciples came to
Jesus, saying unto him: where wylt thou that we prepare for thee, to eat the
Passover. And he said: Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him,
the Master says: my time is at hand, I will keep my Easter by thee with my
disciples. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made
ready the Passover. When the even was come, he sat down with the.xii. And as
they did eat he said: Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
And they were exceading sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him:
Lord, is it I? He answered and said: he that dippeth his hand with me in the
dyshe, the same shall betray me. The son of man truly goes, as it is written
of him: but woe unto that man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. It had
been good for that man, if he had not been borne. Then Judas, which betrayed
him, answered and said. Master, is it I? He said unto him: thou have said.
When they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it and gave it to the discyples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body.
And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying: drink ye all of
this: For this is my blood (which is of the new testament) that is shed for
many, for the remission of sins. But I say unto you: I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine tree, until that day when I shall
drink it new with you, in my fathers kingdom. And when they had said grace,
they went out unto mount Oliuete. Then says Jesus unto them: al ye shall be
offended because of me this night. For it is written: I will smite the
shepehearde, and the sheep of the flock shall be scatered abroad: but after I
am risen again, I will go before you into Galile. Peter answered, and said
unto him: though all men be offended because of thee, yet will not I be
offended. Jesus said unto him: verily I say unto thee, that in this same
night before the cock krowe, thou shall deny me thryse. Peter said unto
him: yea, though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee, likewise
also said all the disciples. Then came Jesus with them unto a farm place,
(which is called Gethsemane) and said unto the disciples: Sit ye here, while
I go and pray yonder. And he took with him Peter and the two sons of
Zebede, and began to wax sorrowful and heavy. Then said Jesus unto them: My
soul is heavy even unto the death: Tarry ye here and watch with me. And he
went a little farther and fell flat on his face and prayed, saying: O my father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will but
as thou will: And he came unto the dyscyples, and found them aslepe, and said
unto Peter: what, could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray,
that ye enter not into temptacion: the spirit is willing but the flesh is
weak. He went away once again and prayed, saying. O my father, if this cup
may not pass away from me except I drink of it, thy will be fulfilled: and he
came and found them aslepe again: for their eyes were heavy. And he left
them, and went again and prayed the third time, saying the same words. Then
comes he to his dyscyples, and says unto them: Sleep on now and take your
rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that does
betray me. While he yet spoke: lo, Judas one of the number of the.xii. came,
and with him a great multitude with sweordes and staves, sent from the chief
priests and elders of the people. But he that betrayed him, gave them atoken,
saying: whomsoever I kiss, the same is he, hold him fast. And furthwith he
came to Jesus, and said: hail Master, and kyssed him. And Jesus said unto
him: friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they and laid hands on Jesus,
and took him. And behold, one of them which were with Jesus, stretched out his
hand and drew his sweorde, and stroke a servant of the hye priest, and
smote of his ear. Then said Jesus unto him: put up thy sweorde into the
sheath, for all they that take the sweord, shall perish with the sweord. Thynkest
thou that I cannot now pray to my father, and he shall give me, even now,
more then.xii. legions of Angels? But how then shall the scriptures be
fulfilled? For thus must it be. In that same hour said Jesus to the
multitude: Ye be come out as it were to a thief with sweordes and staves, for
to take me. I sat daily with you teaching in the temple. and ye took me not.
But all this is done that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.
Then all the disciples forsook him and fled. And they took Jesus and led him to
Cayphas the hye priest, where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. But
Peter followed him a far of unto the hye priests palace: and went in, and
sat with the servants to see the end. The chief priests and the elders and
all the counsel, sought false witness against Jesus (for to put him to death) but
found none: yea, when many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the
last came.ii. false witnesses, and said: This fellow said: I am able to
destroy the temple of God, and to build it again in.iii. days. And the
chief prist arose, and said unto him: answerest thou nothing? Why do these
bear witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace. And the chief priest
answered and said unto him. I charge thee by the living God, that thou tell
us, whether thou be Christ the son of God. Jesus said unto him: thou have
said. Nevertheless I say unto you: hereafter shall ye see the son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and cummyng in the clouds of the sky.
Then the hye priest re^t his clothes, saying: he has spoken blasphemy, what
need we of any more witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy: what
think ye? they answered and said: he is worthy to dye. Then did they spit in
his face, and buffeted him with fistes. And other smote him on the face with
the palm of their hands, saying: tell us thou Christ, who is he that smote
thee? Peter sat without in the palace, and a damsel came to him, saying:
thou also waste with Jesus of Galilee: but he denied before the^ al, saying: I
wot not what thou say. When he was gone out into the porche, another we^che
saw him, and said unto them that were there: This fellow was also with Jesus of
Nazareth. And again he denied with an oath, saying: I do not know the man.
And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said unto Peter: suerly
thou art even one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee. Then began he to
curse and to swear, that he knew not the man. And immediatlye the cock
krewe. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him: before the
cock krowe, thou shall deny me thrice: and he went out and wept bitterly. Mat
xxvii.
When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and the Elders of the
people held a counsel against Jesus, to put him to death, and brought him bound
and delivered him unto Poncius Pilate the deputy. Then Judas (which had
betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought
again the.xxx. plates of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying: I
have sinned, betraying the innocente blood. And they said: what is that to us?
See thou to that: And he cast down the silver plates in the temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the silver
plates, and said: It is not lawful for to put them into the treasure, because
it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them a
potters field to burye strangers in. Wherefore the field is called Haceldama,
that is, the field of blood, until this day. Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying: and they took.xxx. silver plates,
the price of him that was valued whom they bought of the children of Israel,
and gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me. Jesus stood
before the deputy, and the deputy asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the
Jews? Jesus said unto him: thou say: And when he was accused of the chief
priests and elders, he answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him: hear
thou not how many witnesses they lay against thee? And he answered him to
never a word: insomuche that the deputy marueiled greatly. At that feast, the
deputy was wont to deliver unto the people a prisoner, whom they would
desire. He had then a notable prisoner called Barrabas. Therefore, when they
were gathered together, Pilate said: whether will ye that I give loce unto you,
Barrabas, or Jesus which is called Christ? For he knew that for envy they had
delivered him. When he was set down to give judgment, his wife sent unto him,
saying: have thou nothing to do with that just man: For I have suffered many
things this day in my sleep, because of him. But the chief priests and
elders persuaded the people that they should ask Barrabas, and destroy
Jesus. The deputy answered and said unto them: whether of the twain will ye
that I let loce unto you? They said: Barrabas. Pylate said unto them: what
shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ? They all said unto him:
let him be crucified. The deputy said: what evil has he done? But they cried
the more, saying: let him be crucified. When Pylate saw that he could
prevail nothing, but that more business was made, he took water and washed his
hands before the people, saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just
person, ye shall see. Then answered all the people and said: his blood be on us
and on our children. Then let he Barrabas loce unto them, and scourged Jesus,
and delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the deputy took Jesus
into the common hall, and gathered unto him all the company: and they stripped
him, and put on him a purple robe, and platted a croune of thorns, and put it
upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed the knee before him,
and mocked him, saying: hayle king of the Jews: and when they had spit upon
him, they took the reed and smote him on the head. And after that they had
mocked him, they took the robe of him again, and put his own raiment on him,
and led him away to crucifye him. And as they came out, they found a man of
Cirene (named Simon) him they compelled to bear his cross. And they came unto
the place which is called Golgotha, (that is to say, a place of dead men's
sculs) and gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gal. And when he had tasted
thereof he would not drink. When they had crucified him, they parted his
garments, and did cast lottes: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the prophet: They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they
cast lottes. And they sat and watched him there, and set up over his head the
cause of his death written: This is Jesus the king of the Jews. Then were
there.ii. thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and an other on
the left. They that passed by, reuyled him, waggyng their heads, and saying:
thou that destroyedst the temple of God, and did build it in three days, save
thy self. If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross. Likewise
also the high Priests mocking him, with the Scrybes and elders, said: he
saved other, himself he cannot save. If he be the king of Israel let him now
come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in God, let him
deliver him now, if he will have him, for he said: I am the son of god. The
thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. From the
sixth hour was there darckenes over all the land, until the ninth hour. And
about ye ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying: Ely, Ely,
lamasabathany? that is to say: my god, my god, why have thou forsaken me? Some
of them that stood there, when they heard that, said: This man calls for
Helias. And straight way one of them ran and took a spounge, and when he had
filled it full of vinegar, he put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. Other
said: let be, let us see whether Helias will come and deliver him. Jesus, when
he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And behold, the
veil of the temple did rent into two parts, from the top to the botome, and
the earth did quake, and the stones rent, and graves did open, and many bodies
of saints, which slept, arose and went out of the graves after his
resurreccion, and came into the holy city and appeared unto many. When the
Centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the yearthquake,
and those things which happened, they feared greatly, saying: Truly, this was
the son of God. And many weomen were there (beholding him a far of) which
followed Jesus from Galilee, minystryng unto him: Among which was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedes
children.

Mondaye before Easter.
The Epistle.
Psalm. lxiii.
WHat is he this that comes from Edom, with red colored clothes of Bosra:
(which is so costly cloth) and cummeth in so myghtely with all his strength? I
am he that teaches righteousness, and am of power to help. Wherefore then is
thy clothyng red, and thy raiment like his that treads in the wine press? I
have trodden the press my self alone, and of all people there is not one with
me. Thus will I tread down mine enemies in my wrath, and set my feet upon
them in mine indignacion. And their blood shall bespryng my clothes, and so will
I stayne al my raiment. For the day of vengeance is assigned in my heart, and
the year when my people shall be delivered is come. I looked about me, and
there was no man to show me any help. I merueiled that no man held me up.
Then I held me by mine own arm, and my feruentnesse sustained me. And thus
will I tread down the people in my wrath, and bathe them in my displeasure,
and upon the earth will I lay their strength. I will declare the goodness of the
Lord, yea and the praise of the Lord for all that he has given us, for the
great good that he has done for Israel: which he has given them of his own
favor, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. For he said:
these no doubt are my people, and no shrynking children, and so he was their
savior. In their troubles, he was also troubled with them: and the Angel
that went forth from his presence, delivered them. Of very love and kyndenes
that he had unto them, he redeemed them. He has borne them and carried them up,
ever sense the world began: But after they provoked him to wrath and vexed his
holy mind, he was their enemy and fought against them himself. Yet remembered
Israel the old time of Moses and his people, saying: where is he that brought
them from the water of the sea, with them that fed his sheep? where is he that
has given his holy spirit among them? he led them by the ryghthand of Moses,
with his glorious arm: dividing the water before them (whereby he gate him
self an everlasting name) he led them in the deep, as an horse is led in the
plain, that they should not stomble, as a tame beast goes in the field: and
the breath given of God, gives him rest.

Thus (O God) have thou led thy people, to make thy self a glorious name
withal. Look down then from heaven, and behold the dwelling place of thy
sanctuary, and thy glory. How is it that thy gelousy, thy strength, the
multitude of thy mercies and thy loving kindness, will not be entreated of us?
yet art thou our father. For Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel
acquaynted with us: But thou Lord, art our father and redemer, and thy name is
everlasting. O Lord, wherefore have thou led us out of thy way? wherefore have
thou hardened our hearts, that we fear thee not? Be at one with us again for
thy servants sake, and for the generation of thine heritage. Thy people have
had but alitle of thy Sanctuary in possession, for our enemies have trodden
down the holy place. And we were thine from the beginning, when thou wast not
their Lord, for they have not called upon thy name.

The Gospel.
AFter two days was Easter, Mar. xiiii.
and the days of sweet bread. And the hye priests and the Scribes sought how
they might take him by craft, and put him to death. But they said: not in the
feast day, lest any business arise among the people. And when he was at Bethanie
in the house of Simon the leper, even as he sat at meat, there came a woman
having an Alabaster box of oyntmente, called Narde, that was pure and costlye:
and she brake the box and powered it on his head. And there were some that
were not content within themselves, and said: what neded this waste of
oyntmente? for it might have been sold for more then.ccc. pence, and have
been given unto the poor. And they grudged against her. And Jesus said: let
her alone, why trouble ye her? She has done a good work on me: for ye have
poor with you always, and whenever ye will, ye may do them good: but me
have ye not always. She has done that she could, she came before hand to
anointe my body to the burying. Verily I say unto you: whersoeuer this
Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she has
done, shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her. And Judas Iscaryoth, one of
the.xii. went away unto the hye Priests to betraye him unto them. When they
heard that, they were glad, and promised that they would give him money. And he
sought how he might conveniently betray him. And the first day of sweet bread
(when they offered Passover) his disciples said unto him: where will thou that
we go and prepare that thou may eat the passover? And he sent forth two
of his disciples, and said unto them: go ye unto the city, and there shall
mete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow him. And whithersoeuer he
goes in, say ye unto the goodmanne of the house, the master says: where is
the geast chamber, where I shall eat Passover with my disciples? And he will
show you a great parlor paued and prepared: there make ready for us. And his
dysciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto
them: and they made ready the Passover. And when it was now euentide, he came
with the xii. And as they sat at board and did eat, Jesus said: verily I say
unto you, one of you (that eats with me) shall betray me. And they began to
be sorry, and to say to him one by one: is it I? and an other said: is it I? he
answered and said unto them: it is one of the.xii. eue^ he that dippeth with
me in the platter. The son of man truly goes as it is written of him, but
woe to that man by whom the son of man is betrayed: Good were it for that
man, if he had never been borne. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and
when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave to them, and said: Take, eat,
this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he took it
to them, and they all drank of it. And he said unto the^: This is my blood of
the new testamente, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you: I will
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new
in the kingdom of God. And when they had said grace, they went out to
mount Olyuete. And Jesus says unto them: al ye shall be offended because of
me, this night. For it is written: I will smite the shepeheard and the sheep
shall be scatered: but after that I am risen again, I will go into Galile before
you. Peter said unto him: and though al men be offended, yet will not I. And
Jesus says unto him: verily, I say unto thee, that this day, even in this
night before ye cock krow twice, thou shall deny me three times. But he spoke
more vehemently: no, if I should die with thee, I will not deny thee. Likewise
also said they all. And they came into a place which was named Gethsemany, and
he said to his discyples: sit ye here while I go aside and pray. And he
takes with him Peter, and James, and John, and began to wax abashed and to be
man agony, and said unto them. My soul is heavy, even unto the death: tarry ye
here and watch. And he went forth a little and fell down flat on the ground,
and prayed, that if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. And he
said: Abba father, al things are possible unto thee, take away this cup from
me: nevertheless, not that I will, but that thou will be done. And he came
and found them sleping, and says to Peter: Simon, slepest thou? Could not
thou watch one hour? watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptacion: the
spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak. And again he went aside and
prayed, and spoke the same words. And he returned and found them aslepe
again, for their eyes were heavy, neither wiste they what to answer him.
And he came the third time and said unto them: sleep hencefurth and take your
ease, it is enough. The hour is come: behold, the son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners: Rise up, let us go: Lo, he that betrayeth me is at
hand. And immediately while he yet spoke, comes Judas (which was one of
the.xii.) and with him a great number of people with sweordes and staves, from
the hye Priests, and Scribes, and Elders. And he that betrayed him, had given
them a general token, saying: whosoever I do kiss, the same is he: take him,
and lead him away warely. And as soon as he was come, he goes strayghte way
to him, and says unto him: Master, Master, and kissed him: and they laid
their hands on him, and took him. And one of them that stood by drew out a
sweorde, and smote a servant of the hye Priest, and cut of his ear. And
Jesus answered, and said unto them: ye be come out as unto a thief with
sweordes and staves, for to take me: I was dayelye with you in the temple
teaching, and ye took me not: but these things come to pass that the
Scryptures should be fulfilled. And they all forsook him and ran away.
And there followed him a certain young manne clothed in linen upon the bare,
and the young men caught him, and he left his linen garment and fled from
them naked. And they led Jesus away to the highest Priest of all, and with him
came all the hye priests, and the Elders, and the Scribes. And Peter followed
him a great way of (even til he was come into the palace of the hye Priest)
and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire. And the hye
Priests and all the counsel sought for witness against Jesus, to put him to
death, and found none: for many bare false witness against him, but their
witnesses agreed not together. And there arose certain and brought false
witness against him, saying: we heard him say: I will destroy this temple
that is made with hands, and within.iii days I will build an other made
without hands. But yet their witnesses agreed not together. And the hye priest
stood up among them, and asked Jesus, saying: answereste thou nothing? How is
it that these bear witness against thee? But he held his peace, and
answered nothing. Again the hye priest asked him, and said unto him: art
thou Christ the son of the blessed? And Jesus said: I am. And ye shall see
the son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and cumming in the clouds
of heaven. Then the hye priest rent his clothes, and said: what need we any
further of witnesses? ye have heard blasphemy, what think ye? And they all
condemned him to be worthy of death. And some began to spytte at him, and to
cover his face, and to beat him with fistes, and to say unto him: Areade, and
the servants buffeted him on the face. And as Peter was beneth in the palace,
there came one of the we^ches of the hiest priest, and when she saw Peter
warming himself, she looked on him, and said: wast not thou also with Jesus of
Nazareth? And he denied, saying: I know him not, neither wot I what thou
sayeste. And he went out into the porche, and the cock krewe. And a damsel
(when she saw him) began again to say to them that stood by: this is one of
the^. And he denied it again. And anon after they that stood by, said again
unto Peter: suerlye thou art one of them, for thou art of Galyle, and thy
speech agrees thereto. But he began to curse and to swear, saying: I know
not this man of whom ye speak. And again the Cock krewe: and Peter
remembered the word that Jesus had said unto him: before the cock crow twice,
thou shall deny me three times. And he began to weep.

Tewesday before Easter.
The Epistle.
THe lord God has opened mine ear, therefore can I not say nay, neither
withdraw my self: Esai. l.
but I offer my back unto the smiters, and my chekes to the nippers. I turn
not my face from shame and spittyng, and the lord god shall help me: Therefore
shall I not be confounded. I have hardened my face like a flint stone, for I am
sure that I shall not come to confusion. He is at hand that justifies me, who
will then go to law with me? Let us stand one against another: if there be
any that will reason with me, let him come here forth unto me. Behold, the
Lord God stands by me, what is he then that can condemn me? lo, they shall
be all like as an old cloth, the moth shall eat them up. Therefore, whosoever
fears the Lord among you, let him hear the voice of his servant. Whosoever
walks in darckenes, and no light shines upon him, let him put his trust in
the name of the Lord, and hold him by his God: but take heed, ye al kindle a
fire of the wrath of God, and steare up the coals: walk on in the glystryng
of your own fire, and in the coals that ye have kyndled. This comes unto
you from my hand, namely that ye shall sleep in sorrow.

The Gospel.
ANd anon in the dawning, the hye priests held a counsel with the Elders and
the Scribes, Mat. xv.
and the whole congregation, and bound Jesus, and le^d him away, and delivered
him to Pilate. And Pylate asked him: art thou the king of the Jews? and he
answered and said unto him: thou say it. And the hye Priests accused him of
many things. So Pylate asked him again, saying: aunswereste thou nothing?
Behold how many things they lay unto thy charge. Jesus yet answered
nothing, so that Pylate merueiled. At that feast Pylate did deliver unto them a
priesoner, whomsoever they would desire. And there was one that was named
Barrabas, which lay bound with them that made insurreccion: he had committed
murder. And the people called unto him, and began to desire him, that he would
do according as he had ever done unto them. Pylate answered them, saying:
will ye that I let looce unto you the king of the Jews? For he knew that the
hye priests had delivered him of envy. But the hye priests moved the people,
that he should rather deliver Barrabas unto them. Pilate answered again, and
said unto them: what will ye that I then do unto him, whom ye call the king
of the Jews? And they cried again, crucifye him. Pilate said unto them: what
evil has he done? And they cried the more fervently, crucifye him. And so
Pylate wylling to content the people, let looce Barrabas unto them, and
delivered up Jesus (when he had scourged him) for to be crucified. And the
soldiers led him away into the common hall, and called together the whole
multitude, and they clothed him with purple, and they platted a croune of
thorns and crouned him withal, and began to salute him: Hayle king of the
Jews. And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and
bowed their knees and wurshypped him. And when they had mocked him, they took
the purple of him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucifye
him. And they compelled one that passed by called Simon of Cirene (the father
of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the field, to bear his cross. And
they brought him to a place named Golgotha (which, if a man interpret it, is
the place of dead men's sculles) and they gave him to drink, wine mingled
with mirrhe, but he received it not. And when they had crucified him, they
parted his garments, castyng lottes upon them what every man should take. And
it was about the third hour, and they crucified him. And the title of his
cause was written: The king of the Jews. And they crucyfyed with him two
thieves: the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And the
scripture was fulfilled, which says: he was counted among the wicked. And
they that went by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying: A wretch,
thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it again in three days: save thy
self and come down from the cross. Likewise also mocked him the hye priests
among them selves with the Scribes, and said: he saved other men, himself he
cannot save. Let Christ the king of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him, checked him also.
And when the sixth hour was come, darkness arose over all the earth, until the
ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying:
Eloy, Eloy, lamasabathany? which is (if one interpret it) my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when they heard that,
said: behold, he calls for Helias. And one ran and filled a sponge full
of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying: let him
alone, let us see whether Helias will come and take him down. But Jesus cried
with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. And the veil of the temple rent
in.ii. pieces, from the top to the bottom. And when the Centurion (which stood
before him) saw that he so cried, and gave up the ghost, he said: truly this
man was the son of God. There were also women a good way of, beholding him:
among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the little, and of
Ioses, and Mary Salome (which also when he was in Galile had followed him, and
ministered unto him) and many other women, which came up with him to Jerusalem.
And now when the even was come (because it was the day of preparyng that goes
before the Sabbath) Joseph of the city of Aramathia, a noble counsaylour,
which also looked for the kingdom of God, came and went in boldly unto
Pilate, and begged of him the body of Jesus. And Pilate merueiled that he was
already dead, and called unto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whether he
had been any while dead. And when he knew the truth of the Centurion, he gave
the body to Joseph. And he bought a linen clothe, and took him down, and
wrapped him in the linen clothe, and laid him in a sepulcher that was hewn
out of a rock, and rolled a stone before the door of the sepulcher. And Mary
Magdalene, and Mary Ioses beheld where he was laid.

Wednesday before Easter.
At the Communion.
The Epistle.
WHere as is a testament, there must also (of necessity) be the death of him
that makes the testament. Hebr. ix.
For the testament takes authority when men are dead: for it is yet of no
value, as long as he that makes the testament is a live, for which cause also,
neither the first testament was ordained without blood. For when Moses had
declared all the commau^demente to all the people, according to the law, he
took the blood of calves, and of Goats, with water and purple wolle, and
ysope, and sprinkled both the book and all the people, saying: this is the
blood of the testamente, which God has appointed unto you. Moreover he
sprinkled the tabernacle with blood also, and all the ministering vessels. And
almost al things are by the law, purged with blood, and without sheding of
blood is no remission. It is need then, that the similitudes of heavenly
things be purified with such things: but that the heavenly things
themselfes, be purified with better sacrifices then are those. For Christ is
not entered into the holy places that are made with hands (which are
similitudes of true things) but is entered into very heaven, for to appear
now in the sight of God for us: not to offer himself often, as the hye priest
enters into the holy place every year with strange blood: for then must he
have often suffered sense the world began. But now in the end the of the world
has he appeared once, to put sin to flight by the offering up of himself.
And as it is appointed unto all men that they shall once dye, and then comes
the judgment: even so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many,
and unto them that look for him, shall he appear again without sin, unto
salvation.

The Gospel.
Luc. xxii.
THe feast of sweet bread drew nigh, which is called Easter, and the hye
priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him, for they feared the
people. Then entered Satan into Judas whose surname was Iscarioth (which was
of the number of the.xij.) and he went his way and commoned with the hye
priests and officers, how he might betray him unto them. And they were glad,
and promised to give him money. And he consented, and sought opportunity to
betraye him unto them, when the people were away. Then came the day of sweet
bread, when of necessity passover must be offered. And he sent Peter and
John, saying: go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat. They said
unto him: where wylt thou that we prepare? And he said unto them: behold,
when ye enter into the city, there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher
of water, him follow into the same house that he enters in, and ye shall say
unto the good man of the house: the master says unto thee: where is the
geast chamber where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he shall
show you a great parlour paued: there make ready. And they went and found as
he had said unto them, and they made ready the passover. And when the hour
was come, he sat down, and the.xij. Apostles with him. And he said unto them:
I have inwardly desired to eat this passover with you, before that I suffer.

For I say unto you: henceforth I will not eat of it any more, until it be
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and
said: Take this, and divide it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink
of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God come. And he took bread,
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, saying: This is
my body, which is given for you: This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise
also when he had supped, he took the cup, saying: This cup is the new
testamente in my blood, which is shed for you. Yet behold, the hand of him
that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And truly the son of man goes
as it is appointed: but woe unto that manne, by whom he is betrayed. And they
began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do it. And
there was a striefe among them, which of them should seem to be greatest. And
he said unto them: the kings of nations reign over them, and they that have
authority upon them, are called gracious Lords: but ye shall not be so. But
he that is greatest among you, shall be as the younger, and he that is chief,
shall be as he that does minister. For whether is greater he that sits at
meat, or he that serves? Is not he that sits at meat? But I am among you,
as he that ministers, Ye are they which have bydden with me in my temptacions.
And I appointed unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to me, that ye
may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on seats, iudgeyng
the.xii. tribes of Israel. And the Lord said: Simon, Simon behold, Satan has
desired to sift you, as it were wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not. And when thou art converted, strength thy brethren. And he
said unto him: Lord I am ready to go with thee into prieson, and to death. And
he said: I tell thee Peter, the Cock shall not krowe this day, till thou have
thrice denied that thou know me. And he said unto them: when I sent you
without wallet, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, no.
Then said he unto them: but now he that has a wallet, let him take it up, and
likewise his scrip. And he that has no sweord, let him sell his coat and bye
one. For I say unto you, that yet the same which is written, must be performed
in me: even among the wicked was he reputed: For those things which are
written of me have an end. And they said: Lord, behold, here are.ii. swords:
and he said unto them: it is enough. And he came out, and went (as he was wont)
to Mount Oliuete. And the disciples followed him. And when he came to the place,
he said unto them: pray, lest ye fall into temptacion. And he gate himself
from them about a stones cast, and kneled down and prayed, saying: Father, if
thou will, remove this cup from me: Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be
fulfilled. And there appeared an Aungel unto him from heaven, coumfortyng him.
And he was in an agony and prayed the longer: and his sweat was like drops
of blood, tricklyng down to the ground. And when he arose from prayer, and was
come to his disciples, he found them slepyng for heaviness, and he said unto
them: why sleep ye? Rise and pray, lest ye fall into temptacion. While he yet
spoke, behold, there came a company, and he that was called Judas, one of
the.xii. went before the^, and preased nigh unto Jesus, to kiss him. But Jesus
said unto him: Judas, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? When they
which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him: Lord, shall
we smite with the sweorde? And one of them smote a servant of the hye priest,
and stroke of his right ear. Jesus answered and said: suffer ye thus far
forth. And when he touched his ear, he healed him. Then Jesus said unto the
hye priests, and rulers of the temple, and the elders, which were come to
him: Ye be come out as unto a thief, weth swords and staves. When I was daily
with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is
even your very hour, and the power of darkness. Then took they him and led
him, and brought him to the hye priests house. But Peter followed a far of.
And when they had kindled a fire in the mids of the palace, and were set
down together: Peter also sat down among them. But when one of the wenches
beheld him, as he sat by the fire (and looked upon him) she said: this same
fellow was also with him. And he denied him, saying: woman, I know him not. And
after a little while, another saw him, and said: thou art also of them. And
Peter said: man, I am not. And about the space of an hour after, an other
affirmed, saying: verily, this fellow was with him also, for he is of Galile.
And Peter said: man, I wot not what thou say. And immediately while he yet
spoke, the Cock krewe. And the Lord turned back and looked upon Peter. And
Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him: before the
Cock krowe, thou shall deny me thrice: and Peter went out and wept bitterly.
And the men that took Jesus mocked him, and smote him: and when they had
blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him, saying: Areade,
who is it that smote thee? And many other things despitefully said they
against him. And as soon as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the hye
priests and Scribes, came together, and led him into their counsel, saying:
Art thou very Christ? tell us. And he said unto them: if I tell you ye will
not believe me, and if I ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go:
hereafter shall the son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.
Then said they all: Art thou then the son of God? he said: Ye say that I
am. And they said: what need we of any further witness? for we our selves have
heard of his own mouth.

At Eue^song.
The first lesson. Lamenta.i. unto the end.

Thursday before Easter.
At Mattins.
The first Lesson. Lamenta.ii. unto the end.

The Epistle.
Cor. xi.
THis I warn you of, and commend not, that ye come not together after a better
manner, but after a worse. For first of all, when ye come together in the
congregation, I hear that there is discencion among you, and I partly believe
it. For there must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among you,
may be known. When ye come together therefore into one place, the Lords supper
cannot be eaten, for every man begins before to eat his own supper. And
one is hungry, and another is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat and drink
in? despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that have not? what
shall I say unto you? shall I praise you? In this I praise you not. That
which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus,
the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and said: Take ye and eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the same manner
also, he took the cup when supper was done, saying: this cup is the new
testament in my blood. This do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall
show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat of this
bread, or drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eats and drynketh
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnacion, because he makes no
difference of the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sick among
you, and many sleep. For if we had judged our selfs: we should not have been
judged. But when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should
not be damned with the world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to
eat, tarry one for an other: If any man hongre, let him eat at home, that ye
come not together unto condemnacion. Other things will I set in order when I
come.

The Gospel.
THe whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pylate. And they began to
accuse him, Luc. xxiii.
saying: we found this fellow peruertyng the people, and forbyddyng to pay
tribute to Caesar: saying that he is Christ a king. And Pilate apposed him,
saying: art thou the king of the Jews? he answered him and said: thou say
it. Then said Pilate to the hye priests and to the people: I find no faut in
this man. And they were the more fierce, saying: he moves the people, teaching
throughout all Jury, and began at Galile, even to this place. When Pilate heard
mention of Galile, he asked whether the man were of Galile. And as soon as he
knew that he belonged unto Herodes iurisdiccion, he sent him to Herod,
which was also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was
excedyng glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had
heard many things of him, and he trusted to have seen some miracle done by
him. Then he questioned with him many words. But he answered him nothing. The
hye priests and Scribes stood forth and accused him straightly. And Herod
with his men of war, despised him. And when he had mocked him, he arrayed him
in white clothing, and sent him again to Pylate. And the same day Pylate and
Herod were made friends together. For before they were at variaunce. And
Pylate called together the hye priests, and the rulers, and the people, and
said unto them: ye have brought this man unto me, as one that peruerteth the
people: and behold, I examine him before you, and find no fault in this man of
those things whereof ye accuse him, no nor yet Herod: For I sent you unto him,
and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him: I will therefore chasten him,
and let him looce. For of necessity he must have let one looce unto them at
that feast. And all the people cried atonce, saying: away with him, and
deliver us Barrabas: (which for acertayne insurreccion made in the city, and
for a murder, was cast in prison.) Pilate spoke again unto the^, willing to
let Jesus looce. But they cried, saying: crucifye him, crucifye him. He said
unto them the third time: what evil hat he done? I find no cause of death in
him: I will therefore chasten him, and let him go. And they cried with loud
voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the
hye priests prevailed. And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they
required, and he let looce unto them him that (for insurreccion and murder)
was cast into prison, whom they had desired: and he delivered to them Jesus, to
do with him what they would. And as they led him away, they caught one Simon
of Ciren coming out of the field: and on him laid they the cross, that he
might bear it after Jesus. And there followed him a great company of people,
and of women, which bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turned back unto
them, and said: ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me: but weep for your
selfs and for your children. For behold, the days will come, in the which
they shall say: Happy are the baren, and the woumbes that never bare, and the
pappes which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains,
fall on us: and to the hills, cover us. For if they do this in a grene tree,
what shall be done in the dry? And there were two evil doers led with him to
be slain. And after that they were come to the place (which is called
Caluarie) there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left. Then said Jesus: father forgive them, for they wot
not what they do. And they parted his raiment and cast lottes. And the people
stood and beheld. And the rulers mocked him with them, saying: he saved other
men, let him save himself if he be very Christ the chosen of God. The
soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vinegre, and said: if thou
be the king of the Jews, save thy self. And a superscripcion was written over
him, with letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew: This is the king of the
Jews. And one of the evil doers which were hanged, railed on him, saying: If
thou be Christ save thy self and us. But the other answered and rebuked him,
saying: fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same damnacion? we are
righteously punished, for we receive according to our deeds: but this man has
done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus: Lord, remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: verily I say unto thee: to
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And it was about the.vi. hour: and
there was darkness over all the earth, until the.ix. hour, and the Son was
darkened. And the veil of the temple did rent, even through the mids. And
when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said: Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. And when he thus had said, he gave up the ghost. When the
Centurion saw what had happened, he glorified God, saying: verily, this was a
righteous man. And all the people that came together to that sight, and saw
the things which had happened, smote their breasts and returned. And all his
acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galile, stood a far of,
beholdynge these things. And behold, there was a man named Joseph a
counsailor, and he was a good man and a just: the same had no consented to the
counsel and deed of them, which was of Aramathia, a city of the Jews,
which same also waited for the kingdom of God: he went unto Pylate and
begged the body of Jesus, and took it down, and wrapped it in a lynnen
clothe, and laid it in a sepulcher that was hewn in stone, wherein never man
before had been laid. And that day was the preparyng of the Sabbath, and the
Sabbath drue on. The women that followed after, which had come with him from
Galile, beheld the sepulcher, and how his body was laid. And they returned,
and prepared sweet Odours and oyntmentes: But rested on the Sabbath day,
according to the commandment.

At Euensong.
The first lesson. Lamenta.iii. unto the end

On good Friday.
At Mattyns.
The first lesson. Genesis xxii. Unto the end,

The Collect.
ALmyghtie God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy famely: for the
which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be betrayed, and given up into
the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross: who lives and
reigns. etc.

At the Communion.
Deus, deus meus. psalm. XXii.
MY God, my God (look upon me:) why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from
my health, and from the words of my complainte?

O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the night season
also I take no rest.

And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel.

Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee: and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and were
not confounded.

But as for me, I am a worm and no man: a very skorne of men, and the out
cast of the people.

All they that see me, laugh me to skorne: they shote out their lips, and
shake the head, saying.

He trusted in God that he would deliver him: let him deliver him if he will
have him.

But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou waste my hope
when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

I have been left unto thee ever sense I was borne: thou art my God, even from
my mothers woumbe.

O, go not from me, for trouble is here at hand: and there is none to help
me.

Many Oxen are come about me: fat Bulls of Basan close me in on every side.

They gape upon me with their mouths: as it were a rampyng and roaryng Lion.

I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of ioynte: my heart also
in the mids of my body, is even like melting wax.

My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my gummes:
and thou shall bring me into the dust of death.

For (many) dogs are come about me: and the counsel of the wicked lay siege
against me.

They pierced my hands and my fete: I may tell all my bones, they stand
staring and loking upon me.

They part my garments among them: and cast lottes upon my vesture.

But be not thou far from me, O Lord: thou art my succor, haste thee to
help me.

Deliver my soul from the sword: my derling from the power of the dog.

Save me from the Lions mouth: thou haste heard me also from among the horns
of the Unicorns.

I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the mids of the congregation will
I praise thee.

O praise the Lord, ye that fear him: magnify him all ye of the sede of
Jacob, and fear ye him all ye sede of Israel.

For he has not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poor: he has
not hid his face from him, but when he called unto him, he heard him.

My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him.

The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord shall
praise him, your heart shall live for ever.

All the ends of the world shall remember themselves and be turned unto the
Lord: and all the kynreds of the nations shall worship before him.

For the kingdom is the Lords: and he is the governor among the people.

All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten and worshipped.

All they that go down into the dust, shall kneel before him: and no man has
quickened his own soul.

My seed shall serve him: they shall be counted unto the Lord for a generation.

They shall come, and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: unto a people
that shall be borne, whom the Lord has made.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

After the.ii. Collectes at the Communion, shall be said these.ii. Collectes
following. The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, by whose spirit the whole body of the Church
is governed and sanctified: receive our supplicacions and prayers, which we
offer before thee for all estates of men in thy holy congregation, that every
membre of the same, in his vocacion and ministerye, may truly and godly serve
thee: through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Merciful God, who haste made al men, and hate nothing that thou haste made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live: have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from
the^ all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word: And so fetch
them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the
remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold, under one shepehearde,
Jesus Christ our Lord: who lyuethe and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
THe law (which has but a shadow of good things to come, Heb. x.
and not the very fashion of things themselves) can never with those
sacrifices, which they offer year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect. For would not then those sacrifices have ceased to have been
offered, because that the offerers once purged, should have had no more
conscience of sins? Nevertheless, in those sacrifices is there mention made
of sins every year. For the blood of Oxen and of Goats cannot take away
sins. Wherefore, when he comes into the world, he says: Sacrifice and
offering thou would not have, but a body have thou ordained me. Burnt
offeringes also for sin haste thou not allowed. Then said I: lo, I am here.
In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, O
God. Above, when he says, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt sacrifices, and
sin offeringes, thou would not have, neither haste thou allowed them
(which yet are offered by the law) then said he: lo, I am here to do thy
will, O God: he takes away the first to establishe the later, by the which
will, we are made holy, even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all. And every priest is ready daily ministering and offering often times
one manner of Oblacion, which can never take away sins. But this man, after he
has offered one sacrifice for sins, is set down for ever on the right
hand of God, and from henceforth tarieth till his foes be made his foot
stool. For with one offering has he made perfect for ever, them that are
sanctified. The holy ghost himself also bears us record, even when he told
before: This is the testament that I will make unto them: After those days
(says the Lord) I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds
will I write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And
where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin. Seeing
therefore brethren, that by the means of the blood of Jesus, we have liberty
to enter into the holy place, by the new and living way, which he has
prepared for us, through the veil (that is to say, by his flesh:) And seeing
also that we have an hye priest which is ruler over the house of God, let us
draw nigh with a true heart in a sure faith, sprinkeled in our hearts from an
evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water: Let us keep the
profession of our hope, without waueringe (for he is faithful that promised)
and let us considre one another, to the intent that we may provoke unto love,
and to good works, not forsakyng the felowshipe that we have among our selves,
as the manner of some is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much the
more, because ye see that the day draws nigh.

The Gospel.
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, he went furthe with his disciples over the
broke Cedron, John. xviii.
where was a garden, into the which he entered with his disciples. Judas also
which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus often times resorted thither with
his disciples. Judas then after he had received a bend of men (and ministers
of the hye priests and Phariseis) came thither with Lanterns, and fyerbra^des,
and weapons. And Jesus knowinge all things that should come on him, went
forth, and said unto them: whom seek ye? They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus says unto them. I am he. Judas also which betrayed him, stood with
the^. As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backewarde, and
fell to the ground. Then asked he them again. whom seek ye? They said: Jesus
of Nazareth. Jesus answered: I have told you that I am he. If ye seek me
therefore, let these go their way: that the saying might be fulfilled which
he spoke. Of the^ which thou gave me, have I not lost one. Then Simon Peter
having a sword, drew it, and smote the hye priests servant, and cut of his
right ear. The servants name was Malchus. Therefore says Jesus unto Peter,
put up thy sweord into the sheath: shall I not drink of the cup which my
father has given me? Then the company and the captain, and the ministers of
the Jews, took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to Anna first: for he
was father in law to Cayphas, which was the hye priest the same year. Cayphas
was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expediente that one man
should dye for the people. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did an other
disciple: that disciple was known to the hye priest, and went in with Jesus
into the palace of the hye priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then
went out that other disciple (which was known to the hye priest) and spoke
to the damsel that kept the door, and brought in Peter. Then said the
damsel that kept the door unto Peter: Art not thou also one of this man's
disciples? he said: I am not. The servants and ministers stood there, which
had made a fire of coals: for it was cold, and they warmed themselves. Peter
also stood among them and warmed himself. The hye priest then asked Jesus of
his disciples, and of his doctrine. Jesus answered him: I spoke openly in the
world: I ever taught in the Synagoge, and in the temple, whither all the Jews
have resorted, and in secret have I said nothing. Why ask thou me? Ask
the^ which heard me, what I said unto them. Behold, they ca^ tell what I
said. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers, which stood by, smote
Jesus on the face, saying: Aunswerest thou the hye priest so? Jesus answered
him: If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: But if I have well
spoken, why smitest thou me? And Annas sent him bound unto Cayphas the hye
priest. Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. Then said they unto him: Art not
thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said: I am not. One of the
servants of the hye priests (his cousin whose ear Peter smote of) said unto
him: did not I see thee in the garden with him? Peter therefore denied again:
and immediately the Cock crewe. Then led they Jesus from Cayphas into the
hall of judgment. It was in the morninge, and they themselfes went not into
the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat
the Passover. Pilate then went out to them, and said: what accusacion bring
you against this man? They answered and said unto him: If he were not an evil
doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. Then said Pylate unto them:
take ye him and judge him after your own law. The Jews therefore said unto
him: It is not lawful for us to put any manne to death: that the words of
Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what death he should dye.
Then Pylate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus answered: sayeste thou that of
thy self, or did other tell it thee of me? Pylate answered: am I a Jew? Thine
own nation, and hye priests have delivered thee unto me: what have thou done?
Jesus answered: my kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this
world, then would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered
to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. Pylate therefore said
unto him: Art thou a king then? Jesus answered: thou say that I am a king.
For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth. And all that are of the truethe, hear my
voice. Pylate said unto him: what thing is truethe? And when he had said this,
he went out again unto the Jews, and says unto them: I find in him no
cause at all. Ye have a custom that I should deliver you one loce at Easter:
will ye that I loce unto you the king of the Jews? The^ cried they al again,
saying: Not him, but Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a murderer. John. xix.
Then Pilate took Jesus therefore, and scourged him. And the soldiers wound a
croune of thorns, and put it on his head. And they did on him a purple
garmente, and came unto him and said: hayle king of the Jews: and they smote
him on the face. Pylate went forth again, and said unto them: behold, I
bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. The^
came Jesus forth, wearing a crou^e of thorn, and a robe of purple. And he
says unto them: behold the man. When the hye priests therefore and ministers
saw him, they cried, saying: crucify him, crucify him. Pylate says unto
them: take ye him and crucify him, for I find no cause in him. The Jews
au^swered him: we have a law, and by our law, he ought to die, because he
made himself the son of God. When Pilate heard that saying, he was the more
afraid, and went again into the judgment hall, and says unto Jesus: whence
art thou? But Jesus gave him none answer. The^ said Pilate unto him: Speakeste
thou not unto me? knoweste thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and
have power to looce thee? Jesus answered: Thou could have power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above: Therefore he that delivered
me unto thee, has the more sin: And from thencefurth sought Pilate means to
looce him: but the Jews cried, saying: if thou let him go, thou art not
Cesars friend: for whosoever makes himself a king, is against Caesar. When
Pilate heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down to give
sentence in a place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrew tongue
Gabbatha. It was the preparinge day of Easter, about the. vi. hour. And he
says unto the Jews: behold your king. They cried, saying: away with him,
away with him: crucyfy him. Pylate says unto them: shall I crucyfy your
king? The hye priests answered: we have no king but Caesar. Then delivered he
him unto the^ to be crucyfied. And they took Jesus and led him away. And he
bare his cross, and went furthe into a place which is called the place of
dead men's sculles: but in Hebrew golgotha: where they crucyfyed him, and two
other with him: on either side one, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate wrote a
title and put it on the cross. The writing was, Jesus of Nazareth king of the
Jews. This title read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was
crucified, was nie to the city. And it was written in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin. Then said the hye priests of the Jews to Pilate: write not king of the
Jews, but that he said: I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered: what I have
written, that have I written. The^ the soldiers, when they had crucified
Jesus, took his garments and made.iiii. parts, to every soldier a part, and
also his coat. The coat was without seem, wrought upon throughout. They said
therefore among themselves: let us not divide it, but cast lottes for it, who
shall have it. That the scripture might be fulfilled saying: They have parted
my raiment among them, and for my coat did they cast lottes. And the
soldiers did such things in deed. There stood by the cross of Jesus his
mother and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing, whom he
loved, he says unto his mother: woman, behode thy son. Then said he to the
disciple: behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her for his
own.

After these things, Jesus knowing that all things were now performed, that
the scripture might be fulfilled, he says: I thrist. So there stood a vessel
by full of vinegar: therefore they filled a sponge with vinegar, and wound it
about with Isope, and put it to his mouth. As Soon as Jesus then received of
the vinegar, he said: It is finished, and bowed his head and gave up the
ghost. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparing of the Sabbothe that
the bodies should not remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath day (for that
Sabbath day, was an hie day) besought Pilate, that their legs might be
broken, and that they might be taken down. The^ came the soldiers and brake
the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. But
when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his
legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear thrust him into the side, and
forth with came there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record,
and his record is true. And he knows that he says true, that ye might
believe also. For these things were done that the scripture should be
fulfilled: ye shall not break a bone of him.

And again an other scripture says: they shall look upon him, whom they have
pierced. After this, Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besoughte Pylate that he might take down the
body of Jesus. And Pylate gave him license: He came therefore and took the
body of Jesus. And there came also Nicodemus (which at the beginning came to
Jesus by night) and brought of myrre and Aloes mingled together, about an
hundredth pound weight. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in
linen clothes with the odours, as the manner of the Jews is to burye. And in
the place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new
Sepulcher, wherein was never man laid: There laid they Jesus therefore, because
of the preparynge of the Sabbothe of the Jews, for the Sepulcher was nigh at
hand.

At Euensong.
The first lesson. Esai. Liii. Unto the end.

Easter Even.
At Mattyns.
The first lesson. Lamenta. iiii. v. Unto the end,e

At the Communion.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: O let my
prayer enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling. Dimine deus
salutis. Psalm. lxxxviii.


For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draws nigh unto hell.

I am counted as one of them that go down unto the pytte: and I have been
even as a man that has no strength.

Free among the dead, like unto them that be wounded and lie in the grave,
which be out of remembrance: and are cut away from thy hand.

Thou haste laid me in the loweste pit, in a place of darcknes: and in the
deep.

Thine indignacion lies hard upon me: and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms.

Thou have put away mine acquayntaunce far from me: and made me to be abhorred
of them.

I am so fast in prison: that I cannot get forth.

My sight fails for very trouble: lord I have called daily upon thee, I have
stretched out my hands unto thee.

Doeste thou show wonders among the dead? or shall the dead rise up again and
praise thee?

Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave? or thy faythfulnesse in
destruction.

Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the
land where all things are forgotten.

Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and earlye shall my prayer come before thee.

Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul? and hidest thou thy face from me?

I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to dye: (even from my
youth up) thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: and the fear of thee, has undone me.

They came round about me dayelye like water: and compassed me together on
every side.

My lovers and friends have thou put away from me: and hid mine acquayntaunce
out of my sight.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Epistle.
IT is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing then for
evil doing. i. Pet. iii.
For as much as Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
to bring us to God: and was killed as partayning to the flesh, but was
quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went and preached to the
spirits that were in prison, which some time had been disobedient, when the
long suffering of God was once looked for in the days of Noe, while the arc
was a preparing: wherein a few, that is to say, eyghte souls were saved by
the water, like as Baptism also now saves us: not the putting away of the
fylthe of the flesh, but in that a good conscience confenteth to God by the
resurreccion of Jesus Christ, which is on the right hand of God: and is gone
into heaven: Angels, powers, and might, subdued unto him.

The Gospel.
WHen the eue^ was come, there came a rich man of Aramathia named Joseph, Mat.
xxvii
which also was Jesus disciple. He went unto Pilate and begged the body of
Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. And when Joseph had
taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen clothe, and laid it in his
new toumbe, which he had hewn out even in the rock, and rolled a great
stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed. And there was Mary
Magdalene, and the other Mary sytting over against the Sepulcher. The next
day that followed the day of preparing, the high priests and Phariseis came
together unto Pilate, saying: Sir, we remember that this deceyuer said while
he was yet alive: After iii. days I will rise again: Command therefore that
the Sepulcher be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come
and steal him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from the dead: and
the last error shall be worse then the first. Pylate said unto them: ye
have the watch, go your way, make it as sure as ye can. So they went and
made the Sepulcher sure with the watch men, and sealed the stone.

Easter day.
In the morning before mattyns, the people being assembled in the church: these
Anthems shall be first solemnly song, or, said.

CHrist rising again from the dead, now dies not. Death from hence forth
has no power upon him. For in that he dyed, he dyed but once to put away
sin: but in that he lives he lives unto God. And so likewise, count your
selves dead unto sin, but living unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Alleluya Alleluya.

Christ is risen again, the first fruytes of them that sleep: for seeing that
by man came death, by man also comes the resurreccion of the dead: For as by
Adam al men do dye, so by Christ all men shall be restored to life. Alleluya.

The Priest. Show forth to all nations the glory of God.


The Answer. And among all people his wonderful works.


Let us pray. O God, who for our rede^pcion did give thine only begotten
son to the death of the cross: and by his glorious resurreccion have
delivered us from the power of our enemy: Grant us so to dye daily from
sin, that we may evermore live with him in the joy of his resurreccion:
through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.


Proper psalms and lessons
At Mattins.
Psalm. ii. Psalm. lvii. Psalm. Cxi.


The first lesson. Exo. xii. Unto the end.

The second lesson. Roma. vi. Unto the end.

At the first Communion.
Conserua me domine. Psalm. xvi.
Preserve me, O God: for in thee have I put my trust.

O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord: thou art my God, my goods are
nothing unto thee.

All my delyght is upon the Saints that are in the earth: and upon such as
excel in virtue.

But they that run after an other God: shall have great trouble.

Their drink offeringes of blood will not I offer: neither make mention of
their names within my lyppes.

The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my Cup: thou
shall maintain my lotte.

The lotte is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage.

I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins also chasten me in
the night season.

I have set God always before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I
shall not fall.

Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory reioysed: my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For why? thou shall not leave my soul in hell: neither shall thou suffer thy
holy one to see corrupcion.

Thou shall show me the pathe of life: in thy presence is the fulness of joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore

Glory be to the father and to the son: and to. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which through thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, have
overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: we humbly
beseech thee, that as by thy special grace, preuentyng us, thou do put in
our minds good desires: so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to
good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord: who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
IF ye be rise^ again with Christ, Coloss. iii.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God. Set your affeccio^ on heavenly things and not on yearthy things. For ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Whenever Christ (which
is our life) shall show himself, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. Mortify therefore your earthy members, fornicacion, uncleanness,
unnatural lust, evil concupiscence and covetousness, which is wurshyppynge of
ydolles: for which things sake, the wrath of God uses to come on the
disobedient children, among whom ye walked sometime when ye lived in them.

The Gospel.
THe first day of the Sabbothes came Mary Magdalene earlye (when it was yet
darcke) unto the Sepulcher, John. xx.
and saw the stone taken away from the grave. The^ she ran and came to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple who^ Jesus loved and says unto the^: they
have taken away the lord out of the grave, and we cannot tell where they have
laid him. Peter therefore went forth and that other disciple and came unto the
Sepulcher. They ran both together, and the other disciple did out run
Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And when he had stowped down, he saw
the lynnen clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then came Simon Peter following
him, and went into the sepulcher and saw the lynnen clothes lie, and the
napkin that was about his head, not lying with the lynnen clothes, but
wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also that other disciple
which came first to the sepulcher, and he saw and believed. For as yet they
knew not the scripture that he should rise again from death. Then the
disciples went away again unto their own home.

At the second Communion.
Domnie quid multiplicati Psalm. iii.
Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise against
me.

Many one there be that say of my soul: there is no help for him in his God.

But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of
my head.

I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill.

I laid me down and slept: and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me.

I will not be afraid for ten thousa^des of the people: that have set themselves
against me round about.

Up Lord and help me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the
cheke bone, thou haste broken the teeth of the ungodly.

Salvation belongs unto the lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people.

Glory be to the father and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty father, which have given thy only son to dye for our sins; and
to rise again for our iustificacion: Grant us so to put away the leaven
of malice and wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of
living and truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. V.
KNow ye not that a little leaven sowreth the whole lompe of dowe? Pourge
therefore the old leaven, that ye may be new dowe, as ye are sweet bread.
For Christ our passover is offered up for us. Therefore let us keep holy day,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness:
but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth.

The Gospel.
WHen the Sabbath was paste, Mar. xvi.
Mary Magdalene, and Mary Iacoby, and Salome, bought sweet odoures, that they
might come, and anoint him. And early in the morning, the first day of the
Sabbath, they came unto the Sepulcher when the son was risen. And they said
among themselves: who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the
Sepulcher? And when they looked, they saw how that the stone was rolled away,
for it was a very great one. And they went into the Sepulcher, and saw a
young man sytting on the right side, clothed in a long white garmente, and
they were afraid. And he said unto them: be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth which was crucified. He is risen he is not here: Behold the place
where they had put him. But go your way and tell his disciples, and Peter,
that he goes before you into Galile, there shall you see him, as he said unto
you. And they went out quickly and fled from the Sepulcher, for they
trembled, and were amassed, neither said they any thing to any man, for they
were afraid.

At Euensong.
Proper psalms and lessons.

Psalm. cxiii. The.ii. lesson. Act. ii. Unto the end. Psalm. cxiiii. The.ii.
lesson. Act. ii. Unto the end. Psalm. cxviii. The.ii. lesson. Act. ii. Unto
the end.


Monedaye in Easter weke.

At Mattyns.
The second lesson. Mat. xxviii. Unto the end.

At the Communion.
MY soul truly wayteth still upon God: for of him comes my salvation. None
deo subiecta. psalm. lxii.


He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not greatly fall.

How long will ye imagine mischefe against every man? ye shall be slain all the
sort of you, yea, as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

Their device is only how to put him out whom God will exalte: their delight
is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their
heart.

Nevertheless, my soul, wait thou still upon God: for my hope is in him.

He truly is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not fall.

In God is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God is my
trust.

O put your trust in him always, ye people: power out your hearts before him,
for God is our hope.

As for the children of men, they are but vain, the children of men are
deceiptful: upon the weyghtes, they are altogether lyghter then vaynitie it
self.

O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them.

God spoke once and twice: I have also heard the same, that power belongs
unto God.

And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to
his work.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
ALmyghtye God, which through thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, haste
overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: we humbly
beseech thee, that as by thy special grace, preuentyng us, thou do put in
our minds good desires: so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to
good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord: who lives and reygneth. etc.

The Epistle.
PEter opened his mouth, and said: Acts. x.
of a truth I perceive that there is no respect of persons with God, but in
all people, he that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted with him.
Ye know the preaching that God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord over all things: which preaching was
published throughout all Iewry (and began in Galilee, after the baptism which
John preached) how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost, and
with power. Which went about doing good, and healynge all that were oppressed
of the devil, for god was with him. And we are witnesses of all things which
he did in the land of the Jews, and at Jerusalem: whom they slew and hanged
on tree. Him God reised up the third day and showed him openly, not to all the
people, but unto us witnesses (chosen before of God for the same intent) which
did eat and drink with him after he arose from death. And he commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he which was ordained of
God to be the judge of the quick and dead. To him give all the prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins.

The Gospel.
Behold, two of the disciples went that same day to a town called Emaus,
Luc. xxiiii.
which was from Jerusalem about.lx. furlonges: and they talked together of all
the things that had happened. And it chanced that while they co^moned
together and reasoned: Jesus himself drue nere and went with the^. But their
eyes were holde^ that they should not know him. And he said unto them: what
manner of communicacions are these that ye have one to another as ye walk, and
are sad? And the one of them (whose name was Cleophas) answered, and said unto
him: art thou only a stranger in Ierusalen, and haste not known the things
which have chanced there in these days? he said unto them: what things? And
they said unto him: of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet, mighty in
deed and word before God and all the people: and how the hie priests, and our
rulers, delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we
trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel. And as
touching all these things, to day is even the third day that they were done.
Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which came
early unto the Sepulcher and found not his body, and came saying, that they
had seen a vision of Angels, which said that he was alive. And certain of
them which were with us, went to the Sepulcher, and found it even so as the
women had said: but him they saw not. And he said unto them: O fools and
slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ
to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at
Moses and all the prophets, and interpreted unto them in all Scriptures which
were written of him. And they drue nigh unto the town, which they went unto.
And he made as though he would have gone further. And they constrained him,
saying: abide with us, for it draws toward night, and the day is far
passed. And he went in to tarry with them. And it came to pass as he sat at
meat with them, he took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave unto them.
And their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their
sight. And they said between themselves: did not our hearts burn within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the Scriptures? And they
rose up the same hour and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered
together, and them that were with them, saying: the Lord is risen in deed, and
has appeared to Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and
how they knew him in breaking of the bread.

At Euensong.
The second lesson. Act. iii. Unto the end.

Tewesdaye in Easter weke
At Mattyns.
The.ii. lesson. Luke.xxiiii. Unto. and behold.ii. of them.

At the Communion.
Praise the Lord (ye servants: Landate pueri. psalm. cxiii.
) O praise the name of the Lord.

Blessed is the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

The Lords name is praised: from the rising up of the son, unto the going
down of the same.

The lord is hye above all heathen: and his glory above the heavens.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so hie: and yet
humbles himself, to behold the things that are in heaven and earth.

He takes up the simple out of the dust: and lifts the poor out of the
mier.

That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people.

He makes the baren woman to keep house: and to be a joyful mother of
children.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
ALmighty father, which haste given thy only son to dye for our sins, and
to rise again for our iustificacion: Grant us so to put away the leven of
malice and wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and
truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
YE men and brethren, Acts. xiii.
Children of the generation of Abraham and whosoever among you fears God: to
you is this word of salvation sent. For the inhabiters of Jerusalem, and their
rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets, which
are read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled the^ i^ co^de^ning him. And
when they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate to kill him.
And when they had fulfilled all that were written of him, they took him down
from the tree, and put him in a Sepulcher. But God raised him again from death
the third day, and he was seen many days of them which went with him from
Galile to Jerusalem: which are his witnesses unto the people. And we declare
unto you, how that the promise (which was made unto the fathers) GOD has
fulfilled unto their children (even unto us) in that he raised up Jesus again:
Even as it is written in the second Psalm: Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee. As concerning that he raised him up from death, now no more to
return to corrupcion, he said on this wise: The holy promises made to David,
will I give faythfullye to you. Wherefore he says also in an other place: Thou
shall not suffer thine holy to see corrupcion. For David (after that he had in
his time fulfilled the will of GOD) fell on sleep, and was laid unto his
fathers, and saw corrupcio^. But he whom God raised again, saw no
corrupcion. Be it known unto you therefore (ye men and brethren) that
through this man, is preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins, and that by
him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses. Beware therefore, lest that fall on you, which
is spoken of in the Prophets: behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish ye:
for I do a work in your days, which ye shall not believe, though a man
declare it you.

The Gospel.
Luc. xxiiii.
Jesus stood in the mids of his disciples, and said unto them: peace be unto
you: It is I fear not. But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed that
they had seen a spirit. And he said unto the^: why are ye troubled, and why
do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is
even I my self. Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands, and his
fete. And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them: Have ye here any meat? And they offered him a peace of a broyled fish,
and of an Honye comb. And he took it and did eat before them. And he said
unto them: these are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with
you: That all must needs be fulfilled, which were written of me in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. Then opened he their wits,
that they might understand the scriptures, and said unto them: Thus it is
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from death
the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins, should be
preached in his name among all nations, and must begin at Jerusalem. And ye
are witnesses of these things.

At Euensong.
The second lesson.i. Cor. xv. Unto the end.

The first Sunday after Easter.
BLessed is the man that fears the Lord: he has great delyghte in his
commandments. Beatus Vir. Psalm. cxii.


His seed shall be mighty upon yearthe: the generation of the faythefull shall be
blessed. Riches and plenteousnes shall be in his house: and his righteousness
endures for ever.

Unto the Godly there arises up light in the darkness: he is merciful, loving
and righteous.

A good man is merciful and lends: and will guide his words with discrecion.

For he shall never be moved: and the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance.

He will not be afraid for any evil tidings: for his heart stands fast,
and believes in the Lord.

His heart is stablyshed and will not shrynke: until he see his desire upon
his enemies.

He has sparsed abroad and given to the poor: and his righteousness remains
for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

The ungodly shall se it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnashe with his
teeth and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall perish.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty father. etc. As at the second Communion on Easter day.

The Epistle.
i. John. v.
ALl that is borne of GOD, overcomes the world. And this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the world,
but he which believes that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he
that came by water and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood. And
it is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truethe. For
there are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three are one. And there are three which bear record
in earth, the spirit, and, water, and blood, and these three are one. If we
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the
witness of God that is greater, which he testified of his son. He that
believes on the son of God, has the witness in himself. He that believes not
God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of
his son. And this is the record, how that God has given unto us eternal
life, and this life is in his son. He that has the son, has life: and he
that has not the son of God, has not life.

The Gospel.
John. xx.
IHesame day at night, which was the first day of the Sabbothes, when the
doors were shut (where the disciples were assembled together, for fear of the
Jews) came Jesus and stood in the mids, and said unto them: Peace be unto
you. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side.

Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to
them again. Peace be unto you. As my father sent me, even so send I you also.
And when he had said those words, he breathed on them, and said unto them:
receive ye the holy ghost. Whosoeuers sins ye remytte, they are remytted unto
them. And whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

The second Sunday after Easter.
HAste thee, O God, to deliver me: Deus in adiutorium. psalm. lxx.
Make haste to help me, O Lord.

Let them be ashamed and confounded, that seek after my soul: let them be
turned backward and put to confusion, that wish me evil.

Let them (for their reward) be soon brought to shame: that cry over me,
there, there.

But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let al
such as delight in thy salvation, say always, the Lord be praised.

As for me I am poor and in misery: Haste thee unto me (O God.)

Thou art my help and my redemer: O Lord make no long tarying.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which haste given thy holy son to be unto us, both a
sacrifice for sin, and also an example of Godly life: Give us the grace that
we may always most thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit, and also
daily endeavor our selfs, to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life.

The Epistle.
THis is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, i.
Peter. il.
and suffer wrong undeserved. For what praise is it if when ye be buffeted for
your fautes, ye take it patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong
and take it patiently, then is there thank with God. For hereunto verily were
ye called: For Christ also suffered for us, leauyng us an ensample, that ye
should follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was there guyle found
in his mouth: which, when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered,
he threatened not: but committed the vengeance to him that judges righteously,
which his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live unto righteousness. By whose stripes ye were
healed. For ye were as sheep going a stray. But are now turned unto the
shepherd, and bishop of your souls.

The Gospel.
John. x.
Christ said to his disciples: I am the good shepherd, a good shepherd
gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the
shepherd (neither the sheep are his own) sees the wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep and flies, and the wolf catches, and skattreth the sheep. The
hired servant flies, because he is an hired servant, and cares not for the
sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As
my Father knows me, even so know I also my Father. And I give my life for
the sheep: and other sheep I have, which are not of this fold. Them also must
I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.

The.iii. Sunday.
Comfitebimus psalm. lxxv.
Unto thee (O God) do we give thanks: yea, unto thee do we give thanks.

Thy name also is so nigh: and that do thy wondrous works declare.

When I receive the congregation: I shall judge according unto right.

The earth is weak, and all the inhabitours thereof: I bear up the pillars of
it.

I said unto the fools, deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, set not up
your horn.

Set not up your horn on hye: and speak not with a stiff neck.

For promocion comes neither from the East, nor from the West: nor yet from
the Southe.

And why? GOD is the judge: he puts down one and sets up an other.

For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
mixte, and he pours out of the same.

As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them,
and suck them out.

But I will talk of the God of Jacob: and praise him for ever.

All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which show to all men that be in error, the light of thy
truth, to the intent that they may return into the way of righteousness:
Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion,
that they may exchewe those things that be contrary to their profession, and
follow all such things as be agreeable to the same: through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Epistle.
DErely beloved, i. Peter. ii.
I beseech you as straungiers and pilgriemes, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which fight against the soul: and see that ye have honest conversation among
the Gentiles, that where as they backbite you as evil doers, they may see
your good works, and praise God in the day of visitacion. Submyt your selfs
therefore, unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the king as unto the chief head: either unto rulers, as unto them that
are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, but for the laud of them
that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may stop the
mouths of foolish and ignoraunte men: as free, and not as having the liberty
for a cloak of maliciousnes, but even as the servants of God. Honor all
men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor the King.

The Gospel.
John. xvi.
Jesus said to his disciples: After a while ye shall not see me, and again,
after a while ye shall see me: for I go to the father. Then said some of his
disciples between themselfes: what is this that he says unto us, after a
while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me, and that I
go to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he says, after a
while? We cannot tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him,
and said unto them: ye inquire of this between your selfs, because I said,
after a while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament: but contrary wise,
the world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy.
A woman when she trauayleth, has sorrow, because her hour is come. But as soon
as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguishe, for joy
that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I
will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.

The.iiii. Sunday.
Deus stetit in Sinagoga. psalm. lxxxiii.
GOD stands in the congregation of princes: He is judge among Gods.

How long will ye give wrong judgment: and accept the persons of the ungodly?

Defend the poor and fatherless: see that such as be in need and
necessity have right.

Deliver the outcast and poor: Save them from the hand of the ungodly.

They will not be learned nor understand, but walk on still in darkness:
all the foundacions of the earth be out of course.

I have said, ye are Gods: and ye all are children of the the most highest.

But ye shall dye like men: and fall like one of the princes.

Arise, O God, and judge thou the earth: For thou shall take all the Heathen to
thine inheritance.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of
one will: grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing, which thou
commaundest, and desire that which thou do promise, that among the sundery
and manifold chaunges of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed,
where as true joys are to be found: Through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
EVery good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, James. ^.
with whom is no variablenes, neither is he changed unto darkness. Of his own
will begat he us, with the word of truth, that we should be the first
fruits of his creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For the wrath of man works not that
which is righteous before God. Wherefore lay aparte all filthiness, and
superfluity of maliciousnes, and receive with mekenes the word that is graffed
in you, which is able to save your souls.

The Gospel.
Jesus said unto his disciples: John. xvl.
now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me whither I
go. But because I have said such things unto you, your hearts are full of
sorrow. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is expedient for you, that I go
away. For if I go not away, that comforter will not come unto you. But if I
depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will rebuke the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they
believe not on me: Of righteousness, because I go to my father, and ye shall see
me no more: Of Judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged already. I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them away now,
howbeit when he is come (which is the spirit of truth) he will lead you into
all truth. He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify
me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you. All things that
the father has, are mine: therefore said I unto you, that he shall take of
mine, and show unto you.

The.v. Sunday.
O How amiable are thy dwellynges: Thou Lord of Hosts? Qua^ dilecta
tabernacula. psalm. lxxxiiii.


My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: My
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

Yea, the Sparowe has found her an house, and the Swalow a nest where she may
lay her young: Even thy altares, O Lord of Hosts, my king and my God.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be always praising thee.

Blessed is that manne whose strength is in thee: In whose heart are thy ways.

Which going through the vale of misery, use it for a well: and the pooles are
filled with water.

They will go from strength to strength: and unto the God of Gods appears
every one of them in Sion.

O Lord God of Hosts, hear my prayer: Hearken O God of Jacob.

Behold, O God, our defender: and look upon the face of thine anointed.

For one day in thy courts: is better then a thousand.

I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God: then to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness.

For the Lord God is a light and defense: the Lord will give grace and
worship, and no good thing shall he withholde from them that live a godly life.

O Lord God of Hosts: blessed is the manne that puts his trust in thee.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
Lord, from whom all good things do come: grant us thy humble servants,
that by thy holy inspiracion, we may think those things that be good, and by
thy merciful guyding may perform the same: through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
SE that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceyuing your own
selfs. For if any man hear the word, and declares not the same by his
works, he is like unto a man beholding his bodily face in a glass. For as soon
as he has looked on himself, he goes his way, and forgets immediately
what his fashion was. But whosoever looks in the perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work)
the same shall be happy in his deed. If any man among you seem to be devout, and
refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's devotion
is in vain. Pure devotion, and undefiled before God the father, is this: to
viset the fatherles and widows, in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

The Gospel.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: John. xvi.
whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may
be full. These things have I spoken unto you by proverbs. The time will come,
when I shall no more speak unto you by proverbs: but I shall show you
plainly from my father. At that day shall ye ask in my name. And I say not
unto you that I will speak unto my father for you: For the father himself
loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from
God. I went out from the father, and came into the world. Again, I leave the
world, and go to the father.

His disciples said unto him: Lo, now talkest thou plainly, and speak no
Proverb. Now are we sure that thou know all things, and nedest not that
any manne should ask thee any question: therefore believe we, that thou came
from God. Jesus answered them: now ye do believe. Behold, the hour draws
nigh, and is already come, that ye shall be scattered every manne to his own, and
shall leave me alone. And yet am I not alone: for the father is with me. These
words have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, for in the
world shall ye have tribulacion: but be of good chere, I have overcome the
world.

The Ascencion day.
Proper Psalms and Lessons.
At Mattyns.
Psalm. viii. The second Lesson. John.xiiii. unto the end. Psalm. xv. The
second Lesson. John.xiiii. unto the end. Psalm. xxi. The second Lesson.
John.xiiii. unto the end.


At the Communion.
Omnes geutes plaudite. psalm. xlvii.
O Clap your hands together (all ye people:) O sing unto God with the voice of
melody.

For the Lord is hye and to be feared: He is the great king upon all the earth.

He shall subdue the people under us: And the nations under our fete.

He shall chose out an heritage for us: even the worship of Jacob whom he loved.

God is gone up with a merry noise: And the Lord with the sound of the trompe.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our king.

For God is the king of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.

God reigns over the heathen: God sits upon his holy seat.

The princes of the people are joined to the people of the God of Abraham: for
God (which is very hye exalted) does defend the earth, as it were with a
shylde.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Grant we beseech thee almighty God, that like as we do believe thy only
begotten son our Lord to have ascended into the heavens: so we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell.

The Epistle.
IN the former treatise (dear Theophilus) we have spoken of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, Acts. ^.
until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy ghost,
had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he had chosen: to whom also
he showed himself alive after his passion (and that by many tokens) appearyng
unto them.xl. days, and speaking of the kingdom of God, and gathered them
together, and commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem: but
to wait for the promise of the father, whereof (says he) ye have heard of me.
For John truly baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized with the holy ghost,
after these few days. When they therefore were come together, they asked of
him, saying: lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?
And he said unto the^: it is not for you to know the times or the seasons,
which the father has put in his own power. But ye shall receive power after
that the holy ghost is come upon you. And ye shall be witnesses unto me, not
only in Jerusalem, but also in all Iewry, and in Samaria, and even unto the
worlds end. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up on hye, and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And while
they looked steadfastly up toward heaven as he went, behold, two men stood by
them in white apparel, which also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye
gasing up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.

The Gospel.
Mar. xvi.
Jesus appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat: and cast in their teth
their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen that he was risen again from the dead: and he said unto them: go ye into
all the world, and preach the gospel to all creatures: he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. But he that believes not, shall be damned. And these
tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall cast out devils,
they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpents. And if
they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them. They shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then when the Lord had spoken
unto the^: he was received into heaven, and is on the right hand of God. And
they went forth, and preached every where: The Lord working with them, and
confirming the word with miracles following.

Proper Psalms and lessons at Euensong.
Psalm. xxiiii. The second lesson Ephe. iiii. unto the end. Psalm. lxviii.
The second lesson Ephe. iiii. unto the end. Psalm. cxlviii. The second
lesson Ephe. iiii. unto the end.


The Sunday after the Ascencion.
Dominus reg^^auit. psalm. xciii.
THe Lord is king, and has put on glorious apparel: the Lord has put on his
apparel, and girded himself with strength.

He has made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved.

Ever sense the world began, has thy seat been prepared: thou art from
everlasting.

The fluddes are risen, O Lord, the fluddes have lift up their noise: the
fluddes lift up their waves.

The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier.

Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: holiness becomes thine house for
ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
O God, the king of glory, which haste exalted thine only son Jesus Christ,
with great triumph unto thy kingdom in heaven: we beseech thee leave us not
comfortles, but send to us thine holy ghost to comfort us, and exalte us unto
the same place, whither our savior Christ is gone before: who lives and
reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
THe end of all things is at hand: i. Peter. iiii.
be ye therefore sobre, and watch unto prayer. But above all things have
fervent love among your selves: for love shall cover the multitude of sins.
Be ye herberous one to another without grudgeing. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good ministers of the
manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God.
If any manne minister, let him do it as of the ability which God ministers
unto him: that God in all things may be gloryfied through Jesus Christ: to
whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel.
WHen the comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the father (even
the spirit of truth, John, xv.
which proceeds of the father) he shall testifye of me. And ye shall bear
witness also, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

These things have I said unto you, John.xvi.
because ye should not be offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea the time
shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.
And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
father, neither yet me. But these things have I told you, that when the time
is come, ye may remember then that I told you. These things said I not unto
you at the beginning, because I was present with you.

Whitsonday.
Proper psalms and lessons at Mattyns.
Psalm. xlviii. The second lesson Act. x. Then Peter opened his mouth: unto
the end. Psalm. lxvii. The second lesson Act. x. Then Peter opened his mouth:
unto the end. Psalm. cxlv. The second lesson Act. x. Then Peter opened his
mouth: unto the end.


At the Communion.
Exultate ^^^^ti in domino. psalm. xxxiii.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes well the just to be
thankful.

Praise the Lord, with harp: sing psalms unto him with the lute and
instrument of ten stringes.

Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustely (unto him) with a good
courage.

For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithful.

He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord.

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them,
by the breath of his mouth.

He gathers the waters of the sea together, as it were upon a heap: and
lays up the deep as it were in a treasure house.

Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in
the world.

For he spoke and it was done: he commanded and it stood fast.

The Lord brings the counsayll of the heathen to naught: and makes the
devises of the people to be of none effect (and casts out the counsayles of
princes.)

The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his
heart from generation to generation.

Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the
folk that have chosen him to be their inheritance.

The Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from
the habitacion of his dwelling, he considers all them that dwell in the earth.

He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and understands all their works.

There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is
any myghtie man delivered by much strength.

A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver
any man by his great strength.

Behold, the iye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy.

To deliver their souls from death: and to feade them in the time of derth.

Our soul has patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our
shield.

For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy name.

Let thy merciful kyndenes, O Lord, be upon us: like as we have put our trust
in thee.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
GOd, which as upon this day haste taught the hearts of thy faithful people,
by the sending to them the light of thy holy spirit: Grant us by the same
spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in
his holy coumforte, through the merits of Christ Jesus our savior: who
lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the same spirit one God, world
without end.

The Epistle.
WHen the fifty days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. Act. ii.
And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the coming of a
mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared
unto the^ cloven tongues, like as they had been of fire, and it sat upon each
one of them: and they were al filled with the holy ghost, and began to speak
with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave them vtteraunce. There were
dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation of them that are
under heaven. When this was noised about, the multitude came together and were
astonished, because that every man heard the^ speak with his own language. They
wondered all and merueiled, saying among themselfes: behold, are not all these,
which speak, of Galile? And how hear we every man his own tongue, wherein we
were borne? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the inhabiters of
Mesopotamia, and of Iewry, and of Capadocia, of Pontus and Asia, Phrigia and
Pamphilia, of Egipte and of the parties of Libia, which is beside Siren, and
strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Greeks and Arrabians, we have heard
them speak in our own tongues the great works of God.

The Gospel.
John. xiiii.
Jesus said unto his disciples: If ye love me, keep my commandments, and I
will pray the father, and he shall give you an other comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever: even the spirit of truth, whom the world can not
receive, because the world sees him not, neither knows him. But ye know
him: for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you
comfortles: but will come to you. Yet a little while and the world sees me no
more: but ye see me. For I live, and ye shall live. That day shall ye know
that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you. He that has my
commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves me. And he that
loves me, shall be loved of my father: and I will love him, and will show mine
own self unto him.

Proper Psalms and Lessons at Euensong.
Psalm. Ciiii. The.ii. Lesson. Acts.xix. It fortuned when Apollo went to
Corinthum. unto After these things. Psalm. Cxlv. The.ii. Lesson. Acts.xix. It
fortuned when Apollo went to Corinthum. unto After these things.


Monday in Whitson weke.
O Be joyful in the Lord (all ye lands: Iubilate ^e^ psalm. ^.
) serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we
our selfs, we are his people and the sheep of his pasture.

O Go your way into his gates with thankesgeuyng, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
God which. etc. (As upon Whitsondaye).

The Epistle.
THen Peter opened his mouth and said: Act. ^.
of a truth I perceive that there is no respect of persons with God, but in
all people, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him. Ye know the preaching that God sent unto the children of Israel,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord over all things: which
preaching was published throughout all Iewry (and began in Galile after the
baptism which John preached) how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
holy ghost, and with power. Which Jesus went about, doing good, and healyng
all that were oppressed of the devil. For God was with him. And we are
witnesses of all things which he did in the land of the Jews and at
Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on tree: Him God raised up the third
day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses
(chosen before of God for the same entente) which did eat and drink with him,
after he arose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and
to testify that it is he, which was ordained of God to be the judge of quick
and dead. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. While Peter yet
spoke these words, the holy ghost fell on all them which heard the preaching.
And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as came with
Peter, because that on the gentiles also, was shed out the gift of the holy
ghost. For they heard them speak with tongues and magnifye God. Then answered
Peter: can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized which have
received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry a few days.

The Gospel.
John. iii.
SO God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. He that believes on him is not condemned. But he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
name of the only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnacion: that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, because
their deeds were evil. For every one that evil does, hates the light,
neither cummeth to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that
does truth, cummeth to the light, that his deeds may be known, how that
they are wrought in God.

Tuesday.
At the communion.
MY song shall be of mercy and judgment: Misericordiam. psalm. ci
unto thee (O Lord) will I sing.

O let me have understanding: in the way of Godlynes.

When will thou come unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I will take no wicked thing in hand: I hate the sins of unfaithfulness,
there shall no such cleave unto me.

A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

Whosoever prieuely slaundreth his neighbor: him will I destroy.

Whosoever has also a proud look, and an hie stomach: I will not suffer him.

Mine iyes look unto such as be faithful in the land: that they may dwell
with me.

Whosoever leads a godly life: he shall be my servant.

There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house: he that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight.

I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root
out all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
God which. etc. As upon whitsonday.

The Epistle.
WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say, Act. Viii.
that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John.
Which, when they were come down, prayed for the^, that they might receive the
holy ghost. For as yet he was come on none of them: but they were baptized only
in the name of Christ Jesus. The^ laid they their hands on them, and they
received the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
John.x.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: he that enters not in by the door into the
shepefold, but climeth up some other way, the same is a thief, and a murderer.
But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep: To him the
porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. And when he has sent furthe his own sheep, he
goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. A
stranger will they not follow, but will fly from him: for they know not the
voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus unto them, but they understood
not what things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto
them again: verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All
(eue^ as many as came before me) are thieves and murderers, but the sheep did
not hear them. I am the door, by me if any enter in, he shall be safe, and shall
go in and out, and find pasture. A thief cummeth not but for to steal, kill,
and destroy. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it
more aboundauntly.

Trinity Sunday.
At Matyns.
The first lesson. Gene. xviii. unto the end.

The seonde lesson. Math. iii. unto the end.

At the communion.
Deus misere atur. psalm. lxvii.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise the, O God: yea let all the people praise thee.

O let nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk righteously,
and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessyng.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting god, which haste given unto us thy servants grace
by the confession of a true faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
trinity, and in the power of the divine majesty to wurship the unity: we
beseech thee that through the stedfastnes of this faith, we may evermore be
defended from all adversity: which live and reignest one God, world with
out end.

The Epistle.
AFter this I looked, and behold, Apoca. iiii.
a door was open in heaven, and the first voice which I heard, was as it were
of a tro^pet, talking with me, which said: come up hither, and I will show
thee things which must be fulfilled hereafter. And immediately I was in the
spirit: And behold, a seat was set in heaven, and one sat on the seat.
And he that sat, was to look upon, like unto a Jasper stone, and a Sardyne
stone. And there was a rain bow about the seat, in sight like unto an
Emeraulde. And about the seat, were.xxiiii. seats. And upon the
seats.xxiiii. Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and had on their
heads crowns of gold. And out of the seat proceeded lyghtnynges, and
thunderynges, and voices, and there were vii. lamps of fire, burning before
the seat, which are the.vii. spirits of God. And before the seat there was
a sea of glass like unto Crystal, and in the mids of the seat, and round
about the seat, were.iiii. beasts full of iyes, before and behind. And the
first beast was like a Lion: and the second beast like a calfe: and the third
beast had a face as a man: and the fourth beast was like a flying Egle. And
the.iiii. beasts had each one of them six wings about him, and they were full
of iyes within. And they had no rest day neither night, saying: Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. And when those
beasts gave glory and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the seat
(which lives for ever and ever) the.xxiiii. elders fell down before him that
sat on the throne, and worshypped him that lives for ever, and cast their
crounes before the throne, saying: thou art worthy, O Lord (our God) to receive
glory, and honor, and power, for thou haste created all things, and for thy
wills sake they are, and were created.

The Gospel.
THere was a man of the Phariseis named Nicodemus, John. iii.
a ruler of the Jews. The Same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him:
Rabby, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man could do
such miracles as thou do, except God were with him. Jesus answered, and
said unto him: Verily, verily, I say unto thee: except a man be borne from
above, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus said unto him: how can a
man be borne when he is old? can he enter into his mothers womb and be borne
again? Jesus answered: verily, verily, I say unto thee: except a man be borne
of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit, Maruayle not thou that I said to thee, ye must be borne
from above. The wind blows where it lusts, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes and whither it goes: So is every
one that is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered, and said unto him: how
can these things be? Jesus answered, and said unto him: art thou a master in
Israel, and know not these things. Verily, verily I say unto thee: we
speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen: and ye receive not our
witness. If I have told you yearthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man ascends up to heaven,
but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in
heaven. And as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, perish not, but have
everlasting life.

The first Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
BLessed are those that be undefiled in the way: Beati immas culati. Psalm. cxix.
and walk in the law of the Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies: and seek him with their whole
heart.

For they which do no wickedness: walk in his ways.

Thou haste charged, that we shall diligently keep thy commandments: O that
my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes.

So shall I not be confounded: while I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart: when I shall have learned the
judgments of thy ryghteousnes.

I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
GOd the strength of all them that trust in thee, mercyfully accept our
prayers: And because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing
without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy
commandments, we may please thee both in will and deed: through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Dearly beloved, let us love one another: i. John. iiii.
for love comes of God. And every one that loves is borne of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God: for God is love. In this
appeared the love of God to us ward, because that God sent his only begotten
son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the agreement for
our sins. Dearly beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another. No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells
in us and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him and
he in us: because he has given us of his spirit. And we have seen, and do
testify, that the father sent the son to be the savior of the world:
whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and
he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God has to us. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herein is
the love perfect in us, that we should have trust in the day of judgment. For
as he is, even so are we in this world. There is no fear in love, but perfect
love casts out fear: for fear has painefulnes. He that fears, is not
perfect in love. We love him, for he loved us first. If a man say: I love God,
and yet hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can he that loves not his
brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? And this
commandment have we of him: that he which loves God, should love his
brother also.

The Gospel.
Luc. xvi.
THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine white,
and fared deliciously every day: And there was a certain beggar, named
Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desiring to be refreshed with
the crummes which fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto him.
The dogs came also and licked his sores. And it fortuned, that the beggar
dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also
dyed and was buried. And being in hell in torments, he lift up his iyes and
saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said:
father Abraham, have mercy on me: and send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe
of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.
But Abraham said: Son, remember that thou in thy life time, receiuedst thy
pleasure: and contraryewise, Lazarus received pain: But now is he comforted
and thou art punnished. Beyond all this, between us and you there is a great
space set, so that they which would go from hence to you cannot: neither may
come from thence to us Then he said: I pray thee therefore father, send him to
my fathers house (for I have five brethren) for to warn them, lest they also
come into this place of torment. Abraham said unto him: they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. And he said: nay father Abraham, but if one
come unto them from the dead, they will repent. He said unto him: If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe, though one rose from
death again.

The second Sunday.
WHerwithal shall a young man cleanse his way? In quo corri git. Psalm. cxix.
even by ruling himself after thy word.

With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

Thy words have I hyd within my heart: that I should not sin against thee.

Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

With my lips have I been tellyng: of all the judgments of thy mouth.

I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner of
riches.

I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect unto thy ways.

My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy word.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name: for thou
never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in thy
steadfast love: Grant this. etc.

The epistle.
John.iii.
Marvel not my brethren, though the world hate you. We know that we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves
not his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother is a mansiear.
And ye know that no manslear has eternal life abydyng in him. Hereby
perceive we love, because he gave his life for us: and we ought to give our
lives for the brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him: how dwells the
love of God in him? My babes let us not love in word, neither in tongue: but in
deed and in verity. Hereby we know that we are of the verity, and can
quiet our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater
then our heart, and knows al things. Derely beloved, if our heart condemn
us not, then have we trust to Godwarde: and whatsoever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things which are
pleasant in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we believe on the
name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave commandment.
And he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and
hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given
us.

The Gospel.
Luc. xiiii.
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and bade many, and sent his servant at
supper time, to say to them that were bidden, come: for all things are now
ready. And they al at once began to make excuse. The first said unto him: I
have bought a farm, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused. And another said: I have bought v. yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove
them, I pray thee have me excused. And an other said: I have married a wife, and
therefore I cannot come. And the servant returned and brought his master
word again thereof. Then was the good manne of the house displeased, and
said to his servant: go out quickly into the streets and quarters of the
city, and bring in hither the poor, and the feeble, and the halte, and the
blind. And the servant said: Lord it is done as thou have commanded, and
yet there is room. And the Lord said to the servant: go out unto the hye
ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. For
I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my
supper.

The third Sunday.
O Do well unto thy servant: Retribue seruo tuo. psalm. cxix.
that I may live and keep thy word.

Open thou mine eyes: that I may se the wunderous things of thy law.

I am a stranger upon yearthe: O hyde not thy commandments from me.

My soul breaks out for the very fervent desire: that it has always unto thy
judgments.

Thou have rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments.

O turn from me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies.

Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant is occupied in
thy statutes.

For thy testimonies are my delight: and my counsaylours.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Lord, we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and unto whom thou have given
an hearty desire to pray: grant that by thy mighty aid we may be defended:
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Peter. V.
SVbmit your selves every man one to an other, knit your selves together in
lowliness of mind. For God resysteth the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Submit your selves therefore under the myghtie hand of god, that he may
exalt you when the time is come. Cast al your care upon him: for he cares for
you. Be sober, and watch: for your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the
faith, knowing that the same afflyccions are appointed unto your brethren,
that are in the world. But the God of all grace which has called us unto his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have
suffered a little affliccion) make you perfect, settle, strength, and stablyshe
you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

The Gospel.
Luc. xv.
THen resorted unto him, all the Publicanes and sinners for to hear him. And
the Phariseis and Scribes murmured, saying. He receives sinners, and eats
with the^. But he put forth this parable unto them, saying: What man among you
having an hundredth sheep (if he lose one of them) does not leave nintie and
nine in the wilderness, and goes after that which is lost, until he find it?
And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy. And as soon
as he cu^meth home he calls together his lovers and neighbors, saying unto
the^: Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep, which was lost. I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more
then over nintye and nine just persons, which need no repentance. Either what
woman having ten grotes (if she lose one) does not light a candle, and swepe
the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she has found it,
she calls her lovers and her neighbors together, saying: Rejoice with me,
for I have found the grote which I had lost. Likewise, I say unto you, shall
there be joy in the presence of the Angels of god, over one sinner that
repents.

The fourth sunday.

At the Communion.
MY soul cleaves to the dust: O quicke^ thou me according to thy word.
Adhesit paui mento anima psalm. cxix.


I have knowledged my ways, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes.

Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

My soul melts away for very heaviness: comfort thou me according unto thy
word.

Take from me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before me.

I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not.

I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou have set my heart at
liberty.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
GOd, the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy: increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou
being our ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we
finally loose not the things eternal: Grant this heavenly father, for Jesus
Christ's sake our Lord.

The Epistle.
I Suppose that the affliccio^s of this life, Roma. Viii.
are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed upon us. For the fervent
desire of the creature abides, loking when the sons of god shall appear,
because the creature is subdued to vanity against the will thereof, but for his
will which has subdued the same in hope. For the same creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corrupcion, into the glorious liberty of the
sons of GOD. For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and
trauayleth in pain, even unto this time: not only it, but we also which have
the first fruits of the spirit, mourn in our selves also, and wait for the
adopcion (of the children of GOD) even the deliverance of our bodies.

The Gospel.
Luc. vi.
BE ye merciful as your father also is merciful. Judge not and ye shall not be
judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive and ye shall be
forgeuen. Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure and pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosoms. For
with the same measure that ye mete withal, shall other men mete to you again.
And he put forth a similitude unto them. Can the blind lead the blind? do
they not both fall into the diche? The disciple is not above his master: Every
man shall be perfect, even as his Master is. Why see thou a mote in thy
brothers eye, but co^siderest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Either
how can thou say to thy brother? Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in
thine eye, when thou seeste not the beam that is in thine own eye. Thou
ypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then shall thou
see perfectly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.

The.v. Sunday.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the
end. Legem pone psalm. cxix.


Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall keep it with my
whole heart.

Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein is my desire.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.

O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy
way.

O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may fear thee.

Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgments are good.

Behold, my delight is in thy commandments: O quicken me in thy righteousness.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Grant Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance: that thy congregation may joyfully serve
thee in all godly quietness: through Jesus Christ our lord.

The Epistle.
BE you all of one mind, and of one heart, i. peter. iii.
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous (meke) not rendering evil for
evil, or rebuke for rebuke: but contrariewise bless, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, even that ye should be heirs of the blessyng. For he that
does long after life, and loves to see good days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him eschew evil and
do good: let him seek peace and ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. Again, the face of
the lord is over them that do evil. Moreover, who is it that will harm you,
if ye follow that which is good? yea, happy are ye if any trouble happen unto
you for ryghteousnes sake. Be not ye afraid for any terror of them, neither
be ye troubled, but sanctifye the Lord God in your hearts.

The Gospel.
IT came to pass that (when the people preased upon him, Luc. V.
to hear the word of God) he stood by the lake of Genazareth, and saw two
ships stand by the lakes side, but the fishermen were gone out of them, and
were washing their nets. And he entered into one of the ships (which
perteined to Simon) and prayed him, that he would thrust out a little from the
land. And he sat down and taught the people out of the ship. When he had left
speaking, he said unto Simon: launche out into the deep, and let slip your
nets to make a draught. And Simon answered, and said unto him: Master, we
have labored al night, and have taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy
commandment, I will looce forth the net. And when they had this done, they
enclosed a great multitude of fishes. But their net brake, and they beckened
to their fellows (which were in the other ship) that they should come and
help them. And they came and filled both the ships, that they sonke again.
When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying: Lord, go
from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was astonished and all that were with him,
at the draught of fishes which they had taken: and so was also James and John
the sons of Zebede, which were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said unto
Simon: fear not, from hencefoorthe thou shalt catch men. And they brought
the ships to land, and forsook all and followed him.

The.vi. Sunday.
Et Veniat super me. psalm. ^xix.
LEt thy loving mercy come also unto me, O lord: even thy salvation, according
unto thy word.

So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.

O take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in thy
judgments.

So shall I always keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever.

And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.

I will speak of thy testimonies also, even before kings: and will not be
ashamed.

And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved.

My hands also will I lift up, unto thy commandments which I have loved:
and my study shall be in thy statutes.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
GOd, which have prepared to them that love thee, such good things as pass
al man's understanding: Power into our hearts such love toward thee, that we
loui^g thee in all things, may obtain thy promises, which excede all that we
can desire: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Know ye not, Roma. Vi.
that all we which are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with
him? We are buried then with him by baptism for to dye: that likewise as
Christ was raised from death, by the glory of the father, even so we also
should walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like unto him: even
so shall we be partakers of the resurreccion: Knowing this, that our old
manne is crucified with him also, that the body of sin, might utterly be
destroyed, that he^cefurth we should not be servants unto sin. For he that
is dead, is justified from sin. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him, knowing that Christ being raised from
death, dies no more. Death has no more power over him. For as touching
that he died, he died concerning sin once. And as touching that he lives, he
lives unto god: Likewise consider ye also, that ye are dead, as touching
sin, but are alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel.
Jesus said unto his disciples: Mat. V.
except your ryghteousnes excede the righteousness of the Scribes and
Phariseis, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye have heard that it
was said unto them of the old time. Thou shalt not kill: whosoever kylleth,
shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you: that whosoever is angrye
with his brother (vnaduysedlye) shall be in danger o^ judgment. And
whosoever say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of a counsel. But
whosoever says, thou fool shall be in danger of hell fire. Therefore, if thou
offerest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee, leave there thine offryng before the alter, and go thy
way first, and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
him, lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into prieson. Verily I say
unto thee: thou shall not come out thence, til thou have paid the uttermost
farthing.

The.vii. Sunday.
O Think upon thy servant, as concerning thy word: Memor esto psalm. cxix.
wherein thou have caused me to put my trust.

The same is my coumfort in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me.

The proud have had me excedingly in der^ion: yet have I not shrynked from thy
law.

For I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O lord: and received coumfort.

I am horribly afraid: for the ungodly, that forsake thy law.

Thy statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage.

I have thought upon thy name, O Lord, in the night season: and have kept thy
law.

This I had: because I kept thy commandments.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Lord of al power and might, which art the author and geuer of al good
things: graffe in our hearts the love of thy name, increase in us true
religion, nouryshe us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy, keep us in
the same: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
I Speak grossly, Roma. vi.
because of the infirmitye of your flesh. As ye have given your members
servants to uncleanness, and to iniquitye (from one inquitye to an other:)
even so now give over your members servants unto ryghteousenes, that ye may
be sanctified. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were void of
righteousness. What fruit had you the^ in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things is death. But now are ye delivered from
sin, and made the servants of God, and have your fruit to be sanctified,
and the end everlasting life. For the reward of sin is death: but eternal
life is the gift of God: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel.
IN those days, Mat. viii.
when there was a very great company, and had nothing to eat: Jesus called
his Disciples unto him, and said unto them: I have compassion on the people,
because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat: And
if I send them away fasting to their own howses, they shall faint by the
way: for diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him:
where should a man have bread here in the wilderness, to satysfye these? And
he asked them, how many loaves have ye? They said, seven. And he commanded
the people to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves: And when
he had given thanks, he brake and gave to his disciples, to set before them.
And they did set the^ before the people. And they had a few small fishes. And
when he had blessed, he commanded them also to be set before them. And they
did eat, and were suffysed. And they took up of the broken meat that was
left, seven baskettes full. And they that did eat, were about four thousand.
And he sent them away.

The eight Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
At the Communion.
Porcio mea domine. psalm. cxix.
THou art my porcyon, O Lord: I have promised to keep thy law.

I made mine humble peticion in thy presence with my whole heart: O be
merciful unto me, according unto thy word.

I call mine own ways to remembrance: and turn my feet into thy testimonies.

I made haste: and prolonged not the time to keep thy commandments.

The congregacions of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
law.

At midnight will I rise, to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

I am a companyon of all them that fear thee: and keep thy commandments.

The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
GOd, whose providence is never deceived, we humbly beseech thee, that thou will put away from us all hurtful things, and give those things which be
profitable for us: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Roma. viii.
BRethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if ye
live after ye flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye through the spirit do mortifye
the deeds of the body, ye shall live For as many as are led by the spirit of
god, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of adopcion, whereby
we cry: Abba father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the
sons of God. If we be sons, then are we also heirs, the heirs I mean of
god, and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together with him.

The Gospel.
BEware of false Prophets, Math. vii.
which come to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Ye shall know the^ by their fruits. Do men gather Grapes of thorns? Or Figs
of Thystles? Even so every good tree brings forth good fruits: But a
corrupt tree, brings forth evil fruits. A good tree can not bring forth
bad fruits: neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruits. Every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.
Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that says unto
me, Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

The.ix. Sunday.
O Lord, Bonitatem. psalm. cxix.
thou have dealt graciously with thy servant, according unto thy word.

O learn me true understanding, and knoweledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.

Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now I have kept thy word.

Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes.

The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy commandments
with my whole heart.

Their heart is as fat as braune: but my delight has been in thy law.

It is good for me that I have been in trouble: That I may learn thy statutes.

The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
Grant to us lord, we beseech thee, the spirit to think, and do always
such things as be ryghtfull: that we, which cannot be without thee, may by
thee be hable to live according to thy will: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. x.
BRethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were
all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were al baptized
under Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spiritual
meat, and did all drink of one spiritual drink. And they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them, which Rock was Christ. But in many of
them had God no delight. For they were overthrown in the wilderness. These
are ensaumples to us, that we should not lust after evil things, as they
lusted. And that ye should not be worshippers of images, as were some of them,
according as it is written: The people sat down to eat, and drink, and rose
up to play. Neither let us be defiled with fornycacion, as some of them were
defiled with fornicacion, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents. Neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer. All these things happened unto them for ensaumples: But are
written to put us in remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come upon.
Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. There
has none other temptacion taken you, but such as follows the nature of man.
But God is faithful, which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength: but shall in the mids of the temptacion make a way, that ye may be
hable to bear it.

The Gospel.
Luc. xvi.
Jesus said unto his disciples: There was a certain rich manne, which had a
Steward, and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods.
And he called him, and said unto him: how is it that I hear this of thee?
Give accomptes of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. The
Steward said within himself: what shall I do? For my master takes away
from me the Stewardship. I can not dig, and to beg I am ashamed. I wot
what to do, that when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may receive me into
their houses.

So when he had called all his Masters debtors together, he said unto the
first: how much owe thost unto my Master? And he said: an hundred tons of
oil. And he said unto him: take thy Bill, and sit down quickly, and write
fifty. Then said he to an other: how much owe thou? And he said: an
hundred quarters of wheat. He said unto him: take thy bil and write four
skore. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done
wisely. For the children of this world are in their nation wiser then the
children of light. And I say unto you: Make you friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into everlasting
habitacions.

The.x. Sunday.
THy hands have made me and fashioned me: Manus t(...) psalm cxix.
O give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.

They that fear thee will be glad, when they see me: because that I have put
my trust in thy word.

I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou of very
faithfulness, have caused me to be troubled.

O let thy merciful kindness be my coumfort: According to thy word unto thy
servant.

O let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delighte.

Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedly about to destroy me: But
I will be occupied in thy commandments.

Let such as fear thee, and have known thy testimonies: be turned unto me.

O let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
LEt thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble
servants: and that they may obtain their peticions, make them to ask such
things as shall please thee: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. xii.
COncerning spiritual things (brethren) I would not have you ignoraunte. Ye
know that ye were Gentiles, and went your ways unto dumme images, even as ye
were led. Wherefore I declare unto you, that no man, speaking by the spirit of
God, defyeth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit. And there are
differences of administracyons, and yet but one lord. And there are diverse
manners of operacions, and yet but one God, which woorketh all in all. The
gift of the spirit is given to every man, to edifye with all. For to one is
given through the spirit, the vtteraunce of wisdom: To an other is given the
vtterau^ce of knowledge, by the same spirit. To another is given faith, by the
same spirit. To an other the gift of healyng, by the same spirit. To
another, power to do miracles. To another prophecy. To another judgment to
dyscerne spirits. To another diverse tongues. To another the interpretacyon of
tongues: But these all woorketh even the self same spirit, dividing to every
man a several gift, even as he will.

The Gospel.
Luc. xix.
ANd when he was come nere to Jerusalem, he beheld the city, and wept on it,
saying: If thou had known those things, which belong unto thy peace, even
in this thy day thou would take heed. But now are they hyd from thine eyes.
For the days shall come upon thee, that thy enemies also shall cast a bank
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
make thee even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. And they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon an other, because thou knoweste not the
time of thy visytacion. And he went into the Temple, and began to cast out
them that sold therein, and them that bought, saying unto them: It is written,
my house is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves. And he
taught daily in the Temple.

The.xi. Sunday.
MY soul has longed for thy salvation: Defecit. psalm. cxix.
and I have a good hope, because of thy word.

Mine eyes long soore for thy word, saying: O when will thou coumfort me?

For I am become like a botle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes.

How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou be avenged of them
that persecute me?

The proud have dygged pyttes for me: which are not after thy law.

All thy commandments are true. They persecute me falsely, O be thou my
help.

They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy
commandments.

O quicken me after thy loving kyndenes: and so shall I keep the testimonies of
thy mouth.

Glory be to the father and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
GOd which declarest thy almighty power, most chieflye in showing mercy and
pity: Give unto us abu^dauntly thy grace, that we runnyng to thy promises, may
be made partakers of thy heavenly treasure: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
BRethren, as perteining to the gospel, i Cor. xv
which I preached unto you, which ye have also accepted, and in the which ye
continue, by yt which also ye are saved: I do you to wete after what manner I
preached unto you, if ye keep it, except ye have believed in vain. For first of
all I delivered unto you that which I received, how that Christ dyed for our
sins, agreeyng to the scriptures: and that he was buried, and that he arose
again the third day, according to the scriptures: And that he was seen of
Cephas, then of the.xii. After that was he seen of mo then five hundredth
brethren at once, of which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen a
sleep. After that appeared he to James, then to all the Apostles. And last of al
he was seen of me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the least
of the apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I have
persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I am.
And his grace which is in me: was not in vain. But I labored more
aboundauntly then they al: yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me.
Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preached and so ye have believed.

The Gospel.
Luc. xviii.
CHrist told this parable unto certain which trusted in them selves that they
were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up into the temple to pray, the
one a Pharise and the other a Publican. The Pharise stood and prayed thus with
himself. God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extorcioners,
unjust, adulterers, or as this Publican. I fast twice in the weke: I give
tithe of all that I possess. And the Publican standing a far of, would not
lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying: God, be
merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this manne departed home to his house
justified more then the other. For every man that exalts himself shall be
brought low: And he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The.xii. Sunday.
In eternum Domine. psalm. cXiX.
O Lord, thy word endures for ever in heaven.

Thy truth also remains from one generacio^ to another: thou haste laid the
foundacyon of the earth, and it abides.

They continue this day, according to thine ordinance: for all things serve
thee.

If my delight had not been in thy law: I should have perished in my trouble.

I will never forget thy commandments: for with them thou have quickened me.

I am thine, Oh save me: For I have sought thy commandments.

The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

I see that al things come to an end: but thy commandments are exceeding
broad.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, which art always more ready to hear then we
to pray: And art wont to give more then either we desire or deserve: Power
down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgeuing us those things whereof
our conscience is afraid, and giving unto us that that our prayer dare not
presume to ask: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
SVche trust have we through Christ to God ward, ii. Cor. iii.
not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our
selves, but if we be hable unto any thing, the same cummeth of god, which has
made us hable to minister the new testament, not of the letter but of the
spirit: For the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. If the
ministracion of death, through the letters figured in stones, was glorious, so
that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses, for the glory
of his countenance (which glory is done away:) why shall not the ministracion
of the spirit be much more glorious? for if the ministracyon of condemnacyon
be glorious, much more dooethe the ministracion of righteousness excede in
glory.

The Gospel.
Mar. vii
Jesus departed from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the sea of
Galile through the mids of the Coasts of the.x. cities. And they brought
unto him one that was deaffe, and had an impedimente in his speech, and they
prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside from the
people, he put his fingers into his ears: and did spyt, and touched his
tongue, and looked up to heaven and sighed, and said unto him: Ephata, that is
to say, be opened. And straight way his ears were opened, and the string of
his tongue was looced, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them that they
should tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deal
they publyshed, saying: He has done all things well, he has made both the
deaffe to hear, and the dumme to speak.

The.xiii. Sunday.
Quomodo dilexi. psalm. cxix.
Lord, what love have I unto thy law? all the day long is my study in it.

Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.

I have more understanding then my teachers: for thy testimonies are my study.

I am wiser then the aged: because I kept thy commandments.

I have refrayned my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

I have not shrinked from thy judgments: for thou teach me.

O how sweet are thy words unto my throat? yea sweter then honey unto my
mouth.

Through thy commandments I get understanding: therefore I hate al wicked
ways.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmyghtye and merciful God, of whose only gift it cummeth, that thy
faithful people do unto thee true and laudable service: grant we beseech
thee, that we may so run to thy heavenly promises, that we fail not finallye
to attain the same: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
TO Abraham and his sede were the promises made. Gala. iii.
He says not in the seeds, as many: but in thy seed, as of one, which is
Christ. This I say, that the law which began afterward, beyond iiii. C.
and.xxx. years, does not disanul the testament that was confirmed before of God
unto Christewarde, to make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance
come of the law, it cummeth not now of promise. But god gave it to Abraham by
promise. Wherefore then serves the law? The law was added because of
transgression (til the seed came, to whom the promise was made) and it was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a mediator. A mediator is not a mediator of
one: But God is one. Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbid.
For if there had been a law given which could have given life: then no
doubt righteousness should have come by the law. But the scripture concludes
all things under sin, that the promise, by the faith of Jesus Christ,
should be given unto them that believe.

The Gospel.
HAppy are the eyes which se the things that ye se. For I tell you, Luc x.
that many prophets and kings have desired to se those things which ye se,
and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them. And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying:
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? he said unto him: what is
written in the law? how read thou? and he answered, and said: Love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul; and with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said
unto him: Thou have answered right. This do and thou shall live: but he
willing to iustifye himself, said unto Jesus: And who is my neighbor: Jesus
answered and said.

A certain man descended from Jerusalem to Hierico, and fell among thieves,
which robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. And it chanced that there came down a certain Priest that same
way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And likewise a Leuite, when he went
nigh to the place, came and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain
Samaritane as he ioueneied, came unto him: and when he saw him, he had
compassion on him, and went to, and bound up his wounds, and powered in oil
and wine, and set him on his own beast and brought him to a common inn, and
made provision for him. And on the morrow, when he departed, he took out two
pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him: Take cure of him, and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will recompense thee. Which
now of these three, think thou was neighbor unto him that fell among the
thieves? and he said: he that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him:
go, and do thou likewise.

The.xiiii. Sunday.
Lucerna pedibus meis. psalm. cxix.
THy word is a Lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths.

I have sworn, and am stedfastlye purposed: to keep thy righteous judgments.

I am troubled above measure: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word.

Let the free will offerynges of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me
thy judgments.

My soul is always in my hand: yet do not I forget thy law.

The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet swarued not I from thy
commandments.

Thy testimonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are
the very joy of my heart.

I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always: even unto the end.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of faith, hope, and
charity, and that we may obtain that which thou doeste promise: make us to
love that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
I Say, walk in the spirit, Gasa. v.
and fulfill not the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusts contrary to
the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh: these are contrary one to
the other, so that ye cannot do whatsoever ye would. But and if ye be led of
the spirit, then are ye not under the law. The deeds of the flesh are
manifest, which are these: adultry, fornicacion, uncleanness, wantonness,
wurshippyng of images, witchcraft, hatred, variau^ce, zele, wrath, strife,
sedicyons, sects, envying, murder, dronkennes, gluttony, and such like, of
the which I tell you before, as I have told you in times past, that they
which commyt such things, shall not be inheritors of the kingdom of God.
Contrarilye, the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, mekenes, temperaunce. Against such there is
no law. They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affeccions and lusts.

The Gospel.
ANd it chaunsed as Jesus went to Jerusalem, Luc. xvii.
that he passed through Samaria and Galile. And as he entered into a certain
town, there met him.x. men that were lepers. Which stood a far of, and put
forth their voices, and said. Jesus Master have mercy upon us. When he saw
them, he said unto them: go show your selves unto the Priests. And it came
to pass, that as they went they were cleansed. And one of them, when he saw
that he was cleansed, turned back again, and with a loud voice praised God,
and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him thanks. And the same was
a Samaritane. And Jesus answered, and said: Are there not.x. cleansed? but
where are those ix? There are not found that returned again to give God
praise, save only this straungier. And he said unto him: arise, go thy way,
thy faith has made thee whole.

The.xv. Sunday.
Iniquos odio hab^i. psalm. cxix
I Hate them that imagine evil things: but thy law do I love.

Thou art my defense and shylde: and my trust is in thy word.

Away from ye wicked: I will keep the commandments of my God.

O stablyshe me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
disapoynted of my hope.

Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea my delight shall ever be in thy
statutes.

Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they
imagine but deceipte.

Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I love
thy testimonies.

My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Glory be to the father and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Keep we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual mercy, and
because the frayltie of man, without thee, can not but fall: Keep us ever by
thy help, and lead us to all things profitable to our salvation: through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Gasa. vi.
YE see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand. As
many as desire with outward appearaunce to please carnally, the same
constrain you to be circumcised, only lest they should suffer persecucio^ for
the cross of Christ. For they themselves which are circumcised keep not the
law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they might rejoice in your
flesh. God forbid that I should rejoice but in ye cross of our lord Jesus
Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing at all, nor vncircumcisyon:
but a new creature. And as many as walk according unto this rule, peace be on
them, and mercy, and upon Israel that pertaynethe to God. From hencefurth,
let no man put me to business: for I bear in my body the marks of the
Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with your
spirit. Amen.

The Gospel.
NO man can serve two Masters: Math. vi.
for either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else lean to the
one, and despise the other: ye can not serve God and Mammo^. Therefore I say
unto you: be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat or drink: nor yet
for your body, what raime^t ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth the^
meat? and the body more of value then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air,
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor carry into the barnes: and your
heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? Which of you
(by taking careful thought) can add one cubite unto his stature? And why
care ye for raiment? Consider the Lilies of the field, how they grow. They
labor not: neither do they spinne. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon
in all his royalty, was not clothed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so
clothe the grass of the field (which though it stand to day, is to morrow
cast into the furnace:) shall he not much more do the same for you, O ye of
little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying: what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? after al these things do
the gentiles seek. For your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all
these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. Care not
then for the morrow: for the morrow day shall care for it self: sufficient
unto the day is the trauail thereof.

The.xvi. Sunday after Trinity Sunday.
At the Communion.
Feci iudiciu^ psalm. cxix.
I Deal with the thing that is lawful and right: O give me not over unto mine
oppressors.

Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do me
no wrong.

Mine iyes are wasted away with lookyng for thy health: and for the word of
thy righteousness.

O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy
statutes.

I am thy servant: O grant me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.

It is time for thee Lord, to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy
law.

For I love thy commandments: above gold and precious stone.

Therefore hold I straighte all thy commandments: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

Glory be to the father and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy
congregacyon: and because it can not continue in safety without thy succoure,
preserve it evermore by thy help and goodness: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephesians. iii.
I Desire that you faint not because of my tribulacions that I suffer for your
sakes: which is your praise. For this cause I bow my knees unto the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is father over all that is called father in
heaven and in earth, that he would grant you, according to the riches of
his glory, that ye may be strengthed with might by his spirit in the inner
manne: that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith that ye being rooted
and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth and length, depth and height, and to know the excellent love of the
knowledge of Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fulness, which comes
of God. Unto him that is able to do exceadyng aboundantlye above all that we
ask or think according to the power that works in us, be praise in the
congregation by Christ Jesus, throughout all generacions from time to time.
Amen.

The Gospel.
ANd it fortuned that Jesus went into a City called Naim, Luc. vii.
and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nie to
the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, which was the
only son of his mother, and she was a wedowe, and much people of the city
was with her. And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her: weep not. And he came nigh, and touched the coffen, and they that
bare him stood still. And he said: young man, I say unto thee, arise. And he
that was dead, sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his
mother. And there came a fear on them all. And they gave the glory unto God,
saying: A great Prophet is risen up among us, and God has visited his people.
And this rumor of him went forth throughout al Iewrye, and throughout all the
regions which lie round about.

The.xvii. Sunday.
THy testimonies are wonderful: Mirabilia. psalm cxix.
therefore does my soul keep them.

When thy word goes forth: it gives light and understanding even unto the
simple.

I opened my mouth and drue in my breath: for my delight was in thy
commandments.

O look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou use to do unto those
that love thy name.

Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wyckednes have dominion over me.

O deliver me from the wrongful dealinges of men: and so shall I keep thy
commandments.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
statutes.

Mine iyes gushe out with water: because men keep not thy law.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Lord, we pray thee that thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and
make us continually to be given to all good works: through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. iiii.
I (which am a prisoner of the Lords) exhort you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocacion wherwyth ye are called, with all lowlines and mekenes, with humblenes
of mind, forbearyng one another through love, and be delygente to keep the
unity of the spirit through the bond of peace, being one body and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be but
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above
all, and through all, and in you all.

The Gospel.
Luc. xiiii.
IT chanced that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief Phariseis, to
eat bread, on the Sabbath day: and they watched him. And behold, there was a
certain manne before him, which had the dropsye. And Jesus answered, and
spoke unto the lawiers and Phariseis, saying. Is it lawefull to heal on the
Sabbath day? And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and
let him go: and answered them, saying: which of you shall have an Ass or an
Ox fallen into a pyt, and will not straygth way pull him out on the Sabbath
day? And they could not answer him again to these things. He put forth
also a similitude to the geastes, when he marked how they preaced to be in the
hiest roumes, and said unto them: when thou art bidde^ of any man to a wedding,
sit not down in the highest room, lest a more honorable man then thou, be
bidden of him, and he (that bad him and thee) come and say to thee: give this
man room: and thou then begin with shame to take the lowest room. But rather
when thou art bidden, go and sit in the lowest room, that when he that bad
thee comes, he may say unto thee: friend sit up hier. Then shall thou have
worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever
exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted.

The.xviii. Sunday.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord: Justus es dni psalm. cxix.
and true is thy judgment.

The testymonies that thou have commanded: are exceadyng righteous and true.

My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loves it.

I am small and of no reputacion: yet do not I forgette thy commandments.

Thy ryghteousnes is an everlasting righteousness: and thy law is the truth.

Trouble and heauynes have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
commandments.

The ryghteousnes of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me understanding
and I shall live.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee, grant thy people grace to avoid the infeccions of
the devil, and with pure heart and mind, to follow thee, the only God:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
I Thank my God always on your behalf, i. Cor. i.
for the grace of God, which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in all things
ye are made rich by him, in all vtteraunce, and in all knowledge, by the
which things the testimonye of Jesus Christ, was confirmed in you, so that
ye are behind in no gift, waityng for the apperyng of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall also strength you unto the end, that ye may be blameles,
in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel.
Math. xxii.
When the Phaciseis had heard, that Jesus did put the Saduce is to silence, they
came together, and one of them (which was a Doctor of law) asked him a
question, tempting him, and saying: Master, which is the greatest
Commandment in the law: Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is
the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments, hang all
the law and the Prophets. While the Phariseis were gathered together, Jesus
asked them, saying: what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They said
unto him: the son of David. He said unto them: how then does David in
spirit, call him Lord, saying: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand till I make thine enemies thy footestoole. If David then call him
Lord, how is he then his son? And no man was able to answer him any
thing, neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask him any mo questions.

The.xix. Sunday.
Clamaui. psalm cxix.
I Call with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes.

Yea, even upon thee do I call: help me and I shall keep thy testymonies.

Early in the morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust.

Mine ties preuente the night watches: that I might be occupied in thy words.

Hear my voice (O Lord) accordying unto thy loving kyndnesse: quycken me
according as thou art wont.

They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are far from thy law.

Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: For all thy commandments are true.

As concerning thy testymonyes, I have known long since: that thou have
grounded them for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
O GOD, for as much as without thee, we are not able to please thee: Grant
that the workyng of thy mercy, may in all things direct and rule our
hearts: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
This I say and testyfie through the Lord, Ephe. iiii.
that ye hencefurth walk not as other Gentyles walk, in vanytie of their
mind, while they are blinded in their understanding, being far from a godly
life, by the means of the ignorauncie that is in them, and because of the
blyndenesse of their hearts, which being past repentance, have given
themselves over unto wantonness, to work all manner of uncleanness, even with
gredynes. But ye have not so learned Christ. If so be that ye have heard of
him, and have been taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus (as concerning the
conuersacyon in time paste) to lay from you that old man, which is corrupt,
according to the deceivable lusts. To be renewed also in the spirit of your
mind, and to put on that new man, which after God is shapen in ryghteousnes
and true holiness. Wherefore, put away lying, and speak every man truth unto
his neighbor, forasmuch as we are members one of a another. Be angrye and
sin not: Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to
the backbiter. Let him that stole, steal no more, but let him rather
labor with his hands the thing which is good, that he may give unto him
that needs. Let no fylthy communicacion proceed out of your mouth: But that
which is good to edify withal, as often as need is, that it may mynyster
grace unto the hearers. And grieve not ye the holy spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bytternesse and fearcenesse,
and wrath, and roaryng, and cursed speaking, be put away from you, with all
malyciousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, merciful, forgeuyng one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgeuen you.

The Gospel.
Mat. ix.
Jesus entered into a ship and passed over, and came into his own City: And
behold, they brought to him a man sick of the Palsy, lying in a bed. And
when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said unto the sick of the Palsy: Son
be of good there, thy sins be forgeuen thee. And behold, certain of the
Scrybes said within themselves: this manne blasphemeth. And when Jesus saw
their thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? whether is
it easyer to say, thy sins be forgeuen thee, or to say, arise and walk? But
that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins in
earth: Then says he unto the sick of the Palsy: Arise, take up thy bed and
go unto thine house. And he arose and departed to his house: But the people
that saw it, merueiled and glorified God, which had given such power unto men.

The.xx. Sunday.
Vide humili tatem meam psalm. cxix.
O Considre mine adversity, and deliver me: For I do not forget thy law.

Avenge thou my cause and deliver me: quycken me according unto thy word.

Health is far from the ungodly: For they regard not thy statutes.

Great is thy mercy, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont.

Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me: yet do not I swerve from thy
testymonies.

It greueth me when I see the trangressors: because they keep not thy law.

Consider, O Lord, how I love thy commandments: O quicken me, according to
thy loving kyndnesse.

Thy word is true from everlasting: All the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc

The Collect.
ALmighty and mercyful God, of thy bountefull goodness, keep us from all things
that may hurt us: that we being ready both in body and soul, may with free
hearts accomplish those things, that thou would have done: Through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Take heed therefore, how ye walk circumspectelye: Ephe. v.
not as unwise, but as wisemen, winnyng occasion, because the days are evil.
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be
not dronken with wine, wherein is excess. But be filled with the spirit,
speaking unto your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, synging
and making melody to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all
things unto God the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: submittyng
your selves one to another, in the fear of God.

The Gospel.
Jesus said to his discyples: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a king, Math. xx^i.
which made a Marriage for his son, and sent forth his servants, to call
them that were bid to the weddyng, and they would not come. Again he sent
forth other servants, saying: Tell them which are bydden: behold, I have
prepared my diner, mine Oxen and my fatlynges are killed, and all things are
ready: come unto the Marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways:
One to his farm place, another to his Marchaundise, and the remnaunte took his
servants, and entreated them shamefullye, and siewe them. But when the King
heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his men of war, and destroyed
those murderers, and brent up their city. Then said he to his servants: the
Marriage in deed is prepared, but they which were bidden, were not worthy: Go ye
therefore out into the hye ways: and as many as ye find, bid them to the
Marriage. And the servants went forth into the hye ways, and gathered
together all, as many as they could find, both good and bad, and the wedding
was furnished with geastes. Then the king came in to se the geastes: and when
he spied there a man, which had not on a wedding garment, he said unto him:
friend, how cammest thou in hither not having a weddyng Garment? And he was
even speacheles. Then said the King to the mynisters: take and bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into utter darckenesse, there shall be weeping and
gnashyng of teeth. For many be called, but few are chosen.

The. xxi. Sunday.
Princes have persecuted me without cause: but my heart stands in awe of thy
words. Principes persecuti psalm. cxix.
I am as glad of thy word: as one that fyndeth great spoils.

As for lies, I hate and abhor them: But thy law do I love.

Seven times a day do I praise thee: Because of thy righteous judgments.

Great is the peace that they have which love thy law: and they are not
offended at it.

Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandments.

My soul has kept thy testymonyes: and loved them exceadyngly

I have kept thy commandments and testymonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Grant we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people, pardon and
peace: that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a
quyete mind: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
MY brethren, be strong through the Lord, Ephe. vi*
and through the power of his might. Put on all the armoure of God, that ye
may stand against the assaults of the devil: for we wrestle not against
blood and flesh, but against rule, against power, against worldly rulers,
even gouerners of the darckenes of this world, against spiritual craftiness,
in heavenly things. Wherefore, take unto you the whole armoure of God, that ye
may be able to resyst in the evil day, and stand perfect in all things.
Stand therefore, and your loins gyrde with the truth, having on the breast
plate of ryghteousnes, and having shoes on your feet, that ye may be prepared
for the gospel of peace. Above all, take to you the shilde of faith, wherewith
ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. And pray
always with all manner of prayer, and supplicacion in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all instaunce and supplicacion, for all saints and for me: that
vtteraunce may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth freely, to utter the
secrets of my gospel (whereof I am a messenger in bo^des) that therein I may
speak freely, as I ought to speak.

The Gospel.
John. iiii.
THere was a certain Ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum. Assene as the
same heard, that Jesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, he went unto him,
and besought him that he would come down and heal his son. For he was even
at the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe. The Ruler says unto him: Sir, come down or ever
that my son dye. Jesus says unto him: go thy way, thy son lives. The
man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him. And he went his way. And
as he was going down, the servants met him, and told him, saying: thy
son lives. Then inquired he of them the hour, when he began to amend.
And they said unto him: yesterdaye at the seventh hour, the fever left him. So
the father knew that it was the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him.
Thy son lives, and he believed, and all his household. This is again the
second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Iewry into Galile.

The. xxii. Sunday.
Appropiquet deprecatio. psalm. cxix.
LEt my complaynte come before thee, O Lord: Give me understanding according
unto thy word.

O let my supplicacion come before thee: Deliver me according to thy word.

My lyppes shall speak of thy praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.
Yea, my toungue shall sing of thy word: For all thy commandments are
righteous.

Let thine hand help me: For I have chosen thy commandments.

I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: And in thy law is my delight.

O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: And thy judgments shall
help me.

I have gone astraye like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy commandments.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee to keep thy household the church, in contynuall
godlynes: that through thy proteccion, it may be free from all aduersyties,
and devoutly given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy name:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
I Thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my prayers for
you, phil. 8.
and pray with gladness: Because ye are come into the fellowship of the Gospel,
from the first day unto now. And am surely certyfyed of this, that he which
has begone a good work in you, shall perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ: as it becomes me, so judge I of you all, because I have you in my
heart: forasmuch as ye are all companions of grace with me, even in my
bonds, and in the defendyng and stablishing of the Gospel: for God is my
record how greatly I long after you all, from the very heart rote in Jesus
Christ. And this I pray, that your love may increase yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all understanding, that ye may accept the things that are
most excellent, that ye may be pure, and such as offend no man, until the
day of Christ, being filled with the fruit of righteousness, which comes
by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

The Gospel.
PEter said unto Jesus: Math. xviii.
Lord how often shall I forgive my brother, if he sin against me, till seven
times? Jesus says unto him? I say not unto thee until seven times: but
seventy times seven times. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven lykened unto a
certain man that was a king, which would take accoumptes of his servants.
And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought him
ten M. talentes, but forasmuch as he was not able to pay, his Lord
commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made. The servant fell down, and besoughte him, saying: sir,
have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Then had the Lord pytye on
that servant, and loced him, and forgave him the debt. So the same servant
went out, and found one of his fellows which ought him an. C. pence, and he
laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying: pay that thou owe.
And his fellow fell down, and besoughte him, saying: have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all. And he would not, but went and cast him into
prison, till he should pay the debt. So, when his fellows saw what was done,
they were very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that had happened.
Then his Lord called him and said unto him. O thou ungracious servant, I
forgave thee all that debt, when thou desyredst me: should not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pitye on thee? And his Lord
was wroth, and delivered him to the Iailers, till he should pay all that was
due unto him: So likewise shall my heavenly father do also to you, if ye from
your hearts forgive not (every one his brother) their trespaces.

The. xxiii. Sunday.
Nisi quia dominus. psalm. cxxiiii.
IF the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) if the
Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up against us.

They had swalowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drouned us: and the stream had gone over our soul.

The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul.

But praised be the Lord: which has not given us over for a pray unto their
teethe.

Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fouler: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord: which has made heaven and
earth.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
GOd our refuge and strenght, which art the author of al godlynes, be ready to
hear the devout prayers of thy church: and grant that those things which
we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
BRethren be folowers together of me, phil. i^.
and look on them which walk even so as ye have us for an example. For many
walk (of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping) that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnacion, whose belly is
their god, and glory to their shame, which are worldly minded. But our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the savior, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile body, that he may make it like unto
his glorious body: according to the workyng, whereby he is able also to subdue
all things unto himself.

The Gospel. Math. xxii.

THen the Pharyseis went out and took counsayll, how they might tangle him
in his words. And they sent out unto him their disciples with Herodes
servants, saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teacheste the
way of God truly, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the
outward appearaunce of men. Tell us therefore, how think thou? Is it lawful
that tribute be given unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their wickedness,
said: why tempte ye me ye ypocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they took
him a penny. And he said unto them: whose is this Image and superscripcion? they
said unto him, Cesars: Then said he unto them: give therefore unto Caesar, the
things which are Cesars: and unto God, those things that are Gods. When
they had heard these words, they meruayled, and left him, and went their way.

The.xxiiii. sunday.
Qui co^fidu^t psalm. cxxv.
THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Syon: which
may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.

The hills stand about Jerusalem: even so stands the Lord round about his
people, from this time forth for ever more.

For the rod of the ungodly comes not into the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put their hand unto wickedness.

Do well (O Lord:) unto those that be good and true of heart.

As for such as turn back unto their own wickedness: the Lord shall lead
them forth with the evil doers, but peace shall be upon Israel.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Lord we beseech thee, assoyle thy people from their offenses: that through
thy bountiful goodness, we may be delivered from the bands of all those
sins, which by our frayltye we have committed: Grant this. etc.

The Epistle
WE give thanks to God, Coloss. ^.
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always for you in our prayers: for we
have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye bear to al
saints, for the hopes sake which is laid up in store for you in heaven: of
which hope ye heard before by the true word of the gospel, which is come unto
you even as it is, fruitful, and grows as it is also among you, from the day
in the which ye heard of it, and had experience in the grace of god through the
truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear fellow servant, which is for you a
faithful minister of Christ, which also declared unto us your love which ye
have in the spirit. For this cause we also, euersence the day we heard of it,
have not ceased to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with
the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye
might walk worthy of the Lord, that in all things ye may please, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knoweledge of God,
strengthed with all might, through his glorious power, unto all patience and
long sufferyng, with ioyfulnesse, geuyng thanks unto the father, which has
made us meet to be partakers of the inherytaunce of saynctes in light.

The Gospel.
While Jesus spoke unto the people, behold, there came a certain ruler, and
worshipped him, Math. ix.
saying: my daughter is eue^ now disceased, but come and lay thy hand upon
her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his
discyples. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve years, came behind him and touched the hemme of his besture. For she
said within her self: If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be
safe. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: daughter be
of good comfort, thy faith has made thee safe. And the woman was made whole
even that same time. And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the
minstrelles and the people making a noise, he said unto them: get you hence,
for the maid is not dead but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn: But when
the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and said:
damsel arise. And the damosel arose. And this noise went abroad into all that
land.

The.xxv. Sunday.
Nisi dominus. psalm. cxxvii.
EXcept the Lord build the house: their labor is but lost that build it.

Except the Lord keep the city: the watcheman waketh but in vain.

It is but lost labor that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest:
and eat the bread of carefulnes, for so he gives his beloved sleep.

Lo, children and the fruit of the womb, are an heritage and gift: that
comes of the Lord.

Like as the arrows in the hand of the gyaunt: even so are the young children.

Happy is the manne, that has his quyuer full of them: they shall not be
ashamed, when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Collect.
STiere up we beseech thee, O lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that
they plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works: may of thee be
plenteously rewarded: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
Behold the time comes, says the Lord, that I will raise up the righteous
brau^ch of David, Iere. xxiii.
which king shall bear rule, and he shall prosper with wisdom, and shall set up
equity and righteousness again in the earth. In his time shall Judah be saved,
and Israel shall dwell without fear. And this is the name that they shall call
him: even the Lord our righteousness: and therefore behold, the time cummeth,
says the Lord, that it shall no more be said: the Lord lives, which
brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt: But the Lord lives
which brought forth and lead the seed of the house of Israel out of the north
land, and from al countries where I had scatered them: and they shall dwell in
their own land again.

The Gospel.
WHen Jesus lift up his iyes, John. vi.
and saw a great company come unto him, he says unto Philip: whence shall we
bye bread that these may eat? This he said to prove him: for he himself knew
what he would do. Philip answered him: two hundredth peniworthe of bread are
not sufficient for them, that every man may take a little. One of his disciples
(Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother) said unto him: There is a lad here, which has
five barley loves, and two fyshes: but what are they among so many? And Jesus
said: make the people sit down. There was much grass in the place. So the
men sat down, in noumber about five thousand. And Jesus took the bread, and
when he had given thanks, he gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the^
that were set down. And likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When
they had eaten enough, he says unto his disciples: Gather up the broken meat
which remains, that nothing be lost. And they gathered it together, and
filled twelve baskettes with the broken meat of the five barley loaves, which
broken meat remained unto them that had eaten. Then those men (when they had
seen the miracle that Jesus did) said: this is of a truth the same Prophet
that should come into the world.

SAINT Andrews day.
At the Communion.
Sepe expugnauerunt. psalm. cxxix.
MAny times have they fought against me from my youth up: may Israel now say.

Yea many a time have they vexed me from my youth up: but they have not
prevailed against me.

The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long forowes.

But the righteous Lord: has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces.

Let them be counfounded and turned backward: as many as have evil will at
Sion.

Let them be even as the grass growyng upon the house tops: which withers
before it be plucked up.

Whereof the mower fills not his hand: neither he that binds up the sheues,
his bosom.

So that they which go by, say not so much: as the Lord prosper you, we
wish you good luck in the name of the Lord.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which haste given such grace to thy Apostle saint Andrewe,
that he counted the sharp and painful death of the cross to be an high
honor, and a great glory: Grant us to take and esteem al troubles and
adversities which shall come unto us for thy sake, as things profitable for
us toward the obtaining of everlasting life: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Roma x.
IF thou knowledge with thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, and believe in thy
heart, that God raised him up from death, thou shall be safe. For, to believe
with the heart justifies: and to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe.
For the scripture says: whosoever believes on him shall not be confounded:
There is no dyfference between the Jew and the Gentile. For one is Lord of al,
which is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever does call on the name
of the Lord, shall be safe. How then shall they call on him, on whom they have
not believed? How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? How
shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach, except they
be sent? As it is written: how beautiful are the feet of them which bring
tidinges of peace, and bring tidinges of good things? But they have not al
obeyed to the gospel, for Esaias says: Lord, who has believed our sayings? So
the^, faith cummeth by hearing, and hearing cummeth by the word of God. But I
ask: have they not heard? no doubt their sound went out into all lands,
and their words into the ends of the world. But I demand whether Israel did
know or not? first Moses says: I will provoke you to envy, by them that are
no people, by a folishe nation I will anger you. Esaias after that is bold, and
says: I am found of them that sought me not: I am manifest unto them that
asked not after me. But against Israel he says: all day long have I
stretched forth my hands unto a people that believes not, but speaks against
me.

The Gospel.
AS Jesus walked by the sea of Galile, Math. iiii.
he saw two brethren: Simon, which was called Peter, and Andrew his brother,
casting a net into the sea (for they were fyshers) and he says unto them:
follow me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. And they straight way
left their nets, and followed him. And when he was gone forth from thence, he
saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebede, and Ihon his brother, in
the ship with Zebede their father, mendyng their nets, and he called them.
And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.

Saint Thomas the Apostle.
At the Communion.
B(...) omnes psalm. cxxviii.
BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways.

For thou shall eat the labors of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy
shall thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house.

Thy children like the Olive branches: round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Sion, shall so bless thee: that thou shall see
Jerusalem in prosperity all thy life long.

Yea that thou shall see thy childers children: and peace upon Israel.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty everliving God, which for the more confirmacion of the faith, did
suffer thy holy Apostle Thomas, to be doubtful in thy sons resurreccion:
grant us so perfectly, and without al doubt to believe in thy son Jesus
Christ, that our faith in thy sight never be reproved: hear us, O Lord,
through the same Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy ghost be all
honor. etc.

The Epistle.
Ephesians. ii.
HOw ye are not strangers nor foreiners: but citezens with the saints, and of
the householde of God, and are builte upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone: in whom what
building soever is coupled together, it grows unto an holy temple in the
Lord, in whom ye also are built together, to be an habitacion of God through
the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
THomas one of the twelve, John. xx.
which is called Didimus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other
disciples therefore said unto him: we have seen the Lord. But he said unto
them: except I see in his hands the printe of the nails, and put my finger
into the printe of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not
believe. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas
with them. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the mids,
and said: peace be unto you. And after that, he said to Thomas: bring thy
finger hither, and see my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it
into my side, and be not faythlesse, but beleuyng. Thomas answered and said
unto him: my Lord and my God. Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou haste
seen me, thou haste believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book. These are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that (in beleuyng) ye
might have life through his name.

The conversion of Saint Paul.
At Mattyns.
The.ii. Lesson. Act.xxii. unto. they heard him.

I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, Confitebor tibi. psalm. cxxxviii.
with my whole heart, even before the Gods, will I sing praise unto thee.

I will wurshippe toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy
loving kindness and truth: for thou haste magnified thy name, and thy word
above all things.

When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and enduedst my soul with much
strength.

All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard
the words of thy mouth.

Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: that great is the glory of the
Lord.

For though the Lord be hye, yet has he respect unto the lowly: as for the
proud, he beholds them a far of.

Though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet shall thou refreshe me: thou
shall stretche forth thine hand upon the furiousness of mine enemies, and thy
right hand shall save me.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me: yea thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever, despise not then the works of thine own hands.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
GOD which haste taught all the world, through the preaching of thy blessed
Apostle Saint Paul: grant we beseech thee, that we which have his
wonderful conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill the holy
doctrine that he taught: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. ix.
ANd Saul yet breathyng out threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples
of the Lord, went unto the hye priest, and desired of him letters to carye to
Damasco, to the Sinagoges: that if he found any of this way (whether they were
men or women) he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And when he
iourneyed, it fortuned that as he was come nigh to Damasco, suddenly there
shyned round about him a light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and
heard a voice saying to him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said:
what art thou Lord? And the Lord said: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It
is hard for thee to kick against the prick. And he both tre^bling and
astonished, said: Lord, what will thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto
him: arise and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
The men which iourneied with him, stood amassed, hearing a voice, but seeing no
man. And Saul arose from the earth, and when he opened his iyes, he saw no
man: But they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damasco. And he was
three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink. And there was a
certain disciple at Damasco, named Ananias, and to him said the Lord in a
vision: Ananias? and he said: behold, I am here Lord. And the Lord said unto
him: arise and go into the street (which is called straight) and seek in the
house of Judas, after one called Saul of Tharsus. For behold, he prays, and
has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, cumming in to him, and putting his
hands on him, that he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered: Lord, I
have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at
Jerusalem: and here he has authority of the hye priests, to bind all that
call on thy name. The Lord said unto him: go thy way, for he is a chose^ vessel
unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of
Israel. For I will show him, how great things he must suffer for my names
sake. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house, and put his hands
on him, and said: brother Saul, the Lord that appeared unto thee in the way as
thou came, has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled
with the holy ghost. And immediately there fell from his iyes as it had been
scales, and he received sight, and arose, and was baptized, and received meat,
and was coumforted. Then was Saul a certain days with the disciples which
were at Damasco. And straight way he preached Christ in the Sinagogues, how
that he was the son of God. But all that heard him were amassed, and said:
is not this he that spoiled them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and
came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the hie
priests? But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews
which dwelt at Damasco, affirming that this was very Christ.

The Gospel.
Math. xix.
PEter answered and said unto Jesus: behold, we have forsaken all, and followed
thee: what shall we have therefore? Jesus said unto them: Verily I say unto you,
that when the son of man shall sit in the seat of his Majesty, ye that have
followed me in the regeneracion, shall sit also upon twelve seats, and judge
the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that forsakes house, or brethren,
or systers, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But
many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

At Euensong.
The second lesson. Acts.xxvi. unto the end.

The Purification of. S. Mary the virgin.
Ecce nunc benedicite. psalm cxxxiiii.
BEhold (now) praise the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, ye that by night
stand in the house of the Lord: (even in the courts of the house of our God.)

Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary: and praise the Lord.

The Lord that made heaven and earth: give thee blessing out of Sion.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as thy
only begotten son, was this day presented in the Temple, in the substance
of our flesh: so grant that we may be presented unto thee with pure and
clear minds: By Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
The same that is appointed for the Sunday.

The Gospel.
WHen the time of their Purificacion (after the law of Moses) was come, Luc. ii.
they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord (as it is written
in the law of the Lord: every manne child that first opens the matrix,
shall be called holy to the Lord:) and to offer (as it is said in the law of
the lord) a pair of turtle Dooues, or two young Pigions. And behold, there
was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon. And the same man was just and
godly, and looked for the consolation of Israel, and the holy ghost was in him.
And an answer had he received of the holy ghost, that he should not see
death, except he first saw the Lords Christ. And he came by inspiracion into
the temple.

Saint Mathies day.
Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil manne: Eripe me. psalm. cxl.
and preserve me from the wicked manne.

Which imagine mischief in their hearts: and stir up strife all the day
long.

They have sharpened their tongues like a Serpente: Adders poison is under
their lips.

Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked
men, which are purposed to overthrow my goinges.

The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with coardes:
yea, and set trappes in my way.

I said unto the Lord, thou art my God: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

O Lord God, thou strength of my health: thou haste covered my head in the day
of battayl.

Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous
imaginacion prosper, lest they be to proud.

Let the myschiefe of their own lyppes fall upon the head of them: that
cumpasse me about.

Let hoate burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire,
and into the pyt, that they never rise up again.

A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth: evil shall hunte
the wicked person, to overthrow him.

Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poor: and maynteyne the cause of the
helpelesse.

The righteous also shall give thanks unto thy name: and the just shall
continue in thy sight.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmightye God, which in the place of the traitor Judas, did chose thy
faithful servant Mathie, to be of the noumber of thy twelve Apostles:
Grant that thy church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be
ordered and guided by faithful and true pastors: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. i.
IN those days, Peter stood up in the mids of the disciples, and said: (the
number of names that were together, were about an.c. and xx.) Ye men and
brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy
ghost, through the mouth of David, spoke before of Judas, which was guide to
them that took Jesus. For he was nu^bred with us, and had obtained fellowship in
this ministracion. And the same has now possessed a plat of ground, with the
reward of iniquity: and when he was hanged, he burst a sunder in the mids,
and all his bowels gushed out: And it is known unto all the inhabiters of
Jerusalem: in so much that the same field is called, in their mother tongue,
Acheldama, that is to say, the blood field. For it is written in the book of
Psalms: his habitacion be void, and no man be dwelling therein, and his
busshoprike let an other take. Wherefore, of these men which have companied
with us (all the time that the Lord Jesus had all his conversation among us,
beginning at the baptism of John unto that same day, that he was taken up from
us) must one be ordained, to be a witness with us of his resurreccion. And they
appointed two, Joseph which is called Barsabas (whose syrname was Iustus) and
Mathias. And when they prayed, they said: Thou Lord, which know the
hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may
take the room of this ministracio^ and Apostleship, from which Judas by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. And they gave forth
their lottes, and the lot fell on Mathias, and he was coumpted with the eleven
Apostles.

The Gospel.
IN that time Jesus answered, and said: Math. xi.
I thank thee (O father) lord of heaven and earth, because thou haste hyd
these things from the wise and prudente, and have showed them unto babes:
verily father, even so was it thy good pleasure. All things are given over
unto me of my father. And no man knows the son, but the father: neither
knows any manne the father, save the son, and he to whomesoeuer the son
will open him. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease
you. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meke and lowly in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden
is light.

The Annunciation of the virgin Marie.
At the Communion.
Domine non est exal. psalm. cxxxi.
LOrd, I am not hye minded: I have no proud looks.

I do not exercise myself in great matters: which are to hye for me.

But I refrain my soul, and keep it low, like as a child that is wayned from
his mother: yea, my soul is even as a wayned child.

O Israel trust in the Lord: from this time forth, for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
WE beseech thee lord, power thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
Christ thy sons incarnacion, by the message of an Angel: so by his cross and
passion, we may be brought unto the glory of his resurreccyon: Through the
same Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Esai. vii.
GOd spoke once again unto Ahaz, saying: require a token of the lord thy god,
whether it be toward the depth beneath, or toward the heighte above. Then
said Ahaz: I will require none, neither will I tempte the lord. And he said:
hearken to, ye of the house of David, is it not enough for you, that ye be
grievous unto men, but ye must grieve my god also? And therefore the Lord shall
give you a token: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his
mother shall call his name Emanuel. Butter and Honey shall he eat, that he may
know to refuse the evil and choose the good.

The Gospel.
Luc. i.
ANd in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriell was sent from god unto a city of
Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin spoused to a man, whose name was Joseph, of
the house of David, and the virgins name was Mary. And the Angel went in unto
her and said: Hayle full of grace the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among
women. When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying: and cast in her mind,
what manner of salutacion that should be. And the Angel said unto her: fear not
Mary, for thou have found grace with god: Behold, thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name Jesus: He shall be great, and
shall be called the son of the hygheste. And the Lord God shall give unto him,
the seat of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none end. Then said Mary unto the
Angel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angel answered and
said unto her: the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest
shall ouershadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne,
shall be called the son of God. And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she has also
conceived a son in her age. And this is her sixth month, which was called
baren: for with god shall nothing be impossible. And Mary said: behold the
handmayde of the Lord: be it unto me, according to thy word. And the angel
departed from her.

Saint Marks day.
LOrd I call upon thee, have thee unto me: and considre my voice when I cry
unto thee. Domine clamaui. psalm. cxli.


Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense: and let the liftyng
up of my hands be an evening Sacrifice.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.

O let not mine heart be enclyned to any evil thing: let me not be occupied
in ungodly works, with the men that work wickedness, lest I eat of such
things as please them.

Let the righteous rather smite me frendely: and reprove me.

But let not their precious Balmes break mine head: yea I will pray yet
against their wickedness.

Let their judges be overthrown in stonye places: that they may hear my
words, for they are sweet.

Our bones lie scattered before the pit: Like as when one breaks and heweth
wood upon the earth.

But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not out
my soul.

Keep me from the snare, which they have laid for me: and from the trappes of
the wicked dooers.

Let the ungodly fall into their own nets together: and let me ever escape
them.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmyghtye GOD, which haste instructed thy holy Church, with the heavenly
doctrine of thy Evangelist Saint Mark: give us grace so to be establyshed by
thy holy gospel, that we be not, like children, carried away with every blast of
vain Doctrine: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephesians. iiii.
Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says: when he went up an hie, he led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men. That he ascended, what means it, but that he also
descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? he that descended, is even
the same also that ascended up above all heavens, to fulfill al things. And the
very same made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
shepeheardes and teachers: to the edifying of the Saints, to the work and
ministracion, even to the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to
the unity of faith, and knowledge of the some of god, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure, of the full perfect age of Christ. That we hencefurth should be no
more children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
wylines of men, through craftines, whereby they lay awayte for us, to deceive
us. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow in him, which
is the head, even Christ, in whom if all the body be coupled and knit together,
throughout every ioynte, wherewith one ministers to an other (according to the
operacion, as every part has his measure) he increases the body, unto the
edifying of it self through love.

The Gospel.
I Am the true vine, John xv.
and my father is an husband man. Every branch that bears not fruit in me,
he will take away. And every branch that bears fruit, will he pourge, that
it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye clean through the words which I
have spoken unto you. Bide in me and I in you. As the branch cannot bear
fruit of it self, except it bide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide
in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit. For without me can ye do nothing. If
a man bide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered: And men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burn. If ye bide in me, and
my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall be dooen for you.
Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and become my
Disciples. As the father has loved me, even so have I also loved you. Continue
ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall bide in my love, even as
I have kept my fathers commandments, and abide in his love. These things
have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy
might be full.

Saint Philip and James.
At Mattins.
The second lesson. Acts.viii. unto. when the Apostles.

At the Communion.
Ecce quam bonum. psalm. cxxxiii.
Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is: brethren to dwell together in
unity.

It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the beard:
even unto Aarons bearde, and went down to the skirtes of his clothing.

Like the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Sion.

For there the Lord promised his blessyng: and life for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life: Grant us
perfectlye to know thy son Jesus Christ, to be the way, the truth, and the
life, as thou haste taught saint Philip, and other the Apostles: Through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
James.i.
James the servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, sendethe greetyng to
the.xii, Tribes which are scatered abroad. My brethren, count it for an
exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptacions: Knowing this: that the
trying of your faith, gendreth patience: and let patience have her perfect
work, that ye may be perfect, and sound, lacking nothing. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of him that gives it: even God, which gives to all
men indifferentlye, and casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given him.
But let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that doubts, is like a wave
of the sea, which is tossed of the winds, and carried with violence. Neither let
that manne think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A waueryng
minded man, is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother which is of low
degree, rejoice when he is exalted. Again, let him that is rich, rejoice when
he is made low. For even as the flower of the grass, shall he pass away.
For as the sun rises with heat, and the grass withers, and his flower
falls away, and the beautye of the fashyon of it perishes: even so shall the
rich manne peryshe in his ways. Happy is the man that endures temptacion:
For when he is tried, he shall receive the croune of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him.

The Gospel.
ANd Jesus said unto his disciples: John. xiiii.
let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my
fathers house are many Mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. I
go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will
come again and receive you, even unto my self: that where I am, there may ye
be also. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye know. Thomas says unto
him: Lord, we know not whether thou go. And how is it possible for us to
know the way? Jesus says unto him: I am the way, and the truth, and the
life: No man comes unto the father but by me: if ye had known me, ye had
known my father also: And now ye know him, and have seen him. Philip says
unto him: Lord show us the father, and it suffiseth us. Jesus says unto
him: have I been so long time with you, and yet haste thou not known me?
Philip, he that has seen me, has seen my father, and how say thou then,
show us the father? Beleuest thou not that I am in the father, and the father
in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: But the
father that dwells in me, is he that does the works. Believe me that I am in
the father, and the father in me. Orels believe me for the works sake. Verily,
verily, I say unto you: he that believes on me, the works that I do, the same
shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I go
unto my father. And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the
father may be gloryfied by the son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I
will do it.

At Mattyns.
The second lesson. Acts.xiiii. unto the end.

At the Communion.
Voce mea ad dominum. Psalm. cxlii.
I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: yea even unto the Lord did I make my
supplicacion.

I powered out my complayntes before him: and showed him of my trouble.

When my spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walked, have they prieuely laid a snare for me.

I looked also upon my righthande: and see, there was no man that would know
me.

I had no place to fly unto: and no man cared for my soul.

I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said: Thou art my hope and my portion in the
land of the living.

Consider my complaynt: for I am brought very low.

O deliver me from my persecutours: for they are to strong for me.

Bring my soul out of prieson, that I may give thanks unto thy name: which
thing if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my
company.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Lord almyghtie, which haste endued thy holy Apostle Barnabas, with singular
gifts of thy holy ghost: let us not be destitute of thy manyfolde gifts, nor
yet of grace to use them always to thy honor and glory: Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
Act. xi.
Tidings of these things came unto the ears of the congregation, which was in
Jerusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go unto Antioche.
Which when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad and exhorted them
all, that with purpose of heart, they would continually cleave unto the Lord.
For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith, and much people
was added unto the Lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tharsus, for to seek Saul.
And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioche. And it chaunsed, that
a whole year they had their conversation with the congregation there, and
taught much people, insomuche that the disciples of Antioche were the first
that were called Christen. In those days came Prophets from the city of
Jerusalem unto Antioche. And there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and
signified by the spirit, that there should be great dearth throughout all the
world, which came to pass in the Emperor Cladius days. Then the disciples,
every manne according to his ability, purposed to send succor unto the
brethren which dwelt in Iewry: which thing they also did, and sent it to the
elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

The Gospel.
This is my commandment, John. xv.
that ye love together, as I have loved you: Greater love has no man, then
this: that a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. Hencefurth call I you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does. But you have I called friends: for
all things that I have heard of my father, have I opened to you: ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you to go and bring forth
fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye ask of the
father in my name, he may give it you.

At Euensong.
The second lesson. Act. xv. (unto) After certain days.

Saynct John Baptist.
Proper lessons at Mattyns.
The first lesson. Malach. iii unto the end.

The second lesson. Mat. iii. unto the end.

At the communion.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and considre my desire: Domine exaudi. Psalm. cxliii.
harken unto me for thy truth and righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitte^ my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

I stretche forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee, as a
thristie land.

Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit wereth faynte: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betymes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my
soul unto thee.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I fly unto thee to hyde me.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving spirit lead me forth unto the land of righteousness.

Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: and for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my
soul, for I am thy servant.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
ALmyghtie God, by whose providence thy servant John Baptiste was wonderfully
borne, and sent to prepare the way of thy son our savior by preaching of
penance: make us so to follow his doctrine and holy life, that we may truly
repent according to his preaching and after his example constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truethes sake: through
Jesus Christ our lord.

The Epistle.
BE of good there my people, Esai. xl.
O ye Prophets comfort my people, says your God, comfort Jerusalem at the
heart, and tell her, that her travail is at an end, that her offense is
pardoned, that she has received of the Lords hand sufficient correccion for
all her sins. A voice cries in wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord in
the wilderness, make straight the path for our God in the deserte. Let all
valleys be exalted, and every mountain and hill be laid low: whatso is
crooked let it be made straight, and let the rough be made plain fields. For
the glory of the Lord shall appear, and all flesh shall at once see it: for
why, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. The same voice spoke. Now cry. And
the Prophet answered: what shall I cry? that all flesh is grass, and that
all the goodlynes thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass is
withered, the flower falls a way. Even so is the people as grass, when the
breath of the Lord blows upon them. Nevertheless, whether the grass wyther,
or that the flower fade away, yet the word of our God endures for ever. Go up
unto the hie hill (O Sion) thou that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice
with power, O thou preacher Jerusalem: Lift it up without fear, and say unto
the cities of Judah: Behold your God: behold, the Lord God shall come with
power, and bear rule with his arm. Behold, he brings his treasure with
him, and his works go before him. He shall feed his flock like an heardman.
He shall gather the lambs together with his arm, and carye them in his
bosom, and shall kyndely entreat those that bear young.

The Gospel.
Luc. i.
ELizabethes time came that she should be delivered, and she brought forth a
son. And her neighbors and her cosins heard how the Lord had showed great
mercy upon her, and they reioysed with her. And it fortuned that in the eight
day they came to circumcise the child: and called his name Zacharias, after
the name of his father. And his mother answered, and said: not so, but he
shall be called John. And they said unto her. There is none in thy kindred that
is named with this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have
him called. And he asked for writing tables, and wrote, saying: his name is
John. And they meruayled all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his
tongue also, and he spoke and praised God. And fear came on al the^ that dwelt
nigh unto them. And all these sayings were noysed abroad throughout all the
hill country of Jury, and al they that heard them laid the^ up in their
hearts, saying: what manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord
was with him. And his father Zacharias was filled with the holy ghost, and
prophesied, saying: Praised be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people. And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us, in the
house of his servant David. Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, which were sense the world began. That we should be saved from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us. That he would deal mercifully
with our fathers, and remember his holy couenaunte. And that he would perform
the oath which he swear to our father Abraham for to give us. That we delivered
out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, all the days
of our life, in such holiness and righteousness as are acceptable before him. And
thou child shall be called the prophet of the hiest, for thou shalt go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways: to give knowledge of
salvation unto his people for the remission of sins. Through the tender mercy
of our God, whereby the day spring from an hie has visited us. To give light to
the^ that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet
into the way of peace. And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and
was in wilderness till the day came, when he should show himself unto the
Israelites.

Proper lessons at Euensong.
The first lesson. Malach. iii. unto the end.

The second lesson. Mat. xiiii. (unto) when Jesus heard.

Saint Peter's day.
At Mattyns.
The second lesson Act. iii. unto the end.

At the Communion.
BLessed be the Lord my strength: Benedictus dominus. psalm. cxliiii.
which teaches my hands to war, and my fyngers to fight.

My hope, and my fortress, my castle, and delyuerer, my defender in whom I
trust: which subdueth my people that is under me.

Lord, what is man that thou have such respect unto him? or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him?

Manne is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains and they
shall smoke.

Cast furthe the lyghtnynge, and tear them: shote out thine arrows and
consume them.

Send down thine hand from above: deliver me and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children.

Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wickedness.

I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a
ten stringed Lute.

Thou that geueste victory unto kings: and haste delivered David thy servant
from the peril of the sword.

Save me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth
talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may
be as the pollyshed corners of the temple.

That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our
sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets.

That our Oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no decay: no leading
into captivity, and no complainyng in our streets.

Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea blessed are the people
which have the Lord for their God.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God which by thy son Jesus Christ have given to thy Apostle
sayncte Peter many excellent gifts, and commaundedst him earnestly to feed
thy flock: make we beseech thee, all bishops and pastors diligently to preach
thy holy word, and the people obedientlye to follow the same, that they may
receive the croune of everlasting Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts.xii.
AT the same time Herod the king stretched furthe his hands to vex certain
of the congregation. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And because he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded farther and took
Peter also. Then were the days of sweet bread. And when he had caught him, he
put him in prison also, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to
be kept, entending after Easter to bring him furthe to the people. And Peter
was kept in prison, but prayer was made with out ceassing, of the congregacyon
unto God for him. And when Herod would have brought him out unto the people,
the same night slept Peter between two soldiers bound with two chains: And
the kepers before the door, kept the prison. And behold the angel of the
Lord was there present, and a light shyned in the habitacion. And he smote
Peter on the side, and stiered him up, saying: arise up quickly. And his
chains fell of from his hands. And the angel said unto him: gyrde thy self,
and bind on thy sandales. And so he did. And he says unto him: cast thy
garment about thee and follow me. And he came out and followed him, and wist
not that it was truth which was done by the angel, but thought he had seen a
vision. When they were past the first and the second watch, they came unto the
iron gate, that leads unto the city, which opened to them by the own
accord. And they went out, and passed through one street, and furthwith the
angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himself, he said: now I
know of a suertie that the Lord has sent his angel, and has delivered me
out of the hand of Herod, and from all the waytyng for of the people of the
Jews.

The Gospel.
WHen Jesus came into the coasts of the city which is called Cesaria
Philippi, Mat. xvi.
he asked his disciples, saying: whom do men say that I the son of man am?
They said: some say that thou art John Baptiste, some Helias, some Ieremias,
or one of the noumbre of the prophets. He says unto them: but whom say ye
that I am? Simon Peter answered, and said: Thou art Christ the son of the
living God. And Jesus answered, and said unto him. Happy art thou Simon the
son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee: but my
father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter: and
upon this rock I will build my congregation. And the gates of hell shall not
preuail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. And whatsoever thou byndest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou locest in earth, shall be loced in heaven.

At Euensong.
The second lesson Act. iiii. Unto the end.

Saint Marye Magdalene.
Praise the Lord, O my soul: Lauda anima mea. Psalm. cxlvi.
while I live will I praise the Lord, yea as long as I have any being I will
sing praises unto my God.

O put not your trust in princes: nor in any child of man, for there is no
help in them.

For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth:
and then all his thoughts peryshe.

Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

Which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: which keeps
his promise for ever.

Which helps them to right that suffer wrong: which fedeth the hungry.

The Lord loceth men out of prison: the Lord gives sight to the blind.

The Lord helps them up that are fallen: the Lord cares for the righteous.

The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherles and wydowe: as
for the way of the ungodly, he turns it up side down.

The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be king for evermore: and throughout all
generacions.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
Merciful father give us grace, that we never presume to sin through the
example of any creature, but if it shall chance us at any time to offend thy
dyuine majesty: that then we may truly repent, and lament the same, after the
example of Mary Magdalene, and by lyuelye faith obtain remission of all our
sins: through the only merits of thy son our savior Christ.

The Epistle.
Prou. xxxi
Whosoever finds an honest faithful woman, she is much more worth then
pearls. The heart of her husband may safely trust in her, so that he shall
fall in no poverty. She will do him good and not evil, all the days of her
life. She occupies woll and flax, and labors gladlye with her hands. She
is like a merchants ship that brings her vitayles from a far. She is up
in the night season to provide meat for her household, and food for her
maidens. She considers land and byeth it, and with the fruit of her hands
she planteth a vineyarde. She girdeth her loins with strength, and courageth
her arms. And if she perceive that her huswifery does good, her candle goes
not out by night. She lays her fingers to the spindle: and her hand takes
hold of the distaffe. She opens her hand to the poor, yea she stretches
forth her hands to such as have need. She fears not that the cold of
winter shall hurt her house, for all her household folks are clothed with
skarlet. She makes her self fair ornaments, her clothing is white silk and
purple. Her husband is much set by in the gates, when he sits among the
rewlers of the land. She makes cloth of silk and sells it, and delivers
girdles unto the merchant. Strength and honor is her clothing, and in the
latter day she shall rejoice. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her
tongue is the law of grace. She looks well to the ways of her household: and
eats not her bread with ydlenes. Her children shall arise, and call her
blessed: and her husband shall make much of her. Many daughters there be that
gather riches together: but thou go above them al. As for favor it is
deceitpfull, and beutie is a vain thing: but a woman that fears the Lord,
she is worthy to be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let
her own works praise her in the gates.

The Gospel.
ANd one of the Phariseis desired Jesus that he would eat with him. Luc. vii.
And he went into the Phariseis house, and sat down to meat. And behold a
woman in that city (which was a sinner) as soon as she knew that Jesus sat
at meat in the Phariseis house, she brought an Alabaster box of oyntemente,
and stood at his feet behind him weping, and began to wash his feet with
tears, and did wype them with the hears of her head, and kyssed his feet,
and anointed them with the ointment. When the Pharisee (which had bidden him)
saw that, he spoke within himself, saying: if this man were a prophet, he
would surely know who and what manner of woman this is that touched him, for
she is a sinner. Jesus answered and said unto him: Simon, I have somewhat to
say unto thee. And he said: Master say on. There was a certain lender which
had two debtors, the one ought him five hundredth pence, and the other fifty.
When they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which
of them will love him most? Simon answered, and said: I suppose that he to
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him: thou have truly judged. And he
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon: Seeste thou this woman? I entered
into thy house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has washed my
feet with tears, and wiped them with the hears of her head. Thou gaueste me
no kiss: but she sense the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet.
My head with oil thou did not anoint, but she has anointed my feet with
ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee: many sins are forgiven her, for she loved
much. To whom less is forgiven, the same does less love. And he said unto
her: thy sins are forgiven thee. And they that sat at meat with him, began
to say within themselves. Who is this which forgeueth sins also? And he said
to the woman. Thy faith has saved thee: go in peace.

Saint James the Apostle.
Laudate dominum de celis. Psalm. cxlViii
O Praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in the height.

Praise him all ye angels of his: praise him all his host.

Praise him Sun and Moon: praise ye him all ye stars and light.

Praise him all ye heavens: and ye waters that be above the heavens.

Let them praise the name of the Lord: for (he spoke the word, and they were
made) he commanded, and they were created.

He has made them fast for ever and ever: he has given them a law, which
shall not be broken.

Praise the lord upon the earth, ye dragons, and al depes.

Fire, and hayle, snow and vapors, wynd and storm: fulfillyng his word.

Montaynes and all hills: fruitful trees and al Ceders. Beasts and all
cattle: worms and fethered fowls.

Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all the Judges of the world.

Youngmen and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the lord: for
his name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth

He shall exalt the horn of his people, al his saints shall praise him: even
the children of Israel, even the people that serves him.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.
Grant, O merciful God, that as thine holy Apostle James leaving his father
and all that he had, without delay, was obediente unto the calling of thy son
Jesus Christ, and followed him: So we forsaking al worldly and carnal
affeccions, may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments: through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
IN those days came prophets from the city of Jerusalem unto Antioche. Act.
xi.
And there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the spirit,
that there should be great derthe throughout all the world, which came to
pass in the Emperor Claudius days. Then the disciples, every man according
to his ability, purposed to send succor unto the brethren which dwelt in
Iewry, which thing they also did, and sent it to the elders, by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul. Acts. xii.
At the same time Herod the king stretched furthe his hands to vex certain
of the congregation. And he killed James the brother of John with the sweord.
And because he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded farther and took
Peter also.

The Gospel.
Math.xx.
THen came to him the mother of zebedes children, with her sons, wurshipping
him, and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said unto her: what will thou? She said unto him: Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on
thy right hand, and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom. But Jesus answered,
and said: ye wot not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I
shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
They said unto him: we are: He said unto them: ye shall drink in deed of my
cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on
my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give: but it shall chance unto
the^ that it is prepared for of my father. And when the ten heard this, they
dysdayned at the two brethren. But Jesus called them unto him, and said: ye
know that the princes of the nations have dominion over the^, and they that
are great men, exercise authority upon them. It shall not be so among you.
But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister: and whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to ministre, and to give his life a
redemption for many.

Saint Bartholomewe.
Non nobis domine. Psalm. cxv.
NOt unto us (O Lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise: for thy
loving mercy and for thy truethes sake.

Wherefore shall the heathen say: where is now their God?

As for our God he is in heaven: he has done whatsoever pleased him.

Their Idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands.

They have mouths and speak not: eyes have they and see not.

They have ears, and hear not: noses have they and smell not.

They have hands and handle not: feet have they and walk not, neither speak
they through their throat.

They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such as put their
trust in them.

But the house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succor and
defense.

Ye house of Aaron put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and defender.

Ye that fear the Lord, trust ye in the Lord: he is their helper and defender.

The Lord has been myndfull of us, and he shall bless us: even he shall
bless the house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron.

He shall bless the^ that fear the Lord: both small and great.

The Lord shall encreace you more and more: you and your children.

Ye are the blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth.

All the whole heavens are the Lords: the earth has He given unto the
children of men.

The dead praise not thee (O Lord): neither al they that go down into the
silence.

But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc. Amen.

The Collect.
O Almyghtie and everlasting God, which have given grace to thy apostle
Bartholomewe truly to believe and to preach thy word: grant we beseech
thee, unto thy church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he
taught: through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
BY the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders showed among the
people. Acts. v.
And they were all together with one accord in Salomons porche. And of other
durst no man join himself to them: nevertheless the people magnified them. The
noumber of the^ that believed in the Lord, both of men and weome^, grew more
and more: in so much that they brought the sick into the streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that at the least way the shadow of Peter, when he
came by, might shadow some of them (and that they might al be delivered from
their infirmites.) There came also a multitude out of the cities round about,
unto Jerusalem, bringyng sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean
spirits: And they were healed every one.

The Gospel.
Luke. xxii.
ANd there was a strife among them which of them should seem to be the
greateste. And he said unto them: the kings of nations reign over them, and
they that have authority upon them are called gracious Lords: But ye shall not
be so. But he that is greatest among you, shall be as the younger: and he that is
chief, shall be as he that does minister. For whether is greater he that
sits at meat, or he that serves? Is not he that sits at meat: But I am
among you, as he that ministers. Ye are they, which have bidden with me in my
temptacions. And I appointe unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to
me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on seats
iudgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Saint Mathewe.
Leudate dominum omnes Gentes. psalm. CxVii.
O Praise the lord all ye heathen: praise him al ye nations.

For his merciful kindness is ever more and more to ward us: and the truth of
the Lord endures for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which by thy blessed son did call Mathewe from the
receipte of custom to be an Apostle and Evangelist: Grant us grace to forsake
all covetous desires and inordinate love of riches, and to follow thy said
son Jesus Christ: who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
Seeing that we have such an office, ii. Cor. iiii.
even as God has had mercy on us, we go not out of kind, but have cast from
us the clokes of vnhonestye, and walk not in craftines, neither handle we the
word of God deceiptfully, but open the truth, and report our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God. If our gospel be yet hid, it is hid among
them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
them, which believe not, lest the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ
(which is the image of God) should shine unto them. For we preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and our selves, your servants,
for Jesus sake. For it is God that commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, which has shyned in our hearts, for to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

The Gospel.
ANd as Jesus passed forth from thence, Math. ix.
he saw a man (named Mathewe) sitting at the receipt of custom, and hesaid
unto him: follow me. And he arose and followed him. And it came to pass as Jesus
sat at meat in his house: behold, many Publicans also and sinners that came,
sat down with Jesus and his disciples. And when the Phariseis saw it, they
said unto his disciples: why eats your Master with Publicanes and sinners?
But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them: They that be strong need not the
physician, but they that are sick. Go ye rather and learn what that means:
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

Saint Michael and all Angels.
At the communion.
Landate pueri Psalm. cxiii.
Praise the Lord (ye servants) O praise the name of the Lord.

Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

The Lords name is praised: from the rysyng up of the Sun, unto the going
down of the same.

The Lord is hye above all heathen: and his glory above the heavens.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so hye: and yet
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth?

He takes up the simple out of the dust: and lifts the poor out of the mire.

That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people.

He makes the baren woman to keep house: and to be a joyful mother of
children.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
EVerlasting God, which haste ordained and constituted the services of all
Angels and men in a wonderful order: mercifully grant that they which always
do thee service in heaven, may by thy appointment succor and defend us in
earth: through Jesus Christ our Lord. etc.

The Epistle.
Apoca. xii.
THere was a great battle in heaven: Michael and his Angels fought with the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels, and prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great Dragon, that old serpent,
called the devil and Sathanas, was cast out, which deceives all the world.
And he was cast into the earth, and his Angels were cast out also with him. And
I heard a loud voice, saying: in heaven is now made salvation and strength,
and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. And
they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice
heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe unto the inhabitours of the earth, and
of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you, which has great wrath,
because he knows that he has but a short time.

The Gospel.
AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus saying: Math. xviii.
who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child unto him,
and set him in the myddest of them, and said: Verily I say unto you,
except ye turn and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Whosoever therefore humbles himself as this child, the same is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whosoever receives such a child in
my name, receives me. But whosoever does offend one of these lytleons which
believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe unto the world,
because of offenses: necessary it is that offenses come: But woe unto the
manne, by whom the offense comes. Wherefore, if thy hand or thy foot hinder
thee, cut him of, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee to enter into
life halt or maimed, rather then thou should (having two hands or two fete)
be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine iye offend thee, pluck it out,
and cast it from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life with one iye,
rather then (having.ij. iyes) to be cast into hell fire. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these lytleons. For I say unto you: that in heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven.

Saint Luke Evangelist.
BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: Super flumine psalm. cxxxvii.
when we remembered (thee O) Sion.

As for our harpes we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein.

For they that led us away captive, required of us then a song and melodye in
our heaviness: sing us one of the songs of Sion.

How shall we sing the Lords song: in a strange land?

If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning.

If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the rose of my mouth: yea if
I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth.

Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, how they
said: down with it, down with it even to the ground.

O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery: yea happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.

Blessed shall he be, that takes thy children: and throws them against the
stones.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God which calledst Luke the physician, whose praise is in the
gospel, to be a physician of the soul: it may please thee by the wholesome
medicines of his doctrine, to heal all the diseases of our souls: through thy
son Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Watch thou in all things, suffer affliccions, do the work thoroughly of an
Evangelist, ii. Timo. iiii.
fulfill thine office unto the vtmoste: be sobre. For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I
have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith. From hencefurth there is laid
up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord (that is a righteous judge)
shall give me at that day: not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
coming. Do thy diligence, that thou may come shortly unto me. For Demas
has forsaken me, and loves this present world, and is departed unto
Thessalonica. Crescens is gone to Galacia, Titus unto Dalmacia, only Lucas is
with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee, for he is profitable unto me for
the ministracion. And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus: The cloak that I left at
Troada with Carpus, when thou come, bring with thee, and the books, but
specially the parchement. Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the
Lord reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also: For he has
greatly withstand our words.

The Gospel.
THe Lord appointed other seventy (and two) also, Luc. x.
and sent them two and two before him into every city and place, whither he
himself would come. Therefore said he unto them: the harvest is great, but
the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, to send
furthe laborers into his harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth
as lambs among wolves. Bear no wallet, neither scrip, nor shoes, and salute
no man by the way: into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to
this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him:
if not, it shall return to you again. And in the same house tarry still, eating
and drinkyng such as they give. For the labourer is worthy of his reward.

Simon and Jude Apostles.
O Praise God in his holiness: Laudate dominum. Psalm. cl.
praise him in the firmament of his power.

Praise him in his noble acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute and harp.

Praise him in the cymbales and daunse: praise him upon the stringes and pipe.

Praise him upon the well tuned cymbales: praise him upon the loud cymbales.

Let every thing that has breath, praise the lord.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty God, which have builded the congregation upon the foundation of the
Apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone:
grant us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine,
that we may be made an holy temple acceptable to thee: through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
Jude.i.
IVdas the servant of Jesus Christ, the brother of James: to them which are
called and sanctified in God the father, and preserved in Jesus Christ: Mercy
unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence
to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto
you, to exhort you that ye should continuallye labor in the faith, which
was once given unto the saints. For there are certain ungodly men craftily
crept in, of which it was written before time unto such judgment. They turn
the grace of our God unto wantonness, and deny God (which is the only lord)
and our lord Jesus Christ. My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance,
for as much as ye once know this, how that the lord (after that he had
delivered the people out of Egypt) destroyed them which afterward believed not.
The Angels also which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitacion, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day: even as Sodom and Gomor, and the Cities about
them, which in like manner defiled themselves with fornicacion, and followed
strange flesh, are set forth for an exaumple, and suffer the pain of
eternal fire: likewise these being deceived by dreams, defile the flesh,
despise rulers, and speak evil of them that are in authority.

The Gospel.
THis command I you, that ye love together. John.xv.
If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own: howbeit, because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Remember the word that I said unto you: the servant is not
greater then the lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you. If they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But all these
things will they do unto you for my names sake, because they have not known
him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should have
had no sin: but now have they nothing to cloak their sin with all. He that
hates me, hates my father also. If I had not done among them the works
which none other man did, they should have had no sin. But now have they
both seen and hated: not only me, but also my father. But this happens that
the saying might be fulfilled that is written in their law. They hated me
without a cause. But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the father, even the spirit of truth (which proceeds of the father) he
shall testify of me. And ye shall bear witness also, because ye have been with
me from the beginning.

All Saints,
Propre lessons at Mattyns.
The first lesson Sapi. iii. unto blessed is rather the Baren.

The second lesson. Hebre. xi.xii. Saints by faith subdued unto If ye endure
chastisyng.

At the Communion.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: Cantate domino. Psalm. cxlix.
let the congregation of saints praise him.

Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be
joyful in their king.

Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
tabret and harp.

For the Lord has pleasure in his people: and helps the meke hearted.

Let the saints be joyful with glory: let them rejoice in their beds.

Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two edged sword in their
hands.

To be avenged of the heathen: and to rebuke the people.

To bind their kings in chains: and their nobles with lynkes of iron.

That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: such honor have all his
Saints.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

The Collect.
Almighty GOD, which haste knitte together thy elect in one Communion and
fellowship in the mystical body of thy son Christ our Lord: grant us grace
so to follow thy holy Saints in all virtues, and godly living, that we may
come to those unspeakable joys, which thou have prepared for all them that
unfeignedly love thee: through Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
Apoca. vii.
Behold, I John saw an other Angel ascend from the rysyng of the Sun, which
had the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four
Angels (to who^ power was given to hurt the earth and the sea) saying: Hurt
not the earth neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God, in their foreheades. And I heard the noumbre of the^
which were sealed, and there were sealed an.C. and xliiij.M. of all the tribes
of the children of Israel.

Of the tribe of Judah were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Ruben were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Gad were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Aser were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Neptalim were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Symeon were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Leui were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Isachar were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed.xii.M.

Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed xii.M.

Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed xii.M.

After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which no man could nombre)
of all nations, and people, and tongues, stood before the seat, and before the
lamb, clothed with long white garments, and Palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying: salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the
seat of our god, and unto the lamb. And all the Angels stood in the compass
of the seat, and of the elders, and of the four beasts, and fell before the
seat on their faces, and worshipped God, saying: Ame^. Blessing and glory, and
wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for
evermore. Amen.

The Gospel.
Jesus seeing the people, went up into the mountain: Math. v.
and when he was set, his disciples came to him, and after that he had opened
his mouth, he taught them, saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that morn: for they shall
receive comfort. Blessed are the meke: for they shall receive the enheritaunce
of the earth. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be satisfied. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain
mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the
peace makers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they
which suffer persecucion for righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall falsely
say all manner of evil sayings against you for my sake: rejoice and be glad,
for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you.

Propre lessons at Euensong.
The first lesson. Sapi. v. ( unto) His iealosy also.

The second lesson. Apoca. xix. ( unto) And I saw an Angel stand.

THE SVPPER of the Lord, and the holy Communion, commonly called the Mass.
SO many as intend to be partakers of the holy Communion, shall sygnifie
their names to the Curate, over night: or else in the morning, before the
beginning of Matins, or immediately after.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the
congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong to his neighbors, by
word, or deed: The Curate shall call him, and advertise him, in any wise not to
presume to the lords table, until he have openly declared himself, to have
truly repented, and amended his former naughty life: that the congregation
may thereby be satisfied, which before were offended: and that he have
recompensed the parties, whom he has dooen wrong unto, or at the least be in
full purpose so to do, as soon as he conveniently may.

The same order shall the Curate use, with those betwixt whom he perceives
malice, and hatred to reign, not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords
table, until he know them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties so at
variaunce, be content to forgive from the botome of his heart, all that the
other has trespaced against him, and to make amends, for that he himself
has offended: and the other party will not be persuaded to a godly unity,
but remain still in his frowardnes and malice: The Minister in that case,
ought to admit the penitent person to the holy Communion, and not him that is
obstinate.

Upon the day, and at the time appointed for the ministracion of the holy
Communion, the Priest that shall execute the holy ministry, shall put upon him
the vesture appoincted for that ministracion, that is to say: a white Albe
plain, with a vestement or Cope. And where there be many Priests, or Deacons,
there so many shall be ready to help the Priest, in the ministracion, as shall be
requisite: And shall have upon them likewise, the vestures appointed for their
ministry, that is to say, Albes, with tunacles. Then shall the Clearkes sing
in English for the office, or Introite, (as they call it) a Psalm appointed
for that day.

The priest standing humbly before the mids of the Altar, shall say the
Lords prayer, with this Collect. Almighty GOD, unto whom all hearts be
open, and all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid: cleanse the
thoughts of our hearts, by the inspiracion of thy holy spirit: that we may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name: Through Christ our
Lord. Ame^.


Then shall he say a Psalm appointed for the introite: which Psalm ended,
the Priest shall say, or else the Clearkes shall sing. iij. Lord have mercy
upon us.

iij. Christ have mercy upon us.

iij. Lord have mercy upon us.


Then the Priest standing at Gods board shall begin. Glory be to God on high.


The Clearkes. And in earth peace, good will toward men.

We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give
thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord GOD heavenly king, God the father
almighty.

O Lord the only begotten son Jesus Christ, O Lord GOD, Lamb of GOD, son
of the father, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us:
thou that take away the sins of the world, receive our prayer.

Thou that sit at the right hand of God the father, have mercy upon us:
For thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord. Thou only (O Christ)
with the holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the father. Amen.


Then the priest shall turn him to the people and say. The Lord be with you.


The Answer. And with thy spirit.


The Priest. Let us pray.


Then shall follow the Collect of the day, with one of these two Collectes
following, for the King. Almighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power
infinite, have mercy upon the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy
chosen servant Edward the sixth, our king and governor: that he (knowing whose
minister he is) may above all things, seek thy honor and glory, and that we
his subjects (duly consydering whose authority he has) may faithfully
serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy
blessed word, and ordinance: Through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee,
and the holy ghost, lives, and reigns, ever one God, world without end.
Amen.

Almighty and everlasting GOD, we be taught by thy holy word, that the
hearts of Kings are in thy rule and governance, and that thou do dispose,
and turn them as it seems best to thy godly wisdom: We humbly beseech thee,
so to dispose and govern the heart of Edward the sixth, thy servant, our King
and governor, that in all his thoughts, words, and works, he may ever seek
thy honor and glory, and study to preserve thy people, committed to his
charge, in wealth, peace, and Godlynes: Grant this, O merciful father, for thy
dear sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


The Collectes ended, the priest, or he that is appointed, shall read the
Epistle, in a place assigned for the purpose, saying. The Epistle of saint
Paul written in the (...) Chapter of (...) to the (...).


The Minister then shall read thepistle. Immediately after the Epistle ended,
the priest, or one appointed to read the Gospel, shall say. The holy Gospel
written in the (...) Chapter of (...).


The Clearkes and people shall answer. Glory be to thee, O Lord.


The Priest or deacon then shall read the Gospel: After the Gospel ended,
the priest shall begin. I believe in one God.


The Clearkes shall sing the rest. The father almighty maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things visible, and invisible: And in one Lord Jesus
Christ, the only begotten son of God, begotten of his father before all
worlds, God of GOD, light of light, very God of very God, begotten, not made,
being of one substance with the father, by whom all things were made, who
for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by
the holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, and was made manne, and was Crucified also
for us under Poncius Pilate, he suffered and was buried, and the third day he
arose again according to the scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits
at the right hand of the father: And he shall come again with glory, to judge
both the quick and the dead.

And I believe in the holy ghost, the Lord and geuer of life, who proceeds
from the father and the son, who with the father and the son together, is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism, for the remission
of sins. And I look for the resurreccion of the dead: and the life of the
world to come. Amen.


After the Creed ended, shall follow the Sermon or Homely, or some portion of
one of the Homelies, as they shall be hereafter divided: wherein if the people be
not exhorted to the worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament of the body and
blood of our savior Christ: then shall the Curate give this exhortacion, to
those that be minded to receive the same. DErely beloved in the Lord, ye that
mind to come to the holy Communion of the body and blood of our savior
Christ, must consider what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, how he
exhorts all persons diligently to try and examine themselves, before they
presume to eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: for as the benefit is
great, if with a truly penitent heart, and lively faith, we receive that holy
Sacrament: (for then we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, then we dwell in Christ and Christ in us, we be made one with Christ,
and Christ with us) so is the danger great, if we receive the same unworthily,
for then we become gyltie of the body and blood of Christ our savior, we eat
and drink our own damnacion, not considering the Lords body. We kindle Gods
wrath over us, we provoke him to plague us with diverse diseases, and sondery
kinds of death. Therefore if any here be a blasphemer, aduouterer, or be in
malice, or envy, or in any other grievous crime (except he be truly sorry
therefore, and earnestly minded to leave the same vices, and do trust him self
to be reconciled to almighty God, and in Charity with all the world) let
him bewail his sins, and not come to that holy table, lest after the taking
of that most blessed bread: the devil enter into him, as he did into Judas,
to fill him full of all iniquity, and bring him to destruction, both of body
and soul. Judge therefore your selfs (brethren) that ye be not judged of the
lord. Let your mind be without desire to sin, repent you truly for your
sins past, have an earnest and lively faith in Christ our savior, be in
perfect charity with all men, so shall ye be mete partakers of those holy
mysteries. And above all things: ye must give most humble and hearty thanks
to God the father, the son, and the holy ghost, for the redemption of the
world, by the death and passion of our savior Christ, both God and man, who
did humble himself even to the death upon the cross, for us miserable
sinners, which lay in darkness and shadow of death, that he might make us
the children of God, and exalte us to everlasting life. And to thend that we
should always remember the excedyng love of our master, and only savior
Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits, which (by his
precious bloudshedyng) he has obteigned to us, he has left in those holy
Mysteries, as a pledge of his love, and a continual all remembrance of
the same his own blessed body, and precious blood, for us to fed upon
spiritually, to our endless comfort and consolacion. To him therefore with the
father and the holy ghost, let us give (as we are most bounden) continual
thanks, submitting our selfs wholly to his holy will and pleasure, and
studying to serve him in true holiness and righteousness, all the days of our
life. Amen.


In Cathedral churches or other places, where there is daily Communion, it
shall be sufficient to read this exhortacion above written, once in a month.
And in parish churches, upon the weke days it may be left vnsayed.

And if vpon^ the Sunday or holy day, the people be negligent to come to the
Communion: Then shall the Priest earnestly exhort his parishoners, to dispose
themselfes to the receiving of the holy communion more diligently, saying these
or like words unto the^.

Dear friends, and you especially upon whose souls I have cure and charge, on
(...) next, I do intend by Gods grace, to offer to all such as shall be godly
disposed, the most comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to
be taken of them, in the remembrance of his most fruitful and glorious
Passion: by the which passion, we have obteigned remission of our sins, and
be made partakers of the kingdom of heaven, whereof we be assured and
asserteigned, if we come to the said Sacrament, with hearty repentance for
our offenses, steadfast faith in Gods mercy, and earnest mind to obey
Gods will, and to offend no more. Wherefore our duty is to come to these
holy mysteries, with most hearty thanks to be given to almighty GOD, for
his infinite mercy and benefits given and bestowed upon us his unworthy
servants, for whom he has not only given his body to death, and shed his
blood, but also does vouchsaue in a Sacrament and Mystery, to give us his
said body and blood to feed upon spiritually. The which Sacrament being so
Divine and holy a thing, and so comfortable to them which receive it
worthilye, and so dangerous to them that will presume to take the same
unworthily: My duty is to exhort you in the mean season, to consider the
greatness of the thing, and to search and examine your own consciences, and
that not lightly nor after the manner of dissimulers with GOD: But as they
which should come to a most Godly and heavenly Banquet, not to come but in
the marriage garment required of God in scripture: that you may (so much as
lies in you) be found worthy to come to such a table. The ways and means
thereto is.

First that you be truly repentaunt of your former evil life, and that you
confess with an unfeigned heart to almighty God, your sins and unkindness
toward his Majesty committed, either by will, word, or deed, infirmity or
ignorance: and that with inward sorrow and tears you bewail your offenses,
and require of almighty god, mercy and pardon, promising to him (from the
botome of your hearts) thamendment of your former life. And emonges all
others, I am commanded of God, especially to move and exhort you, to
reconcile your selfs to your neighbors, whom you have offended, or who has
offended you, putting out of your hearts all hatred and malice against them,
and to be in love and charity with all the world, and to forgive other, as
you would that god should forgive you. And if any man have done wrong to any
other: let him make satisfaccion, and due restitucion of all lands and goods,
wrongfully taken away or withholden, before he come to Gods board, or at the
least be in full mind and purpose so to do, as soon as he is able, or else let
him not come to this holy table, thinking to deceive God, who sees all men's
hearts. For neither the absolucion of the priest, can any thing avail them,
nor the receyuyng of this holy sacrament does any thing but increase their
damnacion. And if there be any of you, whose conscience is troubled and grieved
in any thing, lackyng comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or to some
other discrete and learned priest, taught in the law of God, and confess and
open his sin and grief secretly, that he may receive such ghostly
counsel, advise, and comfort, that his conscience may be releued, and that of
us (as of the Ministers of GOD and of the church) he may receive comfort and
absolucion, to the satisfaccion of his mind, and auoydyng of all scruple and
doubtfulnes: requiryng such as shall be satisfied with a general confession,
not to be offended with them that do use, to their further satisfying, the
auriculer and secret confession to the Priest: nor those also which think
needful or convenient, for the quietness of their own consciences,
particulerly to open their sins to the Priest: to be offended with them that
are satisfied, with their humble confession to GOD, and the general confession
to the church. But in all things to follow and keep the rule of charity, and
every man to be satisfied with his own conscience, not judging other men's
minds or consciences: where as he has no warrant of Gods word to the same.


Then shall follow for the Offertory, one or mo, of these Sentences of holy
scripture, to be song whiles the people do offer, or else one of them to be
said by the minister, immediately before the offering. Mat. v.
Let your light so shine before me^, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

Mat. vi.
Lay not up for your selves treasure upon the earth, where the ruste and mothe
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for
your selfs treasures in heaven, where neither ruste nor mothe does corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

Math. vii.
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto
them, for this is the law and the Prophets.

Mat. vii.
Not every one that says unto me, lord, lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

Iue. xix.
Zache stood furthe, and said unto the Lord: behold Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any wrong to any man, I restore
four fold.

^. Cor. ix.
Who goes a warfare at any time at his own cost? who planteth a vineiarde,
and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who fedethe a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock?

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, i. Cor. ix.
is it a great matter if we shall reap your worldly things?

Do ye not know, i. Cor. ix.
that they which minister about holy things, live of the Sacrifice? They
which wait of the alter, are partakers with the alter? even so has the lord
also ordained: that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel.

He which sows little, shall reap little, ii. Cor. ix.
and he that sows ple^teously, shall reap plenteously. Let every manne do
according as he is disposed in his heart, not grudgyngly, or of necessity,
for God loves a chereful geuer.

Let him that is taught in the word, Gala. vi.
minister unto him that teaches, in all good things. Be not deceived, GOD is
not mocked. For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap.

While we have time, let us do good unto all men, Gala. vi.
and specially unto them, which are of the household of faith.

Godlynes is great riches, i. Timo. vi.
if a man be contented with that he has: For we brought nothing into the
world, neither may we carry any thing out.

Charge them which are rich in this world, i. Timo. vi.
that they be ready to give, and glad to distribute, laying up in stoare for
themselves a good foundation, against the time to come, that they may attain
eternal life.

GOD is not unrighteous, Hebre. vi.
that he will forgette your works and labor, that proceeds of love, which
love ye have showed for his names sake, which have ministered unto the
saints, and yet do minister.

To do good, and to distribute, forget not, Hebre. xiii.
for with such Sacrifices God is pleased.

Whosoever has this worlds good, i. John. iii.
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him?

Give almose of thy goods, Toby. iiii.
and turn never thy face from any poor man, and then the face of the lord
shall not be turned away from thee.

Be merciful after thy power: if thou haste much, Toby. iiii.
give plenteously, if thou have little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that
little, for so gathereste thou thy self a good reward in the day of
necessity.

prouer. xix.
He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and look what he
lays out, it shall be paid him again.

Psalm. xli.
Blessed be the man that provides for the sick and nedy, the lord shall
deliver him, in the time of trouble.


Where there be Clearkes, they shall sing one, or many of the sentences above
written, according to the length and shortenesse of the time, that the people
be offering.

In the mean time, whiles the Clearkes do sing the Offertory, so many as are
disposed, shall offer to the poor men's box every one according to his
ability and charitable mind. And at the offering days appointed, every
manne and woman shall pay to the Curate, the due and accustomed offerynges.

Then so many as shall be partakers of the holy Communion, shall tarry still in
the quire, or in some conueniente place nigh the quire, the men on the one
side, and the women on the other side. All other (that mind not to receive the
said holy Communion) shall depart out of the quire, except the ministers and
Clearkes.

Than shall the minister take so much Bread and Wine, as shall suffice for
the persons appointed to receive the holy Communion, laiyng the bread upon the
corporas, or else in the paten, or in some other comely thing, prepared for that
purpose: And putting ye wine into the Chalice, or else in some fair or
conueniente cup, prepared for that use (if the Chalice will not serve) puttyng
thereto a little pure and clean water: And setting both the bread and wine upon
the Alter: Then the Priest shall say.

The Lord be with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit.


Priest. Lift up your hearts.


Answer. We lift them up unto the Lord.


Priest Let us give thanks to our Lord God.


Answer. It is mete and right so to do.


The Priest. IT is very mete, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at
all times, and in all places, give thanks to thee, O Lord, holy father,
almighty everlasting God.


Here shall follow the propre preface, according to the time (if there be any
specially appointed) or else immediately shall follow. Therefore with Angels.
etc. PROPRE Prefaces.
Upon Christmas day. BEcause thou diddeste give Jesus Christ, thine only
son to be borne as this day for us, who by the operacio^ of the holy ghost,
was made very man, of the substance of the Virgin Mary his mother, and that
without spotte of sin, to make us clean from all sin. Therefore. etc. Upon
Easter day But chiefly are we bound to praise thee, for the glorious
resurreccion of thy son Jesus Christ, our Lord, for he is the very Pascall
Lamb, which was offered for us, and has taken away the sin of the world,
who by his death has destroyed death, and by his risyng to life again, has
restored to us everlasting life. Therefore. etc. Upon the Assencion day.
THrough thy most dear beloved son, Jesus Christ our Lord, who after his
most glorious resurrection, manifestly appeared to all his disciples, and in
their sight ascended up into heaven, to prepare a place for us, that where he
is, thither might we also ascend, and reign with him in glory. Therefore.
etc. Upon Whitsondaye. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, according to whose
most true promise, the holy Ghost came down this day from heaven, with a
sudden great sound, as it had been a mighty wind, in the lykenes of fiery
toungues, lightynge upon the Apostles, to teach them, and to lead them to all
truethe, geuyng them both the gift of diverse languages, and also boldness
with feruente zeal, constantly to preach the Gospel unto all nations,
whereby we are brought out of darkness and error, into the clear light and
true knowledge of thee, and of thy son Jesus Christ. Therefore. etc. Upon the
feast of the Trinity. IT is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that
we should at all times, and in all places, give thanks to thee, O Lord
almighty, everlasting God, which art one God, one Lord, not one only
person, but three persons in one substance: For that which we believe of the
glory of the father, the same we believe of the son, and of the holy ghost,
without any difference, or inequality: whom the Angels. etc.



After which preface shall follow immediately. Therefore with Angels and
Archangels, and with all the holy company of heaven: we land and magnifye thy
glorious name, evermore praysyng thee, and saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
of Hosts: heaven and earth are full of thy glory: Osanna in the higheste.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: Glory to thee, O lord, in
the highest.

This the Clearkes shall also sing.
When the Clearkes have done syngyng, then shall the Priest, or Deacon, turn
him to the people and say.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's church.


Then the Priest turning him to the Altar, shall say or sing, plainly and
distinctly, this prayer following. Almighty and euerlyuyng God, which by thy
holy Apostle haste taught us to make prayers and supplicacions, and to give
thanks for all men: We humbly beseech thee most mercyfully to receive these
our prayers: which we offer unto thy divine Majesty, besechyng thee to
inspire continually the universal church, with the spirit of truethe, unity
and concord: And grant that all they that do confess thy holy name, may
agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and godly love.
Specially we beseech thee to save and defend thy servant, Edward our
King, that under him we may be Godly and quietely governed. And grant unto
his whole counsel, and to all that be put in authority under him, that they
may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of
wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true religion and
virtue. Give grace (O heavenly father) to all Bishops, Pastors, and Curates,
that they may both by their life and doctrine, set furthe thy true and lively
word, and rightely and duly administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy
people give thy heavenly grace, that with meke heart and due reverence, they
may hear and receive thy holy word, truly serving thee in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of
thy goodness (O Lord) to coumforte and succoure all the^, which in this
transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need, sycknes, or any other adversity.
And especially we commend unto thy merciful goodness, this congregation which
is here assembled in thy name, to celebrate the commemoracion of the most
glorious death of thy son: And here we do give unto thee most high
praise, and hearty thanks, for the wonderful grace and virtue, declared in
all thy saints, from the beginning of the world: And chiefly in the
glorious and most blessed virgin Mary, mother of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord
and God, and in the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs, whose
examples (O Lord) and stedfastnes in thy faith, and keeping thy holy
commandments, grant us to follow. We commend unto thy mercy (O Lord) all
other thy servants, which are departed hence from us, with the sign of
faith, and now do rest in the sleep of peace: Grant unto them, we beseech
thee, thy mercy, and everlasting peace, and that at the day of the general
resurreccion, we and all they which be of the mystical body of thy son,
may altogether be set on his right hand, and hear that his most joyful
voice: Come unto me, O ye that be blessed of my father, and possess the
kingdom, which is prepared for you, from the beginning of the world: Grant
this, O father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate.

O God heavenly father, which of thy tender mercy, diddeste give thine only
son Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the cross for our redemption, who
made there (by his one oblacion once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifyce, oblacion, and satisfaccion, for the sins of the whole world, and
did institute, and in his holy Gospel command us, to celebrate a perpetual
memory, of that his precious death, until his coming again: Hear us (o
merciful father) we beseech thee: and with thy holy spirit and word
vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these thy gifts, and creatures of bread and
wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of thy most derely beloved
son Jesus Christ. Here the priest must take the bread into his hands,
Who in the same night that he was betrayed: took bread, and when he had
blessed, and given thanks: he brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saiynge:
Take, eat, this is my body which is given for you: do this in remembrance
of me.

Here the priest shall take the Cup into his hands.
Likewise after supper he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave
it to them, saying: drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for you and for many, for remission of sins: do
this as often as you shall drink it, in remembrance of me.


These words before rehearsed are to be said, turning still to the Altar,
without any eleuacion, or showing the Sacrament to the people. WHerefore, O
Lord and heavenly father, according to the Instytucyon of thy derely beloved
son, our savior Jesus Christ, we thy humble servants do celebrate, and
make here before thy divine Majesty, with these thy holy gifts, the memory
all which thy son has willed us to make: having in remembrance his blessed
passion, mighty resurreccion, and glorious ascencion, renderynge unto thee
most heartye thanks, for the innumerable benefytes procured unto us by
the same, entyerely desiring thy fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept this
our Sacrifice of praise and thanks geuinge: most humblye besechinge thee to
grant, that by the merits and death of thy son Jesus Christ, and through
faith in his blood, we and all thy whole church, may obteigne remission of our
sins, and al other benefits of his passion. And here we offer and present
unto thee (O Lord) our self, our souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable,
holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee: humbly besechyng thee, that whosoever
shall be partakers of this holy Communion, may worthily receive the most
precious body and blood of thy son Jesus Christ: and be fulfilled with thy
grace and heavenly benediction, and made one body with thy son Jesus Christ,
that he may dwell in them, and they in him. And although we be unworthy
(through our manyfolde sins) to offer unto thee any Sacrifice: Yet we beseech
thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, and command these our
prayers and supplicacions, by the Ministry of thy holy Angels, to be brought
up into thy holy Tabernacle before the sight of thy divine majesty: not waying
our merits, but pardoning our offenses, through Christ our Lord, by whom,
and with whom, in the unity of the holy Ghost: all honor and glory, be unto
thee, O father almighty, world without end. Amen.


Let us pray.

AS our savior Christ, has commanded and taught us, we are bold to say.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptacion.


The Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Then shall the priest say. The peace of the Lord be always with you.


The Clearkes. And with thy spirit.


The Priest. CHrist our Pascal la^be is offered up for us, once for all, when he
bare our sins on his body upon the cross, for he is the very lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world: wherefore let us keep a joyful and
holy feast with the Lord.


Here the priest shall turn him toward those that come to the holy
Communion, and shall say. YOu that do truly and earnestly repent you of your
sins to almighty God, and be in love and charity with your neighbors, and
entende to lead a new life, following the commandments of God, and walkyng
from hencefurth in his holy ways: draw nere and take this holy Sacrament to
your comfort, make your humble confession to almighty God, and to his holy
church here gathered together in his name, mekely knelyng upon your knees.


Then shall this general Confession be made, in the name of all those that
are minded to receive the holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one
of the ministers, or by the Priest himself, all kneling humbly upon their
knees. Almighty GOD, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things,
judge of all men, we knowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wyckednes,
which we from time to time, most grievously have committed, by thought, word
and deed, against thy divine majesty, prouokyng most justly thy wrath and
indignacion against us: we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for these
our misdoinges, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of
them is intolerable: have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful
father, for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is
past, and grant that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee in newnes of
life, to the honor and glory of thy name: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Then shall the Priest stand up, and turning himself to the people, say
thus. Almighty GOD our heavenly father, who of his great mercy, has promised
forgiveness of sins to all them, which with heartye repentance and true
faith turn unto him: have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your
sins, confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to
everlasting life: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall the Priest also say. Hear what coumfortable words our savior
Christ says, to all that truly turn to him.

Come unto me all that travel and be heavy laden, and I shall refreshe you. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, to the end that all
that believe in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Hear also what saynct Paul says.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into this world to save sinners.

Hear also what saint John says.

If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propiciacion for our sins.


Then shall the Priest, turning him to gods board, knele down, and say in the
name of all them, that shall receive the Communion, this prayer following. WE
do not presume to come to this thy table (o merciful lord) trustinge in our
own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies: we be not worthy so
much as to gather up the cromes under thy table, but thou art the same lord
whose property is always to have mercy: Grant us therefore (gracious
lord) so to eat the flesh of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and to drink his
blood in these holy Mysteries, that we may continually dwell in him, and he
in us, that our synful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls
washed through his most precious blood. Amen.


Then shall the Priest first receive the Communion in both kinds himself,
and next deliver it to other Ministers, if any be there present (that they may
be ready to help the chief Minister) and after to the people.

And when he delivers the Sacrament of the body of Christ, he shall say to
every one these words.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy
body and soul unto everlasting life.


And the Minister delivering the Sacrament of the blood, and giving every one
to drink once and no more, shall say. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life.

If there be a Deacon or other Priest, then shall he follow with the Chalice:
and as ye prist ministers the Sacrament of the body, so shall he (for more
expedicion) minister ye Sacrament of the blood, in form before written.
In the Communion time the Clearkes shall sing.

O lamb of god that takeste away the sins of the world: have mercy upon
us.

O lamb of god that takeste away the sins of the world: grant us thy
peace.


Beginning so soon as the Priest does receive the holy Communion: and when
the Communion is ended, then shall the Clerks sing the post Communion.

Sentences of holy scripture, to be said or song every day one, after the holy
Communion, called the post Communion.

Math. xvi.
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross and
follow me.

Mar. Xiii.
Whosoever shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved.

Luc. i.
Praised be the Lord god of Israel, for he has visyted and redeemed his
people: therefore let us serve him all the days of our life, in holiness and
righteousness accepted before him.

Luc. xii.
Happy are those servants, whom the Lord (when he cummeth) shall find
wakyng.

Luc. xii.
Be ye ready, for the son of man will come, at an hour when ye think not.

Luc. xii.
The servant that knows his masters will, and has not prepared himself,
neither has done according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

John. iiii.
The hour cummeth and now it is, when true woorshippers shall woorship the
father in spirit and truethe.

John. v.
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest any wurse thing happen unto
thee.

If ye shall continue in my word, John. viii.
then are ye my very disciples, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free.

While ye have light, believe on the light, John. xii.
that ye may be the children of light.

He that has my commandments, and keeps them, John. xiiii.
the same is he that loves me.

If any man love me, he will keep my word, John. xiiii.
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him.

If ye shall bide in me, and my word shall abide in you, John. xv.
ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done to you.

Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, John. xv.
and become my disciples.

This is my commandment, that you love together, John. xv.
as I have loved you.

If God be on our side, who can be against us? Roma. viii.
which did not spare his own son, but gave him for us all.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is GOD that
iustifyeth, Roma. viii.
who is he that can condemn?

The night is passed, and the day is at hand, Roma. xiii.
let us therefore cast away the deeds of darkness, and put on the armor of
light.

Christ Jesus is made of GOD, unto us, wisdom, i. Corin. i.
and righteousness, and sanctifying, and redemption, that (according as it is
written) he which rejoices should rejoice in the Lord.

Know ye not that ye are the temple of GOD, i. Corin. iii.
and that the spirit of GOD dwells in you? if any manne defile the temple of
GOD, him shall God destroy.

Ye are derely bought, i. Cor. vi.
therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, for they belong to
God.

Be you folowers of God as dear children, Ephesians. v.
and walk in love, even as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an
offering and a Sacrifice of a sweet sauoure to God.


Then the Priest shall give thanks to God, in the name of all them that have
communicated, turning him first to the people, and saying. The Lord be with
you.


The Answer. And with thy spirit.


The Priest. Let us pray.

Almighty and euerlyuynge GOD, we most heartily thank thee, for that thou
have vouch safed to feed us in these holy Mysteries, with the spiritual food
of the most precious body and blood of thy son, our savior Jesus Christ,
and have assured us (duly receiving the same) of thy favor and goodness toward
us, and that we be very members incorporate in thy Mistical body, which is the
blessed company of all faithful people: and heirs through hope, of thy
everlasting kingdom, by the merits of the most precious death and passion,
of thy dear son. We therefore most humbly beseech thee, O heavenly father,
so to assiste us with thy grace, that we may continue in that holy fellowship,
and do all such good works, as thou haste prepared for us to walk in:
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the holy ghost, be all
honor and glory, world without end.


Then the Priest turning him to the people, shall let them depart with this
blessing. The peace of GOD (which passes all understanding) keep your hearts
and minds in the knowledge and love of GOD, and of his son Jesus Christ our
lord. And the blessing of God almighty, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, be emonges you, and remain with you always.


Then the people shall answer. Amen.


Where there are no clearkes, there the Priest shall say all things appointed
herefor them to sing.

When the holy Communion is celebrate, on the workedaye, or in private howses:
Then may be omitted, the Gloria in excelsis, the Creed, the Homely, and the
exhortacion, beginning.

Dearly beloved. etc.


Collectes to be said after the Offertory, when there is no Communion, every
such day one. ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplicacio^s and
prayers, and dispose the way of thy servants, toward the attainement of
everlasting salvation: that emonge all the chaunges and chances of this
mortal life, they may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help:
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty Lord and euerlyuyng GOD, vouchesafe, we beseech thee, to direct,
sanctifye, and govern, both our hearts and bodies, in the ways of thy
laws, and in the works of thy commandments: that through thy most mighty
proteccion, both here and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul: Through
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grant we beseech thee almighty god, that the words which we have heard
this day with our outward ears, may through thy grace, be so grafted
inwardly in our hearts, that they may bring forth in us, the fruit of good
living, to the honor and praise of thy name: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PReuente us, O lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begone, continued,
and ended in thee: we may glorifye thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting life: Through. etc.

Almighty God, the fountain of all wisdom, which know our necessities
before we ask, and our ignorance in asking: we beseech thee to have
compassion upon our infirmities, and those things which for our vnwoorthines
we dare not, and for our blyndnes we cannot ask, vouchsaue to give us for the
woorthines of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty god, which haste promised to hear the petitions of them that ask
in thy sons name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us
that have made now our prayers and supplicacions unto thee: and grant that
those things which we have faithfullye asked according to thy will, may
effectually be obtained to the relief of our necessitye, and to the setting
forth of thy glory: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For rain. O God heavenly father, which by thy son Jesus Christ, haste
promised to all the^ that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, al
things necessary to the bodily sustenaunce: send us (we beseech thee) in this
our necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the
fruits of the earth, to our comfort and to thy honor: Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

For fair wether. O Lord God, which for the sin of man, did once
drown all the world, except eight persons, and afterward of thy great
mercy, didste promise never to destroy it so again: We humbly beseech thee,
that although we for our iniquities have woorthelye deserved this plague of
rain and waters, yet upon our true repentance, thou will send us such
wether where by we may receive the fruits of the earth in due season, and
learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives, and by the grauntinge of
our peticion, to give thee praise and glory: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Upon wednesdaies and frydaies, the English Letanie shall be said or song in
all places, after such form as is appointed by the kings majesty's
Iniunccions: Or as is or shall be otherwise appointed by his highness. And
though there be none to communicate with the Priest, yet these days (after
the Letany ended) the Priest shall put upon him a plain Albe or surplesse,
with a cope, and say all things at the Altar (appointed to be said at the
celebracion of the lords supper) until after the offertory. And then shall
add one or two of the Collectes before written, as occasion shall serve by his
discrecion. And then turning him to the people shall let them depart with the
accustomed blessing.

And the same order shall be used all other days, whenever the people be
customably assembled to pray in the church, and none disposed to communicate
with the Priest.

Likewise in Chappelles annexed, and all other places, there shall be no
celebracion of the Lords supper, except there be some to communicate with the
priest. And in such Chappelles annexed where the people has not been
accustomed to pay any holy bread, there they must either make some charitable
provision for the beryng of the charges of the Communion, or else (for receyuyng
of the same) resort to their parish Church.

For auoydyng of all matters and occasion of discencion, it is mere that the
bread prepared for the Communion, be made through all this realm, after one
sort and fashion: that is to say, unleavened, and round, as it was before, but
without all manner of printe, and some thing more larger and thicker then it
was, so that it may be aptly divided in diverse pieces: and every one shall be
divided in two pieces, at the least, or more, by the discrecion of the
minister, and so distributed. And men must not think less to be received in
part, then in the whole, but in each of them the whole body of our savior
Jesus Christ.

And forsomuche as the Pastors and Curates within this realm, shall
continually find at their costs and charges in their cures, sufficient bread
and wine for the holy Communion (as often as their Parishioners shall be disposed
for their spiritual comfort to receive the same) it is therefore ordered, that
in recompense of such costs and charges, the Parishioners of every Parish
shall offer every Sunday, at the time of the Offertory, the just valor and
price of the holy lofe (with all such money, and other things as were wont to
be offered with the same) to the use of their Pastors and Curates, and that in
such order and course, as they were wont to find and pay the said holy lofe.

Also that the receiving of the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of
Christ, may be most agreeable to the institucion thereof and to the usage of the
primative Church: In all Cathedral and Collegiate churches, there shall
always some Communicate with the priest that ministers. And that the same may
be also observed every where abroad in the country: Some one at the least of
that house in every paryshe, to whom by course after the ordinance herein
made, it apperteyneth to offer for the charges of the Communion, or some other
whom they shall provide to offer for them, shall receive the holy Communion with
the priest: the which may be the better done, for that they know before,
when their course comes, and may therefore dispose themselfes to the worthy
receiving of the Sacrament. And with him or them who does so offer the
charges of the Communion: all other, who be then Godly disposed thereunto, shall
likewise receive the Communion. And by this means the Minister having always
some to communicate with him, may accordingly solempnise so high and holy
mysteries, with all the suffrages and due order appointed for the same. And the
priest on the weke day, shall forbear to celebrate the Comnion, except he have
some that will communicate with him.

Furthermore, every man and woman to be bound to hear and be at the divine
service, in the Parish church where they be resident, and there with devout
prayer, or Godly silence and meditacion, to occupy themselves. There to pay
their duties, to communicate once in the year at the least, and there to
receive, and take all other Sacraments and rites, in this book appointed. And
whosoever willingly upon no just cause, does absent themselfes, or does
ungodly in the Parish church occupy themselves: upon proffe thereof, by the
Ecclesiastical laws of the Realm, to be excommunicate, or suffer other
punishment, as shall to the Ecclesiastical judge (according to his discrecion)
seem convenient.

And although it be read in aunciente writers, that the people many years
past, received at the priests hands, the Sacrament of the body of Christ in
their own hands, and no commandment of Christ to the contrary: Yet
forasmuch as they many times conueyghed the same secretelye away, kept it with
them, and diversely abused it to supersticion and wickedness: lest any such
thing hereafter should be attempted, and that an uniformity might be used,
throughout the whole Realment is thought convenient the people commonly receive
the Sacrament of Christ's body, in their mouths, at the Priests hand.

The Letany and Suffrages.
O GOD the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, proceeding from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, procedyng from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom
thou haste redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of
the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnacion:

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and Hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness:

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornicacion, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceytes of the
world, the flesh, and the devil:

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plage, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedicion and priuye conspiracy, from the tyranny of the bishop of
Rome and all his detestable enormities, from all the false doctrine and
heresye, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
Circumcision, by thy Baptism, fasting, and temptacion:

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agonye and bloudye sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurreccion and ascencion, by the coming of
the holy ghost:

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulacion, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, in the day of judgment:

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to keep Edward the.vi. thy servant our king and
governor:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, that
he may always have affiaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to be his defe^dour, and keeper, geuyng him the victory
over all his enemies:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate al Bishops, pastors and ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the counsel, and all the
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to mayntaine truth:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity, peace, and concord:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
mekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affeccion, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have
erred and are deceived:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to succoure, help, and comfort all that be in
danger, necessity, and tribulacion:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water,
all women labouryng of child, al sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captyues:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherles children and
wyddowes, and all that be desolate and oppressed:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutours and sclaunderers,
and to turn their hearts:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kyndly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignoraunces, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word:

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O la^be of God, that take away the sins of the world:

Grant us thy peace.

O la^be of God, that take away the sins of the world:

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. With the residue of the Pater noster.

And lead us not into temptacion.

But deliver us from evil.

The versicle. O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us, for thy honor.

Glory be to the father, the son, and to the holy ghost: as it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciousely look upon our affliccions.

Pytifully behold the sorrows of our heart.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchesafe to hear us Christ.

Graciousely hear us, O Christ.

Graciousely hear us, O Lord Christ.

The versicle.

The answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

Almighty God, which haste given us grace at this time with one accord to
make our commune supplicacions unto thee, and do promise, that when two or
three be gathered in thy name, thou wylt grant their requests: fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and peticions of thy servants, as may be most
expedience for them, grauntyng us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in
the world to come life everlasting. Amen.

OF THE ADMInistracion of publyke Baptism to be used in the Church.
IT appears by ancient writers, that the Sacrament of Baptism in the old
time was not commo^lye ministered but at two times in the year, at Easter and
whitsontyde, at which times it was openly ministered in the presence of all
the congregation: Which custom (now being grown out of use) although it
cannot for many consideracions be well restored again, yet it is thought good
to follow the same as nere as conveniently may be: Wherefore the people are to
be admonished, that it is most conueniente that Baptism should not be
ministered but upon Sondayes and other holy days, when the most number of
people may come together. As well for that the congregation there present may
testify the receyuyng of them, that be newely Baptized, into the number of
Christ's Church, as also because in the Baytisme of Infantes, every manne
present may be put in remembrance of his own profession made to God in his
Baptism. For which cause also, it is expedient that Baptism be ministered in
the English tongue. Nevertheless (if necessity so require) children ought
at all times to be Baptized, either at the Church or else at home.

PVBLIKE BAPTISM
When there are children to be Baptized upon the Sunday, or holy day, the
parents shall give knowledge over night or in the morning, before the beginning
of Mattens to the curate. And then the Godfathers, Godmothers, and people, with
the children, must be ready at the church door, either immediately before the
last Canticle at Mattens, or else immediately before the last Canticle at
Euensong, as the Curate by his discrecion shall appoynte. And then standing
there, the pryest shall ask whether the children be Baptized or no. If they
answer. No. Then shall the priest say thus.

Dear beloved, forasmuch as al men be conceived and borne in sin, and that
no man borne in sin, can enter into the kingdom of God (except he be
regenerate, and borne a new of water, and the holy ghost) I beseech you to call
upon God the father through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteouse mercy
he will grant to these children that thing which by nature they cannot have,
that is to say, they may be Baptized with the holy ghost, and received into
Christ's holy church, and be made lively members of the same.

Then the priest shall say. Let us pray. them with thy holy ghost, that by
this wholesome lauer of regeneration, whatsoever sin is in them, may be washed
clean away, that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be received into
tharke of Christ's Church, and so saved from peryshing: and being feruente in
spirit, steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, rooted in charity, may ever
serve thee: And finally attain to everlasting life, with all thy holy and
chosen people. This grant us we beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake our
Lord. Amen.


Here shall the priest ask what shall be the name of the child, and when the
Godfathers and Godmothers have told the name, then he shall make a cross upon
the childs foreheade and breast, saying. N. Receive the sign of the holy
Cross, both in thy forehead, and in thy breast, in token that thou shall not
be ashamed to confess thy faith in Christ crucified, and manfully to fight
under his banner against sin, the world, and the devil, and to continewe
his faithful soldiour and servant unto thy lyfes end. Amen.

And this he shall do and say to as many children as be present to be
Baptized one after another. Let us pray.


Then let the priest lokyng upon the children, say. I Command thee, unclean
spirit, in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost, that
thou come out, and depart from these infantes, whom our Lord Jesus Christ
has vouchesaued to call to his holy Baptism, to be made members of his
body, and of his holy congregation. Therefore thou cursed spirit, remember
thy sentence, remember thy judgment, remember the day to be at hand, wherein
thou shall burn in fire everlasting, prepared for thee and thy Angels. And
presume not hereafter to exercise any tirannye toward these infantes, whom
Christ has bought with his precious blood, and by this his holy Baptism
calls to be of his flock.


Then shall the priest say. The Lord be with you.


The people. And with thy spirit.


The Minister. Hear now the gospel written by S. Mark.

Mark. x.
AT a certain time they brought children to Christ that he should touch
them, and his dysciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw
it, he was displeased, and said unto them: suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not: for to such belongs the kingdom of God. Verily I
say unto you: whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God, as a little
child: he shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms:
he put his hands upon them, and blessed them.


After the gospel is read, the minister shall make this brief exhortacion
upon the words of the gospel. Friends, you hear in this gospel the words
of our Savior Christ, that he commanded the children to be brought unto
him: how he blamed those that would have kept them from him: how he
exhorts all men to follow their innocence. Ye perceive how by his
outward gesture and deed, he declared his good will toward them. For he
embraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon the^, and blessed the^:
doubt ye not therefore, but earnestlye believe, that he will likewise favorably
receive these present infantes, that he will embrace them, with the arms of
his mercy, that he will give unto them the blessing of eternal life: and make
them partakers of his everlasting kingdom. Wherefore we being thus persuaded
of the good will of our heavenly father toward these infantes, declared by his
son Jesus Christ: And nothing doubting but that he fauourablye allows this
charitable work of ours, in bringyng these children to his holy baptism: let
us faithfully and deuoutely give thanks unto him: And say the prayer which
the Lord himself taught. And in declaracion of our faith, let us also recyte
the articles contained in our Creed.


Here the minister with the Godfathers, Godmothers, and people present: shall
say. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. etc.


And then shall say openly. I believe in God the father almighty. etc.


The priest shall add also this prayer. ALmyghtie and everlasting God,
heavenly father, we give thee humble thanks, that thou haste vouchsaued to
call us to knowledge of thy grace, and faith in thee: Increace and confirm
this faith in us evermore: Give thy holy spirit to these infantes, that they
may be borne again, and be made heirs of everlasting salvation, through our
Lord Jesus Christ: Who lives and reigns with thee and the holy spirit,
now and for ever. Amen.

Then let the Priest take one of the children by the right hand, the other being
brought after him. And cu^ming into the church toward the font, say. THe
Lord vouchsafe to receive you into his holy household, and to keep and govern
you always in the same, that you may have everlasting life. Amen.


Then standing at the font the priest shall speak to the Godfathers and
Godmothers, on this wise. Well-beloved friends, ye have brought these children
here to be Baptized, ye have prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ would
vouchsafe to receive them, to lay his hands upon them, to bless them, to
release them of their sins, to give them the kingdom of heaven, and
everlasting life. Ye have heard also that our Lord Jesus Christ has promised
in his gospel, to grant all these things that ye have prayed for: which
promise he for his part, will most surely keep and perform. Wherefore after
this promise made by Christ, these infantes must also faithfully for their
part promise by you, that be their suerties, that they will forsake the devil
and all his works, and constantlye believe Gods holy word, and obediently
keep his commandments.


Then shall the priest demand of the child (which shall be first
Baptized) these questyons following: first namyng the child, and saying. N.
Doeste thou forsake the devil and all his works?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister. Doeste thou forsake the vain pomp and glory of the world, with
all the covetous desires of the same?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister. Doeste thou forsake the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow nor be led by them?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister Doeste thou believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and
earth?


Answer. I believe.


Minister Do thou believe in Jesus Christ his only begotten son our lord,
and that he was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgin Mary, that he
suffered under Poncius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, that he went
down into hell, and also did rise again the third day, that he ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father almighty: And from
thence shall come again at the end of the world, to judge the quick and the
dead:

Do thou believe this?


Answer. I believe.


Minister. Doeste thou believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholyke Church,
the Communion of Saints, Remissyon of Sins, Resurreccion of the flesh, and
everlasting life after death?


Answer. I believe.


Minister. What do thou desire?


Answer. Baptism.


Minister Will thou be Baptized?


Answer. I will.


Then the priest shall take the child in his hands, and ask the name. And
namyng the child, shall dippe it in the water thryse. First dipping the
rightside: Second the leftside: The third time dipping the face toward the
font: So it be discretely and warely done, saying. N. I Baptize thee in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.


And if the child be weak, it shall suffice to power water upon it, saying
the foresaid words. N. I Baptize thee. etc. Then the Godfathers and
Godmothers shall take and lay their hands upon the child, and the minister
shall put upon him his white vesture, commonly called the Crisome: And say.
Take this white vesture for a token of the innocencye, which by Gods grace in
this holy sacrament of baptism, is given unto thee: and for a sign whereby
thou art admonished, so long as thou live, to give thy self to innocence of
living, that after this transitory life, thou may be partaker of the life
everlasting. Amen.


Then the Priest shall annoynte the infant upon the head, saying. Almighty
God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has regenerate thee by water and
the holy ghost, and has given unto thee remission of all thy sins: he
vouchesaue to annoynte thee with the vnccyon of his holy spirit, and bring
thee to the inheritance of everlasting life. Amen.


When there are many to be Baptized, this order of demanding, Baptisyng,
puttyng on the Crisome, and enoyntyng, shall be used severally with every child.
Those that be first Baptized departing from the font; and remaynyng in some
conuenyente place within the Church, until all be Baptized. At the last
end, the priest calling the Godfathers and Godmothers together: shall say this
short exhortacion following. FOr as much as these children have promised by you
to forsake the devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him:
you must remember that it is your parts and duty, to see that these
infantes be taught, so soon as they shall be hable to learn, what a solemn
vow, promise, and professyon, they have made by you. And that they may know
these things the better: ye shall call upon them to hear sermons, and
chiefly you shall provide that they may learn the Creed, the Lords prayer,
and the ten commandments in thenglishe tongue: and al other things, which a
Christian manne ought to know and believe, to his souls health. And that
these children may be vertuouslye brought up to lead a godly and Christian
life: remembryng always that Baptism does represent unto us our profession,
which is, to follow thexaumple of our Savior Christ, and to be made like
unto him, that as he dyed and rose again for us, so should we (which are
Baptized) dye from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affeccions, and daily procedyng in all
virtue and godliness of living.

The minister shall command that the Crisomes be brought to the church,
and delivered to the Priests after the accustomed manner, at the Purificacyon
of the mother of every child. And that the children be brought to the
Busshope to be confirmed of him, so soon as they can say in their vulgar
tongue the articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the ten
commandments, and be further instructed in the Cathechisme, set forth
for that purpose, accordyngly as it is there expressed.

And so let the congregacyon depart in the name of the Lord. Note, that if
the number of children to be Baptized, and multitude of people present be so
great that they cannot conuenientlye stand at the church door: then let them
stand within the church in some conueniente place, nygh unto the Church
door: And there all things be said and done, appointed to be said and done
at the church door.


Of them that be Baptized in private houses in time of necessity.
The pastors and curates shall often admonyshe the people, that they differ not
the baptism of infantes any longer then the Sunday, or other holy day next
after the child be borne, unless upon a great and reasonable cause declared
to the curate and by him approved.

And also they shall warn them that without great cause, and necessity, they
Baptize not children at home in their houses. And when great need shall compel
them so to do, that then they minister it on this fashion.

First let the^ that be present call upon god for his grace, and say the
Lords prayer, if the time will suffer. And then one of them shall name the
child, and dip him in the water, or power water upon him, saying these
words

N. I Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.


And let them not doubt, but that the child so Baptized is lawfully and
sufficiently Baptized, and ought not to be Baptized again, in the Church.
But yet nevertheless, if the child which is after this sort Baptized do
afterward live, it is expedyente that he be brought into the Church, to the
entente the Priest may examyne and try, whether the child be lawfullye
Baptized or no. And if those that bring any child to the Church do answer
that he is already Baptized: Then shall the Priest examyne them further.

By whom the child was Baptized? Who was present when the child was
baptized? Whether they called upon god for grace and succor in that
necessity? With what thing, or what matter, they did Baptize the child? With
what words the child was Baptized? Whether they think the child to be
lawfully and perfectly Baptized?


And if the minister shall prove by the aunswers of such as brought the child
that al things were done, as they ought to be: Then shall not he christen the
child again, but shall receive him, as one of the flock of the true
christian people, saying thus. I Certifye you, that in this case ye have done
well, and according unto due order concerning the Baptising of this child,
which being borne in original sin, and in the wrath of God, is now by the
lauer of regeneracion in Baptism, made the child of God, and heir of
everlasting life: for our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny his grace and
mercy unto such infantes, but most lovingly does call them unto him. As the
holy gospel does witness to our coumfort on this wise.

Mark. x.
AT a certain time they brought children unto Christ that he should touch
them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw
it, he was dyspleased, and said unto them: Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbydde them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of God. Verily I
say unto you: whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child, he shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms,
he put his hands upon them, and blissed them.


After the gospel is read: the minister shall make this exhortacion upon the
words of the gospel. Friends, ye hear in this gospel the words of our
Saueour Christ, that he commanded the children to be brought unto him, how he
blamed those that would have kept them from him, how he exhorted all men to
follow their innocence: ye perceive how by his outward gesture and deed, he
declared his good will toward them, for he enbraced them in his arms, he laid
his hands upon them and blessed them. Doubt you not therefore, but earnestlye
believe, that he has likewise fauourablye received this present infant, that
he has enbraced him with the arms of his mercy, that he has given unto him
the blessyng of eternal life, and made him partaker of his everlasting
kingdom. Wherefore we being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly
father, declared by his son Jesus Christ toward this infant: Let us
faithfully and devoutly give thanks unto him, and say the prayer which the
Lord himself taught, and in declaracion of our faith, let us also recyte
the articles contained in our Creed.


Here the minister with the Godfathers and Godmothers shall say. Our father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: let thy kingdom come. etc.


Then shall they say the Creed, and then the Priest shall demand the name
of the child, which being by the Godfathers and Godmothers pronounced, the
minister shall say..N. Do thou forsake the devil and all his works?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister. Do thou forsake the vain Pomp and glory of the world, with
all the covetous desires of the same?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister. Do thou forsake the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow and be led by them?


Answer. I forsake them.


Minister. Do thou believe in God the father almyghtie, maker of heaven and
earth?


Answer. I believe.


Minister. Do thou believe in Jesus Christ his only begotten son our
Lord, and that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin
Marie, that he suffered under Poncius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
that he went down into hell, and also did arise again the third day, that
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty: And from thence shall come again at the end of the world to judge
the quick and the dead: do thou believe thus?


Answer. I believe.


Minister. Do thou believe in the holy Ghost, the holy catholyke Church, the
Communion of Saints, Remission of sins, Resurreccion of the flesh, and
everlasting life after death?


Answer. I believe.


Then the minister shall put the white vesture commonly called the Crisome,
upon the child, saying. TAke this white vesture for a token of the innocence,
which by gods grace in the holy sacrament of Baptysme is given unto thee,
and for a sign whereby thou art admonyshed so long as thou shalt live, to
give thy self to innocence of living, that after this transitory life, thou
may be partaker of the life everlasting. Amen.

Let us pray.


Then shall the minister make this exhortacion, to the Godfathers and
Godmothers. FOr as much as this child has promised by you to forsake the
devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him, you must
remember that it is your parts and duty to see that this infant be taught,
so soon as he shall be hable to learn, what a solemn vow, promise, and
professyon he has made by you, and that he may know these things the
better, ye shall call upon him to hear sermons: And chiefly ye shall provide
that he may learn the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten commandments in
the English tongue, and al other things which a christian man ought to know
and believe to his souls health, and that this child may be virtuously brought
up to lead a godly and a christian life. Remembering always that baptism does
represent unto us our profession, which is to follow the example of our
savior Christ, and to be made like unto him, that as he died and rose again
for us: so should we which are baptized, dye from sin, and rise again unto
righteousness, continually mortifying al our evil and corrupt affeccions, and
daily proceeding in all virtue and godliness of living.

etc As in publyke Baptism.
But if they which bring the infantes to the church, do make an uncertain
answer to the priests questions and say that they cannot tell what they
thought, did, or said, in that great fear and trouble of mind: (as
oftentimes it chaunseth) Then let the priest Baptize him in form above
written, concerning publyke Baptime, saving that at the dyppyng of the child
in the font, he shall use this form of words. IF thou be not Baptized
already. N. I Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of
the holy ghost. Amen.


The water in the font shall be changed every month once at the least, and
before any child be Baptized in the water so changed, the priest shall say at
the font these prayers following. O Most merciful God our savior Jesus Christ,
who haste ordained the elemente of water for the regeneracion of thy faithful
people, upon whom being baptized in the river of Jordan, the holy ghost came
down in lykenes of a dooue: Send down, we beseech thee, the same thy holy
spirit to assist us, and to be present at this our inuocacion of thy holy
name: Sanctify this fou^tain of baptism, thou that art the sanctifier of al
things, that by the power of thy word, all those that shall be baptized
therein may be spiritually regenerated, and made the children of everlasting
adopcion. Amen.

O mercyful God, grant that the old Adam, in them that shall be baptized in
this fountain, may be so buried, that the new man may be raised up again.
Amen.

Grant that all carnal affeccions may die in them: and that all things,
belongyng to the spirit, may live and grow in them. Amen.

Grant to all them which at this fountain forsake the devil and all his
works: that they may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph
against him, the world and the flesh. Amen.

Whosoever shall confess thee, o lord: recognize him also in thy kingdom.
Amen.

Grant that al sin and vice here may be so extinct: that they never have
power to reign in thy servants. Ame^.

Grant that whosoever here shall begin to be of thy flock: may evermore
continue in the same. Amen.

Grant that all they which for thy sake in this life do deny and forsake
themselfes: may win and purchase thee (O lord) which art everlasting
treasure. Amen.

Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our office and ministry:
may also be endewed with heavenly virtues, and euerlastinglye rewarded through
thy mercy, O Blessed lord God, who do live and govern all things world
without end. Amen.

The Lord be with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit.


Almighty everliving God, whose most derely beloved son Jesus Christ, for
the forgeuenes of our sins did shead out of his most precious side both water
and blood, and gave commandment to his disciples that they should go teach
all nations, and Baptize them in the name of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost: Regard, we beseech thee, the supplycacions of thy congregation,
and grant that all thy servants which shall be Baptized in this water,
prepared for the ministracion of thy holy sacrament, may receive the fullness
of thy grace, and ever remain in the noumbre of thy faithful, and elect
children, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


CONFIRMACION wherein is contained a Cathechisme for children.
TO the end that confirmacion may be ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it (according to Saint Paul's doctrine, who teaches that all
things should be done in the church to the edificacion of the same) it is
thought good that none hereafter shall be confirmed, but such as can say in
their mother tongue, tharticles of the faith, the lords prayer, and the ten
commau^deme^tes: And can also answer to such questions of this short
Cathechisme, as the Bushop (or such as he shall appoynte) shall by his
discrecion appose them in. And this order is most conueniente to be observed
for diverse consideracions.

First, because that when children come to the years of discrecion and have
learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism,
they may then themselfes with their own mouth and with their own consent,
openly before the church, ratify and confess the same, and also promise that
by the grace of God they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to
observe and keep such things, as they by their own mouth and confession have
assented unto.

Secondly, for as much as confirmacion is ministered to them that be Baptized,
that by imposicion of hands, and prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all temptacions to sin, and the assautes of the world, and the
devil: it is most mete to be ministered, when children come to that age, that
partly by the frayltie of their own flesh, partly by the assautes of the
world and the devil, they begin to be in daungier to fall into sin.

Thirdely, for that it is agreeable with the usage of the church in times past,
whereby it was ordained that confirmacion should be ministered to them that were
of perfect age, that they being instructed in Christ's religion, should
openly profess their own faith, and promise to be obedyent unto the will of
God.

And that no man shall think that any detrymente shall come to children by
differryng of their confirmacion: he shall know for truth, that it is certain
by gods word, that children being Baptized (if they depart out of this
life in their infancye) are undoubtedly saved.

A CATHECHISME that is to say, an instruccion to be learned of every child,
before he be brought to be confirmed of the Bushop.
Question. What is your name?


Answer. N. or M.


Question. Who gave you this name?


Answer. MY Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritour of the kingdom of heaven.


Question. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?


Answer. They did promise and vow three things in my name. First, that I
should forsake the devil and all his works and pompes, the vanities of the
wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I
should believe all the articles of the Christian faith. And thirdly, that I
should keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the
days of my life.


Question. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do as
they have promised for thee?


Answer. Yes verily. And by Gods help so I will. And I hartilye thank our
heavenly father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through
Jesus Christ our saueour. And I pray God to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.


Question. Rehearse the articles of thy belief.


Answer. I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And
in Jesus Christ his only son our lord. Which was conceived by the holy
ghost, borne of the virgin Marie. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into hell. The third day he rose again from
the dead. He ascended into heaven and sits on the right hand of God the
father almighty. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy ghost. The holy catholyke church. The communion of
saints. The forgeuenes of sins. The resurreccion of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.


Question. What do thou chiefly learn in these articles of thy belief?


Answer. First, I learn to believe in God the father, who has made me and
all the world.

Secondly, in God the son, who has redeemed me and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the holy ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.


Question. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you
that ye should keep Gods commandments. Tell me how many there be.


Answer. Ten.


Question. Which be they?


Answer. THou shalt have none other Gods but me.

ii. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water
under the earth: thou shall not bow down to the^, nor wurship them.

iii. Thou shall not take the name of the lord thy God in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

v. Honor thy father and thy mother.

vi. Thou shall do no murdre.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultry.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wise, nor his servant, nor his maid,
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.


Question. What dooest thou chiefly learn by these commandments?


Answer. I learn two things. My duty toward God, and my duty toward
my neighbor.


Question. What is thy duty toward God?


Answer. My duetye toward God is, to believe in him. To fear him. And to
love him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength. To wurship him. To give him thanks. To put my whole trust in him.
To call upon him. To honor his holy name and his word, and to serve him truly
all the days of my life.


Question. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?


Answer. My duty toward my neighbor is, to love him as my self. And to
do to all men as I would they should do to me. To love, honor, and succor
my father and mother. To honor and obey the king and his ministers. To
submit my self to all my governors, teachers, spiritual pastors, and
masters. To order my self lowly and reuerentlye to all my betters. To hurt
no body by word nor deed. To be true and just in all my dealyng. To bear
no malice nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing,
and my tongue from evil speaking, liyng and slaundring. To keep my body in
temperaunce, sobrenes, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's
goods. But learn and labor truly to geate my own living, and to do my
duty in that state of life: unto which it shall please God to call me.


Question. My good son, know this that thou art not hable to do these
things of thy self, nor to walk in the commandments of God and to serve
him, without his special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call
for by diligent prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords
prayer.


Answer. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our
daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. And lead us not into temptacion, but deliver us from evil. Amen.


Question. What desire thou of God in this prayer?


Answer. I desire my lord God our heavenly father, who is the geuer of all
goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may wurship
him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us al things that be nedeful both for our souls, and bodies: And
that he will be merciful unto us and forgive us our sins: And that it will
please him to save and defend us in all dangers gostly and bodily: And that he
will keep us from al sin and wickedness, and from our gostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I say. Amen. So be it.


So soon as the children can say in their mother tongue tharticles of the
faith, the lords prayer, the ten commandments, and also can answer to
such questions of this short Cathechisme as the Bushop (or such as he shall
appointe) shall by his discrecion appose them in: then shall they be brought
to the Bushop by one that shall be his godfather or godmother, that every child
may have a wittenesse of his confirmacion.

And the Bushop shall confirm them on this wise.

Confirmacion.
Our help is in the name of the Lord.


Answer. Which has made both heaven and earth.


Minister. Blessed is the name of the lord.


Answer. Henceforthe world without end.


Minister. The lord be with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit.


Let us pray. Send down from heaven we beseech thee (O lord) upon them thy
holy ghost the coumforter, with the manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of
wysedom and understanding: The spirit of council and gostly strength: The
spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and fulfill them (O lord) with the
spirit of thy holy fear.


Answer Amen.


Minister. Sign them (o lord) and mark them to be thine for ever, by the
virtue of thy holy cross and passion. Confirm and strength them with the
inward vnccion of thy holy ghost, mercifully unto everlasting life. Amen.


Then the Bushop shall cross them in the forehead and lay his hand upon
their head, saying. N. I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and lay my
hand upon thee. In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.


And thus shall he do to every child one after another. And when he has
laid his hand upon every child, then shall he say. The peace of the Lord
abide with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit.


Let us pray.


Then shall the Bushop bliss the children, thus saying. The blessing of God
almighty, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, be upon you, and remain
with you for ever. Amen.


The curate of every parish once in six wekes at the least, upon warning by
him given, shall upon some Soonday or holy day, half an hour before euensong,
openly in the church instruct and examine so many children of his parish
sent unto him, as the time will serve, and as he shall think conueniente, in
some part of this Cathechisme. And all fathers, mothers, masters and dames,
shall cause their children, servants, and prentises (which are not yet
confirmed) to come to the church at the day appointed, and obedientlye hear
and be ordered by the curate, until such time as they have learned all that
is here appointed for them to learn.

And whansoeuer the Bushop shall give knowledge for children to be brought
before him to any convenient place, for their confirmacion: Then shall the
curate of every parish either bring or send in writing, the names of all
those children of his parish which can say tharticles of their faith, the
lords prayer, and the ten commandments. And also how many of them can
answer to the other questions contained in this Cathechisme.

And there shall none be admitted to the holy communion: until such time as he
be confirmed.

THE FORM OF Solemnizacion of Matrimony.
First the bannes must be asked three several Sondayes or holy days, in the
service time, the people being present, after the accustomed manner.

And if the persons that would be married dwell in diverse paryshes, the bannes
must be asked in both paryshes, and the curate of the one paryshe shall not
solemnize matrimony betwixt them, without a certificate of the bannes being
thrice asked, from the curate of the other paryshe.

At the day appointed for Solemnizacion of matrimony, the persons to be
married shall come into the body of the Church, with their friends and
neighbors. And there the priest shall thus say.

DErely beloved friends, we are gathered together here in the sight of God, and
in the face of his congregation, to join together this man, and this woman, in
holy matrimony, which is an honorable estate instituted of God in paradise,
in the time of man's innocence, signifying unto us the mistical union that is
betwixt Christ and his church: which holy estate, Christ adorned and
beutifyed with his presence, and first miracle that he wrought, in Cana of
Galile, and is commended of Saint Paul to be honorable among all men, and
therefore is not to be enterprised, nor taken in hand unadvisedly, lightely, or
wantonly, to satisfy men's carnal lusts and appetites, like brute beasts
that have no understanding: but reverently, discretely, advisedly, soberly, and
in the fear of God. Duly co^sideryng the causes for the which matrimony was
ordained. One cause was the procreacion of children, to be brought up in the
fear and nurture of the Lord, and praise of God. Secondly it was ordained for
a remedy against sin, and to avoid fornicacio^, that such persons as be
married, might live chastely in matrimony, and keep themselfes undefiled members
of Christ's body. Thirdely for the mutual society, help and comfort, that
the one ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity. Into
the which holy estate these two persons present, come now to be joined.
Therefore if any man can show any just cause why they may not lawfully be
joined so together: Let him now speak, or else hereafter for ever hold his
peace.


And also speaking to the persons that shall be married, he shall say. I require
and charge you (as you will answer at the dreadful day of judgment, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed) that if either of you do know
any impediment, why ye may not be lawfully joined together in matrimony, that
ye confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as be coupled together
otherwise then Gods word does allow: are not joined of God, neither is their
matrimony lawful.


At which day of marriage if any man do allege any impediment why they may not
be coupled together in matrimony: And will be bound, and sureties with him, to
the parties, or else put in a caucion to the full value of such charges, as the
persons to be married do sustain, to prove his allegacion: then the
Solemnizacion must be differed, unto such time as the truth be tried. If no
impediment be alleged, then shall the curate say unto the man. N. Will thou
have this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together after Gods ordeynaunce in
the holy estate of matrimony? will thou love her, coumforte her, honor and
keep her, in sickness and in health? And forsaking all other keep thee only
to her, so long as you both shall live?


The man shall answer. I will.


Then shall the priest say to the woman. N. Will thou have this man to thy
wedded houseband, to live together after Gods ordeinaunce, in the holy estate
of matrimony? will thou obey him, and serve him, love, honor and keep him, in
sickness and in health? And forsaking al other keep thee only to him, so long as
you both shall live?


The woman shall answer. I will.


Then shall the minister say. Who gives this woman to be married to this man?


And the minister receiuyng the woman at her father or friends hands: shall
cause the man to take the woman by the righthande, and so either to give their
troth to other: The man first saying. I.N. take thee.N. to my wedded wife, to
have and to hold from this day forward, for better, for wurse, for richer, for
poorer, in syckenesse, and in health, to love, and to cherishe, till death us
depart: according to Gods holy ordeinaunce: And thereto I plight thee my troth.


Then shall they looce their hands, and the woman taking again the man by the
right hand shall say. I.N. take thee.N. to my wedded husband, to have and to
hold from this day forward, for better, for wurse, for richer, for poorer, in
sickness, and in health, to love, cherishe, and to obey, til death us depart:
according to Gods holy ordeinaunce: And thereto I give thee my troth.


Then shall they again looce their hands, and the man shall give unto the
woman a ryng, and other tokens of spousage, as gold or silver, laying the same
upon the book: And the priest taking the ring shall deliver it unto the man: to
put it upon the fowerth finger of the woman's left hand. And the man taught
by the priest, shall say. With this ring I thee wed: This gold and silver I
thee give: with my body I thee wurship: and with all my worldly goods I thee
endow. In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.


Then the man leauyng the ryng upon the fowerth finger of the woman's left
hand, the minister shall say. Let us pray. together: So these persons may
surely perform and keep the vow and covenant betwixt them made, whereof this
ring given, and received, is a token and pledge. And may ever remain in
perfect love and peace together: And live according to thy laws: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall the Priest join their ryghtehandes together, and say. Those whom
god has joined together: let no man put a sunder.


Then shall the minister speak unto the people. FOr as much as.N. and.N. have
consented together in holy wedlock, and have witnessed the same here before
God and this cumpany: And thereto have given and pledged their troth either to
other, and have declared the same by giving and receiving gold and silver, and
by joining of hands: I pronounce that they be man and wife together: In the
name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.


And the minister shall add this blessing. God the father bless you.. God the
son keep you: god the holy ghost lighten your understanding: The lord
mercifully with his favor look upon you, and so fill you with all spiritual
benediccion, and grace, that you may have remission of your sins in this
life, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.


Then shall they go into the quier, and the ministers or clearkes shall say or
sing, this Psalm following. Beati omnes cxxviii.
BLessed are all they that fear the lord, and walk in his ways.

For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands.

O well is thee, and happy shall thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine, upon the walls of thy house.

Thy children like the olife branches round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the lord.

The lord from out of Sion, shall so bless thee: that thou shall see
Jerusalem in prosperity, all thy life long.

Yea that thou shalt see thy childers children: and peace upon Israel.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.


Or else this psalm following. GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us, Deus
misereatur nostri. psalm. lxvii.
and show us the light of his countenance: and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Leate the people praise thee (O God) yea leat all people praise thee.

O leate the nations rejoice and be glad, for thou shalt judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Leat the people praise thee (O God) leat all people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessinge.

God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.


The psalm ended, and the manne and woman knelyng before the altar: the
priest standing at the altar, and turning his face toward them, shall say.
Lord have mercy upon us.


Answer. Christ have mercy upon us.


Minister. Lord have mercy upon us.


Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Minister. O lord save thy servant, and thy handmaide.


Answer. which put their trust in thee.


Minister. O lord send them help from thy holy place.


Answer. And evermore defend them.


Minister. Be unto them a tower of strength.


Answer. From the face of their enemy.


Minister. O lord hear my prayer.


Answer. And leat my cry come unto thee.


The Minister. Let us pray. O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob,
bless these thy servants, and sow the seed of eternal life in their
minds, that whatsoever in thy holy word they shall profitably learn: they may
in deed fulfill the same. Look, O lord, mercifully upon them from heaven and
bless them: And as thou did send thy Angel Raphaell, to Thobie, and
Sara, the daughter of Raguel, to their great comfort: so vouchsafe to send thy
blessinge upon these thy servants, that they obeyng thy will, and always being
in safety under thy proteccion: may abide in thy love unto their lives end:
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


This prayer folowinge shall be omitted where the woman is past child birthe. O
Merciful lord, and heavenly father, by whose gracious gift mankind is
increased: We beseech thee assiste with thy blissig these two persons, that
they may both be fruictful in procreacion of children: and also live together
so long in godly love and honesty: that they may see their childers
children, unto the third and fourth generation, unto thy praise and honor:
through Jesus Christ our lord. Ame^.

O God which by thy mighty power have made all things of naught, which also
after other things set in order diddeste appoint that out of man (created
after thine own image and similitude) woman should take her beginning: and
knitting them together, did teach, that it should never be lawful to put
asonder those, whom thou by matrimony had made one: O God, which have
consecrated the state of matrimony, to such an excellent mystery, that in it
is signified and represented the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ
and his church: Look mercifully upon these thy servants, that both this manne
may love his wife, according to thy word (as Christ did love his spouse the
church, who gave himself for it, loving and cherishinge it even as his own
flesh:) And also that this woman may be loving and amiable to her housebande
as Rachael, wise as Rebecca, faithful and obedient as Sara: And in all quietness,
sobriety, and peace, be a follower of holy and godly matrones. O lord bless
them both, and grant them to inherit thy everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall the priest bless the man and the woman, saying. Almighty god,
which at the beginning did create our first parents Adam and Eve, and did
sanctify and join them together in marriage: Power upon you the richesse of
his grace, sanctify and bliss you, that ye may please him both in body and
soul: and live together in holy love, unto your lives end. Amen.


Then shall be said after the gospel a sermon, wherein ordinarely (so often as
there is any marige) thoffice of man and wife shall be declared, according to
holy scripture. Or if there be no sermon, the minister shall read this that
follows. Al ye which be married, or which entende to take the holy estate of
matrimony upon you: hear what holy scripture does say, as touching the
duty of houseba^des toward their wives, and wives toward their housebandes.

Saint Paul (in his epistie to the Ephesians the fyfthe chapter) does give
this commandment to all married men.

Ye housebandes love your wives, even as Christ loved the church, and has
given himself for it, to sanctify it, purgeyng it in the fountain of water,
through the word, that he might make it unto him self, a glorious
congregation, not having spot or wrincle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and blameles. So men are bound to love their own wives, as
their own bodies: he that loves his own wife, loves himself. For never did
any man hate his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the
lord does the congregation, for we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This mystery is
great, but I speak of Christ, and of the congregation. Nevertheless, let
every one of you so love his own wife, even as himself.

Colos. iii.
Likewise the same Saint Paul (writing to the Colossians) speaks thus to all
men that be married: Ye men love your wives and be not bitter unto them.

^. Pet. iii.
Hear also what saint Peter thapostle of Christ, (which was himself a married
man) says unto all men that are married. Ye husbands dwell with your wives
according to knowledge: Geuyng honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel,
and as heirs together of the grace of life, so that your prayers be not
hindered.


Hitherto ye have heard the duty of the husband toward the wife. Now
likewise ye wives, hear and learn your duty toward your husbands, even as
it is plainly set forth in holy scripture.


Ephe. v.
Saint Paul (in the forenamed Epistle to the Ephesians) teaches you thus: ye
weomen submit your selves unto your own husbands as unto the lord: for the
husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the church: And he
also is the savior of the whole body. Therefore as the Church, or
congregation, is subject unto Christ: So likewise let the wives also be in
subieccion unto their own husbands, in all things. And again he says: Let
the wife reverence her husband. And (in his Epistle to the Colossians) Saint
Paul gives you this short lesson. Colos. iii.
Ye wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is conueniente, in
the Lord.

Saint Peter also does instruct you very godly, i. Peter. iii.
thus saying: Let wives be subject to their own husbands, so that if any obey
not the word, they may be won without the word, by the conversation of
the wives: While they behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear,
whose apparel let it not be outward, with broyded hear, and trymmyng about
with gold, either in putting on of gorgeous apparel: But leat the hyd man,
which is in the heart, be without all corrupcion, so that the spirit be
mylde and quiet, which is a precious thing in the sight of God. For after
this manner (in the old time) did the holy women, which trusted in God,
apparel themselves, being subject to their own husbands: as Sara obeyed
Abraham calling him lord, whose daughters ye are made, doing well and being not
dismayed with any fear.


The new married persons, (the same day of their marriage) must receive the
holy communion.

THE ORDER FOR the visitacion of the sick, and the Communion of the same.
The priest entering into the sick persons house, shall say. Peace be in this
house, and to all that dwell in it.


When he comes into the sick man's presence, he shall say this psalm.
Domine exaudi. Psalm. C. xliii.
Hear my prayer (o lord) and consider my desire: harken unto me for thy truth
and righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my
life down to the ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that
have been long dead.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

Yet do I remember the time paste, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I
exercise my self in the works of thy hands.

I stretche forth mine hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a
thirsty land.

Hear me (o lord) and that soon: for my spirit weaxeth faint: hyde not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kyndnesse betymes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my
soul unto thee. Deliver me (o lord) from mine enemies: for I fly unto thee
to hyde me.

Teach me to do the thing, that pleases thee, for thou art my god: let
thy loving spirit lead me forth unto the land of righteousness.

Quicken me (o lord) for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness slaye my enemies, and destroy all them that vex my
soul, for I am thy servant.

Glory be to the father and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.


With this antheme. Remember not Lord our iniquities, nor the iniquities of
our forefathers. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou haste redeemed
with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.


Lord have mercy upon us.


Christ have mercy upon us.


Lord have mercy upon us.


Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


The Minister. O Lord save thy servant.


Answer. Which puts his trust in thee.


Minister. Send him help from thy holy place.


Answer. And evermore mightily defend him.


Minister. Let the enemy have none advantage of him.


Answer. Nor the wicked approach to hurt him.


Minister. Be unto him, O Lord, a strong tower.


Answer. From the face of his enemy.


Minister. Lord hear my prayer.


Answer. And let my cry come unto thee.


Minister. Let us pray. O Lord, look down from heaven, behold, visit, and
releue this thy servant: Look upon him with the iyes of thy mercy, give him
coumforte, and sure confidence in thee: Defend him from the danger of the
enemy, and keep him in perpetual peace, and safety: through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Hear us almighty and most merciful God, and Savior: Extend thy
accustomed goodness to this thy servant, which is grieved with sickness:
Visit him, O Lord, as thou did visit Peter's wyfes mother, and the
Capitaynes servant. And as thou preseruedst Thobie and Sara by thy Angel
from danger: So restore unto this sick person his former health (if it be thy
will,) or else give him grace so to take thy correccion: that after this
painful life ended, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting. Amen.


Then shall the minister exhort the sick person after this form, or other
like. DErely beloved, know this, that almighty God is the Lord over life,
and death, and over all things to them perteining, as yougth, strength, health,
age, weakness, and sickness. Wherefore, whatsoever your sickness is, know
you certainly that it is Gods visitacion. And for what cause soever this
sickness is sent unto you: whether it be to try your patience for the
example of other, and that your faith may be found, in the day of the Lord,
laudable, glorious and honorable, to the increase of glory, and endless
felicity: Orels it be sent unto you to correct and amend in you, whatsoever
does offend the iyes of our heavenly father: know you certaynlye, If the
person visited be very sick, then the curate may end his exhortacion at this
place.
that if you truly repent you of your sins, and bear your sickness
patiently, trustyng in Gods mercy, for his dear son Jesus Christ's sake,
and render unto him humble thanks for his fatherly visitacion, submytting your
self wholly to his will: it shall turn to your profit, and help you forward
in the right way that leads unto everlasting life. Take therefore in good
worth, the chastement of the Lord: For whom the Lord loves, he chastises. Yea
(as Saint Paul says,) he scourges every son, which he receives: if you
endure chastisement, he offers himself unto you as unto his own children.
What son is he that the father chastises not? If ye be not under correccion
(whereof all the true children are partakers) then are ye bastardes and not
children. Therefore seeing that when our carnal fathers do correct us, we
reverently obey them, shall we not now much rather be obedient to our
spiritual father, and so live? And they for a few days do chastise us afer
their own pleasure: but he does chastise us for our profit, to thentente he
may make us partakers of his holiness. These words, good brother, are Gods
words, and written in holy scripture for our coumfort and instruccion, that we
should patiently and with thanks geuyng, bear our heavenly fathers
correccion: whansoeuer by any manner of adversity it shall please his gracious
goodness to visit us. And there should be no greater coumfort to christian
persons, then to be made like unto Christ, by sufferyng patiently adversities,
troubles, and sickenesses. For he himself went not up to joy, but first he
suffered pain: he entered not into his glory, before he was crucified. So
truly our way to eternal joy, is to suffer here with Christ, and our door
to enter into eternal life: is gladly to dye with Christ, that we may rise
again from death, and dwell with him in everlasting life. Now therefore taking
your sickness, which is thus profitable for you, patiently: I exhort you in
the name of God, to remember the profession, which you made unto God in your
Baptism. And forasmuch as after this life, there is account to be given
unto the ryghteous judge, of whom all must be judged without respect of
persons: I require you to examine your self, and your state, both toward God
and manne, so that accusyng and condemning your self for your own faults,
you may find mercy at our heavenly fathers hand, for Christ's sake, and not be
accused and condemned in that fearful judgment. Therefore I shall shortly
rehearse the articles of our faith, that ye may know whether you do believe as
a christian man should believe, or no.


Here the minister shall rehearse the articles of the faith, saying thus.
Do thou believe in God the father almighty?


And so forth as it is in Baptism.

This may be done before the minister begin his prayers as he shall see cause.
Then shall the minister examine whether he be in charity with all the world:
Exhortyng him to forgive from the botome of his heart, all persons that have
offended him: and if he have offended other, to ask them forgiveness: and
where he has done injury or wrong to any man, that he make amends to his
vttermoste power. And if he have not a fore disposed his goods, let him then
make his will. (But men must be often admonished that they set an order for
their temporal goods and lands, when they be in health.) And also to declare
his debtes, what he owes, and what is owyng to him: for discharging of his
conscience, and quietness of his executours. The minister may not forget, nor
omit to move the sick person, (and that most earnestly) to lyberalitie
toward the poor.

Here shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which confession, the
priest shall absolve him after this form: and the same form of absolucion
shall be used in all pryuate confessions.

OVre Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all
sinners, which truly repent and believe in him: of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses: and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from
all thy sins, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.


And then the priest shall say the Collecte following. Let us pray. full trust
only in thy mercy: Impute not unto him his former sins, but take him unto thy
favor: through the merits of thy most derely beloved son Jesus Christ. Amen.


Then the minister shall say this Psalm. IN thee, O Lord, have I put my
trust, Jn te domine speraui. psalm. lxxi.
let me never be put to confusion, but rid me, and deliver me in thy
righteousness: enclyne thine ear unto me, and save me.

Be thou my strong hold, (whereunto I may always resort) thou haste promised
to help me: for thou art my house of defense and my castle.

Deliver me (O my God) out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel manne.

For thou (O Lord God) art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope even
from my youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was borne: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

Oh let my mouth be filled with thy praise (that I may sing of thy glory) and
honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

For mine enemies speak against me: and they that lay wait for my soul, take
their counsel together, saying:

God has forsaken him, persecute him and take him: for there is none to
deliver him.

Go not far from me, O God: my God, haste thee to help me.

Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know
no end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of
thy righteousness only.

Thou (O God) haste taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I
tell of thy wondreous works.

Forsake me not (O God) in mine old age, when I am gray headed: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all the^ that are
yet for to come.

Thy righteousness (O God) is very high, and great things are they that thou
haste done: O God who is like unto thee?

O what great troubles and adversities haste thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refreshe me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again.

Thou haste brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every side.

Therefore will I praise thee, and thy faythfulnes (O God) playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

My lips will be feign, when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou
haste delivered.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded and brought unto shame, that seek to do me evil.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Addyng this antheme. O Saueour of the world save us, which by thy cross and
precious blood haste redeemed us, help us we beseech thee, O God.


Then shall the minister say. THe almighty Lord, which is a most strong
tower to all the^ that put their trust in him, to whom al things in heaven, in
earth, and under earth, do bow and obey: be now and evermore thy defense,
and make thee know and feel, that there is no other name under heaven given to
man, in whom and through whom, thou may receive health and salvation, but
only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


If the sick person desire to be anointed, then shall the priest annoynte him
upon the forehead or breast only, making the sign of the cross, saying thus.
AS with this visible oil thy body outwardelye is anointed: so our heavenly
father, almighty god, grant of his infinite goodness, that thy soul inwardly
may be anointed with the holy ghost, who is the spirit of al strength,
comfort, relief, and gladness. And vouchesafe for his great mercy (if it be his
blessed will) to restore unto thee thy bodily health, and strength, to serve
him: and send thee release of all thy pains, troubles and diseases, both in
body and mind. And howsoever his goodness (by his divine and unsearchable
providence) shall dispose of thee: we his unworthy ministers and servants,
humbly beseech the eternal majesty, to do with thee, according to the
multitude of his innumerable mercies, and to pardone thee all thy sins, and
offenses, committed by all thy bodily senses, passions, and carnal affeccions:
who also vouchesafe mercifullye to grant unto thee gostly strength, by his
holy spirit, to withstand and overcome al te^ptacions and assaults of thine
adversary, that in no wise he prevail against thee, but that thou may have
perfect victory and triumph against the devil, sine, and death, through Christ
our lord: Who by his death, has ouercomed the prince of death, and with the
father, and the holy ghost evermore lives and reigns god, world without end.
Amen.

HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord?) for ever? Vsque quo domine. psalm. xiii
how long will thou hyde thy face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul? and be so vexed in mine heart? how
long shall mine enemy tryu^phe over me?

Consider, and hear me (O Lord my God) lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death.

Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast down,
they that trouble me will rejoice at it.

But my trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

I will sing of the lord, because he has delte so louyngly with me.

Yea I will praise the name of the lord the most higheste.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.


The Communion of the sick.
Forasmuch as all mortal men be subject to many sudden perilles, diseases,
and syckenesses, and ever uncertain what time they shall depart out of this
life: Therefore to the intent they may be always in a redynesse to dye,
whenever it shall please almyghtye God to call them: The curates shall
diligently from time to time, but specially in the plague time, exhort their
parishoners to the often receiving (in the church) of the holy Communion of the
body and blood of our savior Christ: which (if they do) they shall have no
cause in their sudden visitacion, to be unquieted for lack of the same. But
if the sick person be not hable to come to the church, and yet is desirous to
receive the Communion in his house, then he must give knowledge over night, or
else early in the morning to the curate, sygnifying also how many be appointed
to communicate with him. And if the same day there be a celebracion of the holy
Communion in the church, then shall the priest reserve (at the open communion)
so much of the sacrament of the body and blood, as shall serve the sick
person, and so many as shall Communicate with him (if there be any.) And so
soon as he conuenientlye may, after the open Communion ended in the church,
shall go and minister the same, first to those that are appointed to
communicate with the sick (if there be any) and last of al to the sick
person himself. But before the Curate distribute the holy Communion: the
appointed general confession must be made in the name of the communicantes,
the curate adding the absolucion with the comfortable sentences of scripture
following in the open Communion: and after the communion ended, the Collecte.

Almighty and euerliuyng God, we most heartily thank thee. etc.

But if the day be not appointed for the open communion in the church, then
(upon convenient warning given) the curate shall come and visit the sick
person before noone. And having a convenient place in the sick man's house
(where he may reuerentely celebrate) with all things necessary for the same,
and not being otherwise let with the public service or any other just
impediment: he shall there celebrate the holy communion after such form and
sort as herafter is appointed.

THE CELEBRAcion of the holy Communion for the sick.
O Praise the Lord, all ye nations, laud him all ye people: for his merciful
kyndenes is confirmed toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for
ever. Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.


Without any more repeticion.
The Priest. The Lord be with you.


Answer. And with thy spirit


Let us pray.

The Epistle. MY son despise not the correccion of the lord, Hebr. xii.
neither faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the lord loves, him he
corrects, yea and he scourges every son, whom he receives.

The Gospel. John.v.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come unto damnacyon, but he
passes from death unto life.

The Preface. The Lord be with you.

Answer. And with thy spirit.

Lift up your hearts. etc.

Unto the end of the Cannon.
At the time of the distribucion of the holy sacrament, the priest shall first
receive the Communion himself, and after minister to them that be appointed to
communicate with the sick (if there be any) and then to the sick person. And
the sick person shall always desire some, either of his own house, or else of
his neighbors, to receive the holy Communion with him, for that shall be to
him a singular great coumfort, and of their part a great token of charity.

And if there be more sick persons to be visited the same day that the Curate
does celebrate in any sick man's house: then shall the curate (there)
reserve so much of the sacrament of the body and blood: as shall serve the
other sick persons, and such as be appointed to communicate with them, (if
there be any.) And shall immediately carry it, and minister it unto them.

But if any man either by reason of extremity of sickness, or for lack of
warnyng given in due time, to the curate, or by any other just impediment, do
not receive the sacrament of Christ's body and blood: then the curate shall
instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of his sins, and steadfastly
believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the cross for him: and shed
his blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering the benefits he has
thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore: he does eat and drink
spiritually the body and blood of our savior Christ, profitably to his souls
health, although he do not receive the sacrament with his mouth

When the sick person is visited and receives the holy Communion, all at one
time: then the priest for more expedicion shall use this order at the
visitacion.

The Antheme. Remember not Lord. etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Let us pray.

O Lord look down from heaven. etc.


With the first part of the exhortacion and all other things unto the Psalm:
In thee O Lord have I put my trust. etc.


And if the sick desire to be annoyncted, then shall the Priest use the
appointed prayer without any Psalm. THE ORDER FOR the Burial of the dead.
The priest metyng the Corpse at the Church style, shall say: Or else the
priests and clearkes shall sing, and so go either into the Church, or
toward the grave. I Am the resurreccion and the life (says the Lord) he
that believes in me, yea though he were dead, Jhon. xi.
yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes in me: shall not dye for
ever.

I Know that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the
last day, Job. xix.
and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see God in my flesh: yea
and I my self shall behold him, not with other but with these same iyes.

WE brought nothing into this world, i. Timo. vi. Job. i.
neither may we carye any thing out of this world. The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes away. Even as it pleases the Lord, so comes things to pass:
blessed be the name of the Lord.


When they come at the grave, whiles the Corpse is made ready to be laid into
the earth, the priest shall say, orels the priest and clearkes shall sing.
MAnne that is borne of a woman, Job. ix.
has but a short time to live, and is full of misery: he cummeth up and is
cut down like a flower, he flies as it were a shadow, and never continues
in one stay.

In the myddest of life we be in death, of whom may we seek for succor but of
thee, O Lord, which for our sins justly art moved: yet O Lord God most
holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful savior, deliver us not
into the bitter pains of eternal death. Thou know, Lord, the secrets of
our hearts, shut not up thy merciful iyes to our prayers: But spare us
Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and merciful savior, thou most
worthy judge eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of death,
to fall from thee.


Then the priest castyng earth upon the Corpse, shall say. I Commend thy soul
to God the father almighty, and thy body to the ground, earth to earth,
ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure and certain hope of resurreccion to
eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
body, that it may be like to his glorious body, according to the mighty workyng
whereby he is hable to subdue al things to himself.


Then shall be said or song. Apoca. xiiii.
I Heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: Write, blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord. Even so says the spirit, that they rest from their labors.

Let us pray.


This prayer shall also be added. ALmightye God, we give thee hertie thanks
for this thy servant, whom thou have delivered from the miseries of this
wretched world, from the body of death and all temptacion. And, as we trust,
haste brought his soul, which he committed into thy holy hands, into sure
consolacion and rest: Grant we beseech thee, that at the day of judgment,
his soul and all the souls of thy elect, departed out of this life, may with
us and we with them, fullye receive thy promises, and be made perfect
altogether, through the glorious resurreccion of thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord.


These psalms with other suffrages following, are to be said in the church,
either before or after the burial of the corpse. I Am well pleased that the
lord has heard the voice of my prayer. Dilexi quoniam. psalm. cx^i


That he has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long
as I live.

The snares of death compased me round about, and the pains of hell, gatte hold
upon me: I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the name of
the Lord (O Lord) I beseech thee deliver my soul.

Gracious is the lord, and righteous: yea our god is merciful.

The lord preserves the simple: I was in misery and he helped me.

Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul: for the lord has rewarded thee.

And why? thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

I will walk before the lord, in the land of the living.

I believed and therefore will I speak: but I was sore troubled.

I said in my haste: all men are liars.

What reward shall I give unto the lord: for all the benefits that he has
done unto me?

I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the Lord.

I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the
sight of ye lord is the death of his saints.

Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant: I am thy servant and the son
of thy handemayde, thou haste broken my bonds in sunder.

I will offer to thee the sacrifyce of thanks geuyng: and will call upon the
name of the Lord.

I will pay my vows unto the lord in the syghte of all his people: in the
courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Domine probasti. psalm. cxxxix.
O Lord thou have searched me out, and known me. Thou know my downsitting
and mine vprising: thou understand my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spyeste out all my ways.

For lo there is not a word in my tongue: but thou (O Lord) know it
altogether.

Thou have fashioned me, behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

Such knowlage is to wonderful and excellent for me: I cannot attain unto
it.

Whither shall I go then from thy spirit? or whither shall I go then from
thy presence?

If I clime up into heaven, thou art there: If I go down to hell thou art
there also.

If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the sea.

Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say: peradventure the derkenes shall cover me, then shall my night be
turned to day.

Yea the darkness is no darkness with thee: but the night is all clear as the
day, the darkness and light to thee are both a like.

For my reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb, I will give
thanks unto thee: for I am fearfully, and wunderously made, marvelous are thy
works, and that my soul knows right well.

My bones are not hyd from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth.

Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect: and in thy book were
all my members written.

Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them.

How dear are thy counsels unto me, O God? O how great is the sum of them?

If I tell them, they are more in noumbre then the sand: when I wake up, I am
present with thee.

Will thou not sley the wicked, O God? depart from me ye blood thristie men.

For they speak unrighteously against thee: and thine enemies take thy name in
vain.

Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

Yea I hate them right soore: even as though they were mine enemies.

Try me, O God, and seek the ground of mine heart: prove me, and examine my
thoughts.

Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Praise the Lord (O my soul) while I live will I praise the Lord: Lauda anima
mea. psalm. cxlvi.
yea as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

O put not your trust in princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no
help in them.

For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth:
and then all his thoughts perish.

Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keeps
his promise for ever.

Which helps them to right that suffer wrong: which feeds the hungry.

The Lord looceth men out of prison: the Lord gives sight to the blind.

The Lord helps them up that are fallen: the Lord cares for the righteous.

The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless and widdowe:
as for the way of the ungodly, he turns it vpsyde down.

The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be king for evermore: and throughout all
generacions.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Then shall follow this lesson, taken out of the.xv. Chapter to the
Corinthians, the first Epistle.
i. Cor. xv.
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
slepte. For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurreccion of the
dead. For as by Adam all dye: even so by Christ shall all be made alive: but
every manne in his own order. The first is Christ, then they that are
Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end, when he has delivered up the
kingdom to God the father, when he has put down all rule and all authority
and power. For he must reygne till he have put all his enemies under his
feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. For he has put all
things under his feet. But when he says all things are put under him, it
is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him. When all
things are subdued unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject
unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Else what
do they, which are baptized over the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why
are they then baptized over them? Yea, and why stand we always then in
ieoperdie? By our rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily.
That I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what
auauntageth it me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat, and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Be not ye deceived: evil words corrupt good manners.
Awake truly out of sleep, and sin not. For some have not the knowledge of
God. I speak this to your shame. But some manne will say: how arise the
dead? with what body shall they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is
not quickened except it dye. And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that body
that shall be: but bare corn, as of weate, or of some other: but God gives it a
body at his pleasure, to every seed his own body. All flesh is not one manner
of flesh: but there is one manner of flesh of me^, an other manner of flesh of
beasts, an other of fishes, and an other of birds. There are also celestial
bodies, and there are bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is an other. There is one manner glory of
the sun, and an other glory of the moon, and an other glory of the stars.
For one star differs from an other in glory. So is the resurreccion of the
dead. It is sown in corrupcion, it rises again in incorrupcion. It is sown
in dishonor, it ryseth again in honor. It is sown in weakness; it rises
again in power. It is sown a natural body, it ryseth again a spiritual
body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body: as it is also
written: the first man Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam was made
a quicknyng spirit. Howebeit that is not first which is spiritual: but that
which is natural, and then that which is spiritual. The first man is of the
earth, earthy: The second manne is the Lord from heaven (heavenly.) As is the
earthy, such are they that are earthy. And as is the heavenly, such are they
that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, so shall we
bear the image of the heavenly. This say I brethren, that flesh and blood
can not enherite the kingdom of God: Neither does corrupcion inherit
vncorrupcion. Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not al sleep, but we
shall al be changed, and that in a momente, in the twynkelyng of an iye by the
last trumpe. For the trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible,
and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorrupcion:and this
mortal must put on immortality. When this corruptible has put on
incorrupcion, and this mortal has put on immortality: then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written: Death is swalowed up in victory: Death where
is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin: and the
strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God, which has given us
victory, through our lord Jesus Christ. Therefore my dear brethren, be ye
steadfast and immovable, always rich in the work of the lord, forasmuch as
ye know, how that your labor is not in vain, in the lord.


The lesson ended, then shall the priest say. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ
have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.


Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Priest. Enter not (O Lord) into judgment with thy servant.


Answer. For in thy sight no living creature shall be justified.


Priest. From the gates of hell.


Answer. Deliver their souls, O Lord.


Priest. I believe to see the goodness of the Lord.


Answer. In the land of the living.


Priest. O Lord, graciously hear my prayer.


Answer. And let my cry come unto thee.

Let us pray. O Lord, with whom do live the spirits of them that be dead:
and in whom the souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered from
the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity: Grant unto this thy
servant, that the sins which he committed in this world be not imputed unto
him, but that he, escaping the gates of hell, and pains of eternal darckenes,
may ever dwell in the region of light, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
place where is no weeping, sorrow, nor heauynes: and when that dredful day of
the general resurreccion shall come, make him to rise also with the just and
righteous, and receive this body again to glory, then made pure and
incorruptible: set him on the right hand of thy son Jesus Christ, among thy
holy and elect, that then he may hear with them these most sweet and
coumfortable words: Come to me ye blessed of my father, possess the kyngdo^e
which has been prepared for you from the beginning of the world: Grant this
we beseech thee, o merciful father, through Jesus Christ our mediator and
redemer. Amen.


THE CELEBRACION of the holy Communion when there is a Burial of the dead.
Like as the heart desires the water brooks: Quem admedum. psalm. xlii.
so longs my soul after thee, O God.

My soul is a thirst for god, yea, even for the living god: when shall I come
to appear before the presence of God? My tears have been my meat day and
night: while they daily say unto me, where is now thy god?

Now when I think thereupon, I power out my heart by my self: for I went
with the multitude, and brought them forth unto the house of God, in the voice
of praise and thankesgeuing, among such as keep holy day.

Why art thou so full of heaviness (O my soul) and why art thou so unquiet
within me?

Put thy trust in god, for I will yet give him thanks, for the help of his
countenance.

My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee concerning
the land of Iordane, and the little hill of Hermonim.

One deep calls an other because of the noise of thy water pypes: al thy
waves and storms are gone over me. The lord has granted his loving
kyndenesse on the day time: and in the night season did I sing of him, and
made my prayer unto the god of my life.

I will say unto the God of my strength, why haste thou forgotten me? why go I
thus heauelye, while the enemy oppresses me?

My bones are smitten a soonder, while mine enemies (that trouble me) cast me
in the teeth: namely while they say daily unto me, where is now thy God?

Why art thou so vexed (O my soul) and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in god, for I will yet thank him which is the help of my
countenance, and my God.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Collette.
O Merciful god the father of our lord Jesus Christ, who is the resurreccion
and the life: In whom whosoever believes shall live though he dye: And
whosoever lives, and believes in him, shall not dye eternally: who also has
taught us (by his holy Apostle Paul) not to be sorye as men without hope for
them that sleep in him: We mekelye beseech thee (o father) to raise us from the
death of sin, unto the life of righteousness, that when we shall depart this
life, we may sleep in him (as our hope is this our brother does) and at the
general resurreccion in the last day, both we and this our brother departed,
receiuyng again our bodies, and risinge again in thy most gracious favor:
may with all thine elect Saynctes, obtain eternal joy. Grant this, O Lord
god, by the means of our advocate Jesus Christ: which with thee and the holy
ghost, lives and reigns one God for ever. Amen.

The Epistle.
i. Tess. iiii.
I Would not brethren that ye should be ignorant concerning them which are
fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do, which have no hope. For if we
believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again: even so them also which sleep by
Jesus, will God bring again with him. For this say we unto you in the word
of the Lord: that we which shall live, and shall remain in the cummynge of
the Lord, shall not come ere they which sleep. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shoute and the voice of the Archangell and troump
of God. And the dead in Christ shall arise first: then we which shall live
(even we which shall remain) shall be caughte up with them also in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. And so shall we ever be with the
Lord. Wherefore coumforte your selves one an other with these words.

The gospel.
Jesus said to his disciples and to the Jews: John. vi.
All that the father gives me, shall come to me: and he that comes to me, I
cast not away. For I came down from heaven: not to do that I will, but that he
will which has sent me. And this is the fathers will which has sent me:
that of all which he has given me, I shall lose nothing: but raise them up
again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me: that every one
which sees the son and believes on him, have everlasting life. And I will
raise him up at the last day.

THE ORDER OF THE Purification of weomen.
The woman shall come into the church, and there shall kneel down in some
conueniente place, nygh unto the quier door: and the priest standing by her,
shall say these words or such like, as the case shall require. FOr as much
as it has pleased almighty god of his goodness to give you safe deliverance,
and your child baptism, and has preserved you in the great danger of
childebirth: ye shall therefore give hearty thanks unto god, and pray.


Then shall the priest say this psalm. Leuaui oculos Psalm. cxxi.
I Have lifted up mine iyes unto the hills: from whence cummeth my help?

My help cummeth even from the lord: which has made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee will not
sleep.

Behold, he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The lord himself is thy keeper: the lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night.

The lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea it is even he that shall keep
thy soul.

The lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy cummyng in: from this time
forth for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Priest. O lord save this woman thy servant.


Answer. Which puts her trust in thee.


Priest. Be thou to her a strong tower.


Answer. From the face of her enemy.


Priest. Lord hear our prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come to thee.


Priest. Let us pray.


The woman that is purifyed, must offer her Crisome, and other accustomed
offeringes. And if there be a communion, it is convenient that she receive the
holy communion. The first day of Lent commonly called Ashewednisdaye.
After mattens ended, the people being called together by the rynging of a bell,
and assembled in the church: Thinglishe letanye shall be said after
thaccustomed manner: which ended, the priest shall go into the pulpitte, and
say thus. Brethren, in the primative church there was a godly discipline,
that at the beginning of lent such persons as were notorious sinners, were
put to open penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be
saved in the day of the Lord. And that other, admonyshed by their example,
might be more afraid to offend. In the steed whereof until the said
disciplyne may be restored again: (which thing is much to be wished) it is
thought good that at this time (in your presence) should be read the general
sentences of gods cursing against impenitent sinners, gathered out of the
xxvii. Chapter of Deuteronomie, and other places of scripture. And that ye
should answer to every sentence, Amen. To the intent that you being
admonished of the great indignacion of God against sinners: may the rather
be called to earneste and true repentance, and may walk more warely in these
dangerous days, fleyng from such vices, for the which ye affirm with your
own mouths: the curse of God to be due.

Cursed is the manne that makes any carved or molten image, an abominacion to
the Lord, the work of the hands of the crafts manne, and puts it in a
secret place to wurship it.


And the people shall answer, and say. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that curses his father, and mother.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that remoueth away the mark of his neighbors land.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of his way.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that lets in judgment the right of the straungier,
of them that be fatherless, and of widows.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that smites his neighbor secretly.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that lies with his neighbors wife.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that takes reward to slay the soul of innocent
blood.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, and takes manne for his
defense, and in his heart goes from the Lord.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed are the unmerciful, the fornicatours and aduouterers, the
covetous persons, the wurshyppers of images, slaundreers, drunkardes, and
extorcioners.


Answer. Amen.


The minister. Psalm. cxviii.
Now seeing that al they be accursed (as the Prophet David bears witness)
which do err and go astray from the commandments of God, let us
(remembering the dredeful judgment hanging over our heads, and being always
at hand) return unto our lord God, with all contricion and mekenes of heart,
bewailing and lamenting our synful life, knowlagyng and confessing our
offenses, and seeking to bring forth worthy fruits of penance. Mat. iii.
For even now is the axe put unto the root of the trees, so that every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, Hebru. x.
is hewn down and cast into the fire. It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God: he shall power down rain upon the sinners,
Psalm. x.
snares, fire, and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to
drink. Esai. xxvi.
For lo the lord is cummen out of his place, to visit the wickedness of such
as dwell upon the earth. But who may abide the day of his cumming? Mala. iii.
who shall be hable to endure when he appears? His fan is in his hand, Mat.
iii.
and he will pourge his floor, and gather his wheat into the barn, but he
will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. i. Thessa. v.
The day of the lord cummeth as a thief upon the night, and when men shall say
peace, and al things are safe: then shall sudden destruction come upon them,
as sorrow comes upon a woman trauaillyng with child, and they shall not
escape: then shall appear the wrath of God in the day of vengeance, which
obstinate sinners through the stubbernes of their heart, Roma. ii.
have heaped unto themself, which despised the goodness, patience and long
sufferaunce of god, when he called the^ continually to repentance. proverb. i.
Then shall they call upon me (says the lord) but I will not hear: they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me, and that because they hated
knowlage, and received not the fear of the lord, but abhorred my counsel and
despised my correccio^: then shall it be too late to knock, when the door
shall be shut, and too late to cry for mercy, when it is the time of justice. O
terrible voice of most just judgment, which shall be pronounced upon them, when
it shall be said unto them. Go ye cursed into the fire everlasting, Math. xxv.
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. Therefore brethren take we
head by time, while the day of salvation lasts, ii. Cor. vi. John.ix.
for the night comes when none can work: but let us while we have the light,
believe in the light, and walk as the children of the light, that we be not
cast into the utter derkenes, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let us
not abuse the goodness of god, Mat. xxv.
which calls us mercifully to amendment, and of his endless pity,
promises us forgeuenes of that which is past: if (with a whole mind and a
true heart) we return unto him: Esai. i.
for though our sins bered as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, and
though they be like purple, yet shall they be as white as woolle. Turn you
clean (says the lord) from all your wickedness, Esech. xvii.
and your sin shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your
ungodliness that ye have done, make you new hearts and a new spirit: wherefore
will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies (says the Lord God.) Turn you then, and you shall live. i. John.
ii.
Although we have sinned yet have we an advocate with the father Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he it is that obteyneth grace for our sins, for he was
wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness: Esai. liii.
let us therefore return unto him, who is the merciful receiver of all true
penitent sinners, assuryng our self that he is ready to receive us, and most
willing to pardon us, if we come to him with faithful repentance: if we will
submit our selves unto him, and from henceforth walk in his ways: Math. xi.
if we will take his easy yoke and light burden upon us to follow him in
lowlynesse, patience, and charity, and be ordered by the governance of his
holy spirit, sekyng always his glory, and serving him duly in our vocacion
with thanks giving. This if we do, Christ will deliver us from the curse of
the law, and from the extreme malediccion which shall light upon them that
shall be set on the left hand: and he will set us on his right hand, and give us
the blessed benediccion of his father, Math. xxv.
commanding us to take possession of his glorious kingdom, unto the which he
vouchsafe to bring us all, for his infinite mercy. Amen.


Then shall they all kneel upon their knees: And the priest and clearkes
kneeling (where they are accustomed to say the letanie) shall say this
psalm. Miserere mei deus. psalm. li.
Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness: according unto the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. Wash me throwly fro my
wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowlage my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
myghtest be justified in thy saying and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shalt make me to
understand wisdom secretelye.

Thou shall pourge me with Hope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whyter then snow.

Thou shalt make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
haste broken, may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart (O God) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the coumforte of thy help again, and stablishe me with thy free
spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood giltinesse (O God) thou that art the god of my health:
and my toungue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips (O Lord:) my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desyreste no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou deliteste
not in burnt offering.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart (O
God) shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifyce of righteousness, with the
burnt offerynges, and oblacions: then shall they offer young bullockes upon
thine aultare.

Glory be tho the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.


Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Minister. O Lord save thy servants.


Answer. Which put their trust in thee.


Minister. Send unto them help from above.


Answer. And evermore mightily defend them.


Minister Help us O God our savior.


Answer. And for the glory of thy names sake deliver us, be merciful unto us
sinners, for thy names sake.


Minister O Lord hear my prayer.


Answer. And let my cry come to thee.


Let us pray.

O Most mighty God and merciful father, which have compassion of al men,
and hateste nothing that thou haste made: which wouldeste not the death of a
sinner, but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: mercyfully
forgive us our trespasses, receive and coumforte us, which be grieved and
weried with the burden of our sin: Thy property is to have mercy, to thee
only it apperteineth to forgive sins: spare us therefore, good Lord, spare
thy people whom thou have redeemed. Enter not into judgment with thy
servants, which be vile earth, and miserable sinners: But so turn thy ire
from us, which mekely knowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our fautes:
so make haste to help us in this world: that we may ever live with thee in
the world to come: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall this antheme be said or song. TVrne thou us, good Lord, and so
shall we be turned: be favorable (O Lord) be favorable to thy people,
which turn to thee in weping, fasting and praying: for thou art a merciful
god, full of compassion, long sufferyng, and of a great piety. Thou sparest
when we deserve punishemente, and in thy wrath thynkest upon mercy. Spare thy
people, good Lord, spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to
confusion: Hear us (O Lord) for thy mercy is great, and after the multitude
of thy mercyes look upon us.




OF CEREMONIES Why some be abolished and some retained.
OF such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
thinstitucion of man: Some at the first were of godly intent and purpose
devised, and yet at length turned to vanity and supersticio^: Some entered into
the Church by indiscreet devotion, and such a zele as was without knowleage:
and forbecause they were winked at in the beginning, they grew daily to more
and more abuses, which not only for their unprofitableness, but also because
they have much blinded the people, and obscured the glory of God, are worthy
to be cut away, and clean rejected. Other there be, which although they have
been devised by man: yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a
decent order in the Church (for the which they were first devised) as because
they pertain to edificacion: Whereunto all things done in the Church (as the
Apostle teaches) ought to be referred. And although the keeping or omittyng of
a ceremony (in it self considered) is but a small thing: Yet the wilful and
conte^ptuous transgression, and breaking of a common order, and discipline, is
no small offense before God. Let al things be done among you (says Saint
Paul) in a semely and due order. The appointeme^te of the which order,
pertains not to private men: Therefore no man ought to take in hand, nor
presume to appointe or alter any public or common order in Christ's Church,
except he be lawfully called and autorized thereunto. And whereas in this our
time, the minds of men be so diverse, that some think it a great matter
of conscience to depart from a piece of the least of their Ceremonies (they
be so addicted to their old customs) and again on the other side, some be
so new fangle that they would innouate all thing, and so do despise the old
that nothing can like them, but that is new: It was thought expediente not
so much to have respect how to please and satisfye either of these parties,
as how to please God, and profit them both. And yet lest any manne should
be offended (whom good reason might satisfy) here be certain causes
rendered, why some of the accustomed Ceremonies be put away, and some be
retained and kept still.

Some are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them has so
increased in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable:
whereof saint Augustine in his time complained, that they were grown to such
a noumbre: that the state of christian people was in wurse case (concerning
that matter) then were the Jews. And he counsayled that such yocke and
burden should be taken away, as time would serve quietely to do it. But
what would saint Augustine have said if he had seen the Ceremonies of
late days used among us? whereunto the multitude used in his time was not to
be compared. This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies, was so great, and
many of them so dark: that they did more confound, and darken, then declare
and setteforth Christ's benefits unto us. And besides this, Christ's Gospel
is not a Ceremonial law (as much of Moses law was,) but it is a religion to
serve God, not in bondage of the figure or shadow: but in the freedom of
spirit, being content only with those ceremonies which do serve to a
decente order and godly discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the
dulle mind of man, to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable
and special significacion, whereby he might be edified.

Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the abolishement of certain
Ceremonies was, that they were so far abused, partly by the supersticious
blindenes of the rude and unlearned, and partelye by the insatiable avarice of
such as sought more their own lucre then the glory of God: that the abuses
could not well be taken away, the thing remaining still. But now as
concerning those persons, which peradventure will be offended for that some
of the old Ceremonies are retained still: If they consider, that without some
Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any order or quite discipline in the
church: they shall easilye perceive just cause to refourme their judgments.
And if they think much that any of the old do remain, and would rather
have all devised a new: then such men (grauntyng some Ceremonies
conueniente to be had) surely where the old may be well used: there they
cannot reasonablye reprove the old (only for their age) without bewraying
of their own folly. For in such a case they ought rather to have reverence
unto them for their antiquity, if they will declare themselves to be more
studious of unity and concord, then of innouacions and new fanglenesse,
which (as much as may be with the true setting forth of Christ's
religion) is always to be eschewed. Furthermore, such shall have no just
cause with the Ceremonies reserved, to be offended: for as those be taken
away which were most abused, and did burden men's consciences without
any cause: So the other that remain are retained for a discipline, and order,
which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to
be esteemed egual with gods law. And moreover they be neither dark nor dumme
ceremonies, but are so set forth that every man may understand what they do
mean, and to what use they do serve. So that it is not like that they, in time
to come, should be abused as the other have been. And in these all our
doings we condemn no other nations, nor prescribe any thing, but to our
own people only. For we think it conueniente that every countreye should
use such ceremonies, as they shall think best to the setting forth of
gods honor and glory: and to the reducyng of the people to a most perfect
and Godly living, without error or supersticion: and that they should put
away other things, which from time to time they perceive to be most abused,
as in men's ordinances it often chances diversely in diverse countries. *

CERTAIN NOTES for the more plain explicacion and decent ministracion of
things, contained in this book.
IN the saying or singing of Matens and Euensonge, Baptizyng and Burying, the
minister, in paryshe churches and chapels annexed to the same, shall use a
Surples. And in all Cathedral churches and Colleges, tharchdeacons, Deanes,
Prouestes Masters, Prebendaryes and fellows, being Graduates, may use in the
quiere beside their Surplesses, such hoodes as pertains to their several
degrees, which they have taken in any university within this realm. But in
all other places, every minister shall be at liberty to use any Surples or no.
It is also seemly that Graduates, when they do preach, should use such
hoodes as pertayneth to their several degrees.

And whenever the Bushop shall celebrate the holy communion in the church,
or execute any other public minystracyon: he shall have upon him, beside his
rochette, a Surples or albe, and a cope or vestmente and also his pastoral
staff in his hand, or else borne or holden by his chapeleyne.

As touching kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands, knocking upon the breast,
and other gestures: they may be used or left, as every man's devotion serves,
without blame.

Also upon Christmas day, Ester day, the Ascension day, whitsondaye, and the
feast of the Trinity, may be used any part of holy scripture hereafter to
be certainly limited and appointed, in the stead of the Letany.

If there be a sermon, or for other great cause, the Curate by his discrecio^,
may leave out the Letanye, Gloria in excelsis, the Creed, thomely and the
exhortacion to the communion.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, at the sign of the Sun over against the
conduyte, by Edward VVhitchurche. The fourth day of May, the year of our
Lord, 1549.

The Kings Majesty, by the advise of his most dear uncle the Lord
Protector and other his highness Counsel, straightly charge and commands,
that no manner of person do sell this present book unbound, above the price
of.ii. Shyllynges and.ii. pence the piece. And the same bound in paste or in
boordes, not above the price of three shyllynges and.viii. pence the piece.

God save the King.

