

FIDES


PRAYERS appointed to be used in the Church at Morning and Evening Prayer by
every Minister, FOR The Queens safe deliverance.

Set forth and enjoined by Authority.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1605.

HVMILITAS




A Prayer for the Queens Majesty's safe deliverance in her Childbirth.
(*)

O Merciful Lord and heavenly Father, by whose gracious gift mankind is
increased, who have promised that the seed of them that fear thee, shall be
mighty upon earth: we beseech thee for our gracious Queen ANNE, that thou will preserve her in the great pains and peril of childbirth: grant her a
safe and happy deliverance, and send thy blessing upon her and the fruit of
her womb, to the joy and comfort of this land, and to the everlasting praise
and glory of thy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
Almighty God, from whose only blessing the fruitfulness of the womb with
safe and happy deliverance from the pains and danger in childbirth do
proceed: give this thy blessing we humbly beseech thee unto thy handmaid our
gracious Queen, that she may be comforted with thy saving health, and become a
joyful mother of many children. So shall the King rejoice, and thy people be
glad thereof, and we all with thankful hearts shall praise thy glorious Name
for such an increase of the Kings royal issue, tending to the good of this thy
Church, and unto the comfort both of us and of our posterity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Or this.
MOst gracious God which have blessed us with a Queen of a fruitful womb and
an happy offspring, and preserved her heretofore in the prosperous birth of
that royal issue, which we with comfort and joy daily behold: grant her we
humbly beseech thee at this time also, a safe deliverance of that noble babe
which now she bears, and prolong her days with the life of our most renowned
King, that they may both together see their childrens children for many
generations, unto the honor and glory of thy name, and the full establishment
of our peace and happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Or this.
O Lord our God, seeing it has pleased thee of thy merciful goodness to make
our gracious Queen ANNE as a fruitful Vine to multiply and increase the
royal Line of this Kingdom: we beseech thee to bless and preserve her,
together with the happy fruit of her womb formed and quickened by thine own
hand, that she may in her fullness of time have safe deliverance, and we
together with her may receive thereby such joy and comfort, as may tend to the
good of this Kingdom, and to the eternal praise of thy holy Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
MOst merciful Father, seeing thou have in thy wisdom appointed to all the
sons of Eve, one and the same entrance into life, through the sorrows and
pangs of Childbirth: We most humbly beseech thee of thine infinite goodness,
to protect and strengthen thy servant ANNE, our most gracious Queen, against
all danger and pains of Travel, that through thy heavenly protection she may
be safely delivered of the blessed fruit of her body, and become a joyful
Mother of a happy issue, to the unspeakable comfort of this thy Church, and to
the praise and honor of thy glorious Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, hear the prayers of thy Church for thy
hand-mayd our gracious Queen ANNE: look down from heaven upon her with the
eyes of thy tender compassion, and be evermore merciful unto her, assist her
with thy comforts in her travel of childbirth, mitigate the panges thereof for
sin inflicted, strengthen her, that without peril she may pass those
dangers, and receiving joy by an happy issue we thy people may have comfort
and consolation in her safe deliverance, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

Or this.
O Most merciful God and loving Father, we commend unto thy Divine
providence, the present estate of our most gracious Queen ANNE: Protect and
defend her among all the changes and chances of this mortal life: preserve and
keep her amidst the pains and perils of Childbirth, and give her the
comfort, both safely to bring forth, and joyfully to bring up the conceived
Issue of her fruitful womb. So shall we jointly for such thy Fatherly mercy,
give thanks unto thee in the great Congregation, and praise thy Name for ever
and ever. Amen. (*)


