Sighs At the contemporary deaths OF Those incomparable Sisters, The Countess
of Cleaveland, AND Mistrisse CICILY KILLEGRVE, Daughters of Sir JOHN CROFTS
Knight Of Saxom Hall, in the County of Suffolk Deceased, And his Noble Lady
now living. Breathed forth by F. Q.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for N. Alsop; and are to be sold at the Angel
in Popes head Alley. 1640.

TO THE HONORABLE LADY, The Lady CROFTS.
Madam,
EArth is a mixture of Heaven and Hell: Jn heaven is all happiness, and no
misery: in Hell, is all misery, and no happiness: Jn earth, both happiness,
and misery, The grave is the common Rest from both. Jf our happiness had no
misery to sharpen it, we should expect no other Heaven; if our misery had no
happiness to sweeten it, we should fear no other Hell. But God has dealt us
both, that in adversity, we may hope better, and in Prosperity, fear worse.
Not many Ladies in this Land, could show a fairer Inventory of Gods favor than
your self; either as single, in your own person; or as multiplied, in your
children; yet could not all this raise you a perfect happiness, here. All
earthly happiness is like earth, alterable; always meeting with an alterable
subject; in so much, that if it could abide with us, we could not stay with
it: We must shake hands and part. Madame, our lives are but Lamps, to light us
in this dark Vale, to find that Jewel we lost in Paradise, If we had never
lost that jewel, we had never left that Paradise: These your two daughters
found it in their Saviors birth, and were strait invited to the feast of his
Circumcision, and shall we be sad? Dressed in those jewels, they were called to
the Lambs Marriage, and shall we mourn? They changed an earthly Hadradrimmon
for a heavenly Jerusalem, and shall we lament? Madam, I know Flesh and Blood
(which is made of nothing but a little dust tempered with a few tears) would
repine at this. But your Ladyship is instructed in a better School, and has
attained to a higher Form than Sense. It Is true, Natural affection has much
to plead against the extremes of Stoicisme: but Religion has more to plead
against the excess of Natural affection. Rough Stoicisme denies all sorrow:
Soft affection excluds all comfort; Religion moderates, and with the surplusage
of Natures tears, mollifies the Stoics heart. Madam, I beseech Almighty God
to comfort you in all your griefs, and direct them to their right Object; So
shall your sadness be momentary, and your joys eternal, According to the
Wishes of

Your Ladyships humble Servant, FRA* QVARLES.

Sighs.
1.
If our
For every drop, a Shower,
Our needless Quill might then refrain
This heavy task: But since our tears are pent
Within our straightened eyes, our Pen must give them vent*
2.
Blunt Quill,
To glorify thy Skill
In Sooty Characters of Ink?
Or that thy easy Language can proclaim
An Accent half so shrill, as the loud Trumpe of Fame*
3.
But tell,
Should our sad lines compel
A tear, or force a trickling eye?
We beg it not: What gentle eye embalmes
The precious dust of Saints, brings Off^^ings, and not Alms*
4.
You whom
Has foiled and over come
With sighs and tears, not wept for fashion,
Come bear a part: These Obsequies do sue
To entertain such Guests, such Guests alone as you.
5.
Rash Fates!
At how extreme great Rates
True Honor and Perfection's prized,
When you in twice two days, surprised more,
Then Ages can prescribe, then Ages can restore.
6.
Repose,
This sacred Dust, kept close,
As Relics of our buried Mirth:
Let Time preserve your holy Turfts unstirr'd:
This Age will scarce unlocke your Gates for such a third.
7.
In this
Unstained perfection is
Laid down to sleep, till break a day;
Which, when the early morning Trumpe shall so^nd,
With Joy, with Robes, with Crowns shall wake, be clothed, be crowned*
8.
Sad Tomb!
To understand for whom
Thy marble Curtains make this night,
Thou'ldst vie with Mahomets (if such there be)
Two stones support but his; two Saints are propts to thee.
9.
We should
And challenge (if we would)
Assistance from the heavenly Maid;
But we forbear: The Spirit of grief infuses
More salt into our Quill, than all the sacred Muses.
10.
Provoke
Or smothring Flax to smoke;
Full seas to swell; Spring-tides to flow;
For us; we need no ay'd, nor will suborne
The help of foreign Art. True grief knows how to mourn
11.
Hard stones,
Would cleave and split with groans,
Ere so much worth should lie forgot:
At such a loss, should stones forbear to break
Their flinty Silence, stones, the very stones would speak.
12.
To speak
A Faith that were not weak;
Twould seem a rank Hyperboly,
To make but half their excellence appear,
For whom we mourn, for whom we justify this tear.
13.
If not
Virtue without a spot,
And all those gifts that earth calls good,
May send some Privilege to life, nor add
Some sand to Natures Glass, what matter good or bad!
14.
Persuade,
False earth, to trust thy aid,
Or build my hopes on it, or Thee:
Give all thou have, alas, thou can not make
Estates for more than life: Thou do but give, and take,
15.
Stone hearts
You all to play your parts:
If you be too too hard to break,
Too stout for drops to pierce, yet come;
You Will serve for stuff, to build their honorable Tomb
16.
To break
In taking leave to speak
Our real griefs in vain complaints,
Is but a trick of earth: Why should, we thus
Afflict our souls for them, that find no grief, but us?
17.
Attend,
A while, and we will end
Our sighs, and wipe away your tears:
We Will change our Scene, and we will unsad our Style;
We Will teach your sighs to sing; we will teach your tears to smile.
18.
Report.
Of the eternal Court,
Your Hallalujahs mixed with theirs:
Welcome these Saints to that Celestial Quire,
Where griefs do not explore; where joys do not expire.
19.
And you,
That now have enterview
With Thrones and Syraphims; that share
With Powers and Angels: O what Oratory
Can color out your joys? What Pen can chant your Glory?
20.
Shall then
Of earth-begotten Men
Wash your white Names, or cloy your ears?
No, no, it is pity tears should intercept
The peace of your sweet Rest, where tears are never wept?
21.
Shed tears?
To serve their weary years
At earths hard Trade, and then denied
A common Rest, this had been apt to breed,
A thousand, thousand tears: This had been grief indeed?
22.
Enough:
To show how poor a Puff
Is earth, and all that earth can prize:
Wealth, honor, beauty, in whose flames we burn,
Give warning in the bed, and leave us at the Vrn.^
23.
Without
Of unbelief, or doubt,
Our mountain faith does canonize
These Saints; whose dying Ashes did conferr
To their Redeemers Birth, gifts passing gold and Myrrh.
24.
My Pen,
Archangels, and not Men
Should sing the story of their Rest:
But we have done, we leave them to the trust
Of heavens eternal Tower, and kiss their sacred Dust.
Epitaph.
IF our blunt Quill but tell you whom,
Rash Fates repose in this sad Tomb;
We should provoke hard stones to speak,
If not persuade stones hearts to break:
Attend report, and you shall, then,
Shed tears enough without my Pen.
The End.

