THE Exercise of a christian life, written by G. L.

Being the first ground and foundaion, whence the two Treatises appertaining to
resolution, were made and framed, by R. P.

Mat. 26. ver. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: The
spirit in deed is ready, but the flesh is weak.

Printed for W. Leake, and are to be sold in Paul's church yard at the sign of
the Crane. 1594.

To the Worshipful, and his loving kind Father, master John Banester,
Chirurgian, and Licentiate in Physic: health, and his hearts desire entirely
wished.
Remembering how many kind favors, I have from time to time received at your
hands (loving friend and father) yet on my part no moitie of answereable
courtesy returned, whereby you might either find regard of your gentleness,
or note my thankful mind: Now at last, as nearly touched with consideration
of mine own slothfulness, I presume to dedicate this small Treatise to you,
therein to require favor for all former wants, and in your woonted affable
nature, to bury all defects on my behalf. For the excellency of the work, I
dare commit it to your judgment, after reading, because I know you can both
read and censure: And for my self, I likewise with the book, stand ready at
your service, and to be commanded to the uttermost power while I live.

A SONNET to the Christian Reader.
A Chilles never durst at once,
with monsters two to fight,
And yet at once this book shows thee
How three to put to flight.
The Devil, the World, the Flesh; and more,
To conquer Death and sin:
And how to live, and how to die,
And how the heavens to win.
It is a path to Paradise,
Aport to heavenly bliss,
It treats of truce, and bringes the peace,
That ever during is.
Then read, and reap the fruits thereof,
And thank thou for thy gains
The God above, who raisd up those,
That took for thee the pains.
Conuertantur qui oderunt Sion.
To the Reader.
THIS learned Treatise of the exercise of a christian life (Gentle Reader) was
first written in the Italian tongue, by a certain Jesuit Friar who was named
Gasper Loarte, and afterward more at large wrought upon, and handled in more
plentiful discourse, by Robert Persons Englishman, yet a Jesuit likewise,
living beyond the Seaes, which he termed A Christian exercise, appertaining to
Resolution, two parts whereof are extant in English, and many have reaped
Christian profit from them, I do not doubt. Now this treatise, being the
first frame and ground-woorke, where these two several books were derived,
and containing very much good matter left unhandled in them: is likewise
published for thy further benefit if with like mind and spirit thou give it
entertainment, as it is offered. Diverse learned men have had the perusing of
it, and have left no matter in it to urge thy dislike: then thankfully accept
of their pains that would gladly do any thing for thy profit.

Farewell.
WHat thing he ought first of all to do, that purposes to begin a new life,
and to spend his time henceforth sincerely in Gods service. Fol. 1 Certain
general aduertisements necessary for such as mind to serve God sincerely. 9 Of
the particular order we ought every day to observe in our daily exercise. 12
The exercises wherein a good Christian ought to occupy himself on holy days.
16 Of the profit and necessity of prayer. 20 The manner how to pray in the
spirit, and of the preparation we ought to make before it. 22 Meditations of
the blessed passion of our Savior, for every day in the week, especially on
Morninges. 25 Certain particular aduertisements, touching the Meditations
contained in the former chapter. 37 Meditations to be made on Eueninges or a
new week. 42 Other Meditations wherein the better learned may at other times
exercise themselves: certain also for the simpler sort, wherein the mysteries
of the life of Christ is entreated of. 54 Certain remedies for such as could
not happily find savor or devotion in the former meditations. 56 Of the
avoiding of lewd company: 61 Of the second thing that is required of him, that
intends to lead a new life. 64 Of the tentations which ordinarily offer
themselves, to such as have begun to walk in spiritual ways. 66 General
remedies to be used against temptations. 67 A Preamble concerning the remedies
against particular temptations. 70 Remedies against Lasciviousness. 71
Remedies against the second sin of the flesh, which is Gluttony. 75 Remedies
against the troblesome temptations of floth and Idleness. 79 Remedies against
the sin and temptation of covetousness. 82 Remedies against the temptation
of the third enemy, to wit, the devil: and first against pride, whereto he
principally induces us. 86 Remedies against the temptations and sins of
wrath: 90 Remedies against the sin and temptation of envy. 95 Certain other
aduises and remedies concerning the same matter of tentation. 99 What a good
Christian ought to do, when he falls sick, or draws nigh the hour of
death. 103 Of the rentations that are commonly felt in the hour of death, and
the remedies against the same. 106 A prayer against Desperation. 109 A
Conclusion and brief reherfall of all that has been said in this little
treatise, and of the things that every good Christian is bound to learn, and
have by heart. 111

FINIS.
What thing he ought first of all to do, that purposes to begin a new life,
and to spend his time henceforth sincerely in Gods service. Cap. 1.
FOr that, as S. Augustine says, it is not possible for any man to begin a
new and laudable life, but if he first forsake and utterly detest his former
loose and lewd life; who so therefore minds to amend his former manners,
and to endeavor himself sincerely to serve God: the first thing he ought to
do, is, to call upon God for grace, that his soul may be purged, that so it
may please the holy ghost to dwell therein, and remain as in his holy Temple:
who will not (as holy Scripture tells) enter into the soul of the wicked,
nor be harbored 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 6. 2. Cor. 6. Sap. 1.
in the body, thral and captiuate unto sin. It behooves therefore to follow
the prophets council, to sequester thy self from sin, and so shall thou
become a fit instrument to do good.

The which sequestration from sin, Psa. 33. Psa. 33. Isai. 1. 1. Pet. 3.
and purging of the soul, is procured by true and hearty repentance for thy
sins past. In as much as it is certain, that there is no man, nor no man can
be without sin, and sin is the very poison and bane of man's soul, and that
which the Prophet says is true, your wickedness has made a division between
you and your God, and your Esai. 59. 2.
sins have hidden his face from you, that he should not hear you. Moreover,
sin does not only make division between God and man, which in deed is the
most lamentable division that man can think on, for it is written in the
prophet. Thy malice shall rebuke thee, and thy turning away shall Ier. 2. 19.
blame thee: see and know how miserable and brittle a thing it is, for thee
to have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that thou have no fear of me, says the
Lord of hoasts? But it also makes a great dissension in thine own self: for
the Prophet cries out, Peccatum meum Psa. 51. 5.
contrame est semper: My sin is always against me. A lamentable thing it is,
to see a kingdom divided in it self, for it shall be desolate, and the house
or Mat. 12. 25
City that is not at unity in it self, shall not stand. Disquietnesse of
conscience, strife between the flesh and the spirit, and the dissension in the
very will of man, described by the Apostle is occasioned, nay rather caused by
sin. And I refer my self unto them that are Romans 7, 19 19. etc.
vexed with the disquietnesse of conscience, whether there be a greater
torment then it in the world, for every battle that a man has without, may
be prevented by some policy, or illuded by some stratagem, and therefore not
so dangerous, but when a man feels and carries his own enemy in his own
bosom, the matter is more dangerous, and the destruction of a man more
eminent. And so (I say) it is also a lamentable case to see a man divided in
himself. But if that be so lamentable that the Prophet cries out, who will
give water unto my head, I^r. 9. 1, 2. 3. etc.
and a fountain of tears unto mine eyes? etc. no doubt that division is to be
deplored, and bewailed with a sea of tears, which is between God and man, for
as God is unity it self, and the cause of al union, that is amongst his
creatures: even so the debate and concision that is between God and man, is
the cause of all other debats that are in the uniform multiformitie of the
world. Therefore we read, and sometimes do see things go against their nature,
for the punishment of sins, as the earth covered with water in the time of
Noah was Genesis 7.
the punishment of the old world, likewise Genesis 19.
fire descended from heaven, for the punishment of the Sodomits: and such like
punishments in the old testament. In the new Testament though Gods mercy be
more revealed, and though there be not so great signs of his justice showed,
yet did the creatures detest sin, and declared it by darkness in the day
time against nature, the obscuration of the sun, the Mat. 27.
renting of stones in sunder, and of the veil of the temple, the opening of
the graves, etc. generally let this conclusion stand, there is nothing so much
against nature, as is sin, which makes all things (in a manner) to go
against their natures, for the punishment of it. Seeing then that sin is so
dangerous, that it does not only set division between man in himself, but
also between God and man: let a man therefore avoid it, in as much as he can,
otherwise he runs daily further and further to his own utter ruin and
destruction. Two things therefore does the Prophet propound unto a man that
intends to lead a new life, and to turn unto the Lord, the first is
Declina a malo, eschew evil. The which thing how natural it is for a man to
follow it, is declared in ye scriptures. And God seeing that the malice of man
on the earth, was very great, and that the thoughts of his heart was always
bent to mischief: he repented that he had made man upon the earth. Besides
that, the Genesis 6, 5.
multitude of the wicked in this world, does sufficiently manifest the same,
for you shall hardly find a man that has taken a smacke in sin, to be
willing to forsake the same, without God of his special grace do reveal to
him the danger that he is in. And a man being in so miserable a case, goes on
still never looking into the lewd life which he has led. It is requisite
therefore that a man do call unto God for grace, toward the purifying of his
soul, for of our selves we are neither able to eschew evil, nor to do good,
but both the one and the other is the gift of almighty God, who does work
in us, and velle, and perficere, both to will Phil. 2. 13.
and to perform, and that also of his good will and pleasure. Considering
then first, the frailty of man in falling so often, his impotencie in not
rising, his negligence in seeking of help, his ingratitude in refusing the
help that is offered unto him, his slothfulness in using Gods grace bestowed
upon him: who would not think that of all the creatures that God has created,
man is the most negligent in bending his whole life, and all his actions unto
the end, unto the which he is created? But true it is that Moises says in
his Song, in expostulation with the children of Israel for their ingratitude,
Deum quite genuit, de reliquisti, and oblatus es Domini creatoris tui. Thou
have forsaken God who Deuteronomy. 32, 18.
has begotten thee, and have forsaken the Lord thy creator. But to the
principal event, which is, to direct him whose mind is bent to serve God, and
to forsake his evil life past, I will take this for a general principle, he
that commits sin, is of the Devil, because 1. Io. 3. 8
the Devil sins from the beginning, if all that commit sin be of the
Devil, and all of us offend in many things, how many men shall we find to be
free from sin? We may say with the Prophet in the 14. Psalm, There is not
one that does good, no not one, yet every man ought to take heed of sin,
and to eschew it, without pretense of any excuse whatsoever it be: for God is
pure, and must be looked upon with a pure eye: for it is written: Math. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Now the sight of God is
nothing else but the knowledge of god: and the knowledge of God is life
everlasting, according to the saying of our Savior, which says, This is life
eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have
Ioh, 17, 3.
sent Jesus Christ: and life everlasting is the only end, unto the which man
was created, and there is no stop or hinderance to this life but sin. What
man then is so unnatural unto himself, but would eschew this impediment, and
hate it, cane peius and angue, worse then a dog and a snake. But men inueigled
with the lewdnes of this world, pretend excuses of this their daliance. Some say
the knife is dull, and the bread is hard, but the word of God is more sharp
then any sword, of 2. edges whatsoever, to pierce the flinty hearts of such
obstinate wretches, whose end is destruction. To those therefore which are in
a manner already disposed to repentance (of the which as before, I said this,
Declina a malo, avoid evil, is the first part) I would propound these few
points for their consideration.

First the enormity of sin, in the which there is nothing but all kind of
things that should terrefie a man: for before that man by suggestion of the
Serpent transgressed the commandment of God, what death, nay what dream of
death had man, being created immortal? 1. Cor. 15.
Now death the last enemy that shall be destroyed, is most irrigular and
enormous, and most aduersant unto Romans 5.
the life of man. Death comes by sin, for by a man came sin, and by sin
came death into the world. There is no worldling that is not afraid of death.
But it is a wonder that the worldlings are not afraid of that thing which
causes death? Persuaded I am, that if a man's eye were so spiritual to see
things corporal, a man would abhor the sight of any sin, were it never so
small. A man that has a care of neatness and cleanliness in apparaile, can
not abide the least moat in the world, or the least spot that may be imagined
in any part of his apparel, and all this is because he would not offend the
eyes of men. But a man that is little less in degree then the Angels, and made
for Psalm. 8.
ye praise of his creator, who regards not the body, but makes an account
of the soul: has no regard of the decking of his soul, but only follows
the lustful delights of the flesh. If then men be so diligent in brushing,
and cleansing of their garments, that they should not offend the eyes of
carnal men, does it not behooue thee to take heed that the garments of thy
soul be not defiled, with the most filthy spots of sin in the sight of
Almighty God?

Secondly, let him that loves his own salvation, always diligently consider
the frail estate of this world. And let him weigh how short all carnal delights
are. That man will quickly abhor the way of sin, which considers that the
pleasure of the flesh is very short, but the pain that is due unto it to be
eternal. The world passes away, and the desire thereof, 1. Ioh. 2.
and all men pass away by death, and no man is permitted to stay long in
this world, for what is the world but a great deep and a troublesome Sea, in
the which there are so many monsters of sin, as there be evil desires in
men? O false, deceiptfull and impure world, which so fowlly do deceive
those that trust in thee, and do drown those that do follow thee in the
depth of hell. How happy are those that contemn thee for Christ his sake? And
making a comfortable division, do speedily depart from thy vanities:
whatsoever we see in the world is vanity, and every lover of the world is
vain, and shall quickly be corrupted. Think that you shall quickly die, for
nothing does so much withdraw a man from sin, as the often and diligent
meditation of Ies. Syra.
death, for it is said, Remember thy latter end, and thou shall never sin:
the necessity of death being thought upon diligently, does terrify the
mind, and keeps it from sin.

Thirdly, the meditation or thinking upon the last judgment, in the which al
men must be presented before ye judgment seat of Christ, helps much to ye
flight of sin. No man can escape this terrible judgment, but we must all
appear in it: of the which day of judgment does the Prophet say, very great
Joel. 2.
and terrible is the day of the Lord, and who can abide it? And Solomon says,
All things that are done under the Sun Prea. 21.
will ye lord bring to judgment, etc. And in Esai, we read, The Lord will come
to Esai. 3.
judgment with the elders and princes of his people. And Amos, woe be to them
which desire ye day of the Lord, for why Amos. 5.
do ye wish the day of the Lord, for that day is darkness and not light?
And Sophonie pronouncing the bitterness of that day: says, the voice Soph. 1.
of the day of the Lord is bitter: there shall the strong man be troubled.
That day is a day of anger, of trouble and anguish, a day of calamity and
misery, a day of darkness and blindness, a day of mist and whirlewinde, in the
fire of the zeal of the Lord, shall all the earth be devoured, because he
shall quickly dispatch with all the dwellers on the earth. Saint Ambrose
says, that nothing is more profitable for an honest life, than to think that
he shall be our judge, which knows the secrets of our hearts, and is not
delighted with dishonest things. For all we, as Saint Paul says, must be
presented before the tribunal seat of Christ, for every man shall receive as
he has done in his body either good or evil. At that terrible hour, the
purity of the heart will be more worth, then the subtle persuasions of
Rhetoricians: a clear conscience shall avail more than all the money in the
world. For he that shall judge all things cannot be deceived, nor by
entreatie changed.

Fourthly, the consideration of the bitterness of the eternal pains, is
available to the eschuing of sin, for there is not so vehement a tentation
of carnal pleasure, but it may be repressed, if a man think of the
punishment that the wicked suffer in hell. And here least a man should think
that there is no hell: I will make but this discourse. There is no nation (as
Tullie says) so barbarous, but it has this sentence naturally written in
their hearts. Deos esse. That there are Gods. Now that there is a God, by the
scriptures it is manifest. For saint Paul says, for the invisible things of
him, that is, his eternal Rom, 1.
power and Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the world, being considered
in his works, to the intent that they should not be excused. And for the
singularity of one God, what does not Nature tell us? seeing that we see all
things concur to the conservation of one whole university. And Aristotle
himself, the greatest enemy of one providence of all things in the world,
does not only confess but also prove, that there is one only Primus motor,
the first moouer, which being granted, we must say, that there is a God, a
Creator, a Conseruer, a governor of all things, and consequently a prouider for
all things. For if there be a God, it is requisite, that in him should be all
kind of perfection. So if we count it a perfection in an vnreasoble Creature,
to have a care of the young that is procreated of it: how much more is it a
perfection in almighty God, not only willingly, and not of necessity, to
create all things: but also to have a perpetual care of things, created as well
visible as invisible, reasonable as unreasonable? And as ye scripture Psalm. 145.
says, does provide for all things in due season and time, yet if we give al
perfections unto God, which are due Psalm. 145.
unto him, we must needs give unto him that attribute which is most proper
unto him, we shall see yt he is most just, and therefore in the rigor of justice
he gives that to every man which is due unto him, according as he has don
in his body, either good or evil. Hell therefore is prepared for the devil
and his angels, and the reprobates: and this depends on the consideration
going before. For S. Paul says, that God will reward every man according to his
Rom, 2.
works: yt is, to the^ which by patience in weldoing, seek glory and honor,
immortality, and everlasting life, but unto the^ that be co^tentious and
disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil, of
the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, but to every man that does good,
shall be honor, glory, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the grecian, it
is therefore as hard a thing for a man to deny hell, as it is for him to deny
God, but the torments of hell are extreme and intolerable, yet not so great
as ye quality of sin deserves: For the very (just in ye sight of God) are
defiled. Psalm. 143.
And if God would deal with the^ in rigor, they are worthy of condemnation.
Where then shall ye sinner have place? Then as we see, that in the scriptures
there is no penitent sinner rejected of God, at what time soever he repents,
so are there in the same scripture manifest examples of the punishments of such
as obstinately persist in their sins. Let therefore this suffice for the
terrifying of a man from sin, and consequently to the amendment of his life.

Certain general aduertisments necessary for such as mind to serve God
sincerely. Cap. 2.
Having thus therefore with my self considered, the great discord that sin
sets between God and man, and the causes that may make a man refrain
sin, and so by consequence (if at the least Gods grace have taken any place
in thee) thou detesting sin, and with a penitent heart returning unto God,
with determination never to return unto the same again, but rather calling
upon God, that he would give thee grace, rather to suffer any kind of
affliction, contempt, yea death it self, if need require, then to offend. For
if a chaste wife ought to carry this mind, rather to loose her life, then betray
the truth she has once plight to her husband: how much more ought thou to
be of the same mind, rather to loose a thousand lives (if thou hads so many)
then to play the traitor toward God, 2. Cor. 1. 12
who is thy husband, thy father, thy Lord and maker? When thou have once thus
fully determined, then take a zealous and fervent desire, to live a new
hereafter, and strive to get other new behauiours, and to live far otherwise
then thou have done before, reputing thy self now to be a new man, far
changed from that thou erst was. Sithence all the time thou have hitherto
lived, has been lost, and as it were a death: for the better doing hereof,
this shall help thee greatly, in any wise to eschew all occasions of sin,
especially the company of wicked men, but much more of women, such as may
provoke thee to naughtines, and give thee loose and lewd example. For albeit
thou art bound to love every one, and to pray for every one as charity
comma^deth, yet art thou not bound to company and converse with every one, but
only such as may help to do thee good, and with their good words and virtuous
example serve to edify thee.

Secondly, thou must fly such places where God is customably offended, as
dicing-houses, tauerns, dancing schools, and such like, not only foreseeing
thou do no evil thy self, but also not to be present there where it is done:
for look how much more thou standst aloof from the fire, and so much more
secure art thou not to be burnt therewith.

Thirdly thou must take great heed, to be at no time Idle, for that (as the
Eccle. 33.
holy scripture tells) many men have received much harm through Idleness. See
therefore thou follow S. Ieroms counsel, saying, It behooves we S. Jerome.
be always doing of some good, that when the feend shall come to tempt us he
shall find us well and virtuously occupied.

Fourthly, thou must take heed of all excess in eating, drinking, sleeping
and clothing, and endeavor thy self to observe a mediocritie and temperance in
each of them, yea rather to decline to some rigor and austeritie, then to any
superfluity and delicate pampering of thy flesh: for look by how much the
more thou tamest and bridelest it, and by so much the less shall thou be
trobled with the temptations and disordinate desires that proceed of it, yea so
much the more apter shall thou find thy self to serve God, and to perform all
spiritual exercises.

As touching corporal mortification, it is good to follow the example of the
apostle, which says, but I beat down 1. Cor. 9.
my body, and bring it into subjection, which must not be done as some
hypocrites do, (which by Imoderate kind of punishing their body, do seek to
get unto themselves the names of Saints and holy men. But with all kind of
moderation and alacrity, so that it be don not for ostentation and vain
glory, but for that which the Apostle says in the Ibid.
same place, least by any means after it I have Preached to other, I my self
should be reproved.

Fifthly it shall greatly profit thee, to set before thine eyes the good
examples, works and life, that the Saints which both the old and new
testament have set before us to imitate, have led and continued in, and also
of them which in this time thou see to excel in any kind of virtue, but
cheiflie, of 2. Cor. 4.
such as be like to thy self, animating thee by their good examples, and
procuring as much as thou may to imitate them in every thing, yea
forgetting the good thou haste already don, thou ought to strive every day
to become better then other, and always to advance thy self forward in the
service and fear of God.

Sixtlie, make none account of the tediousnes and temptations, which those
commonly feel that begin first to lead a godly and a spiritual life; be not
1. Cor. 9.
thou, I say, dismayed there with at all, but march on forward, and fight
manfully against all such temptations, co^forting and confirming thy self with
this undoubted truth, which thou must have firmly fixed in thy mind, to wit,
that now thou have taken in hand the highest and most happiest enterprise, that
may be thought of in this world, and how this is an affair of more weight and
importance then any other, and whereby more certain gain, greater aboun dance
of treasure, more honor and dignity, and finally the most blessed haps of all
the happy and good things that may be found or desired in this world, shall
redound unto thee: yea there is no good thing yt is good indeed, but only
this, neither any other importa^t affair, but this alone, this being ye only
thing our Savior himself said was necessary. Luke 10. 8.
And therefore ought no toils, temptations Romans 8. 2. Cor. 4.
or disquietnes, no backbitings, slanders and persecutions, which may and must
befall thee in this life, seem any whit grievous for the gaining of so precious
a pearl and rare jewel as thou lookst for: herewith must thou eftsoons
animate, and encorage thy self, calling often to mind that saying of the Apostle.
Romans 8.
How all the afflictions and crosses, of this world, are not to be compared to
the future glory that shall be given unto us. Persuade thy self likewise, least
thou might happily faint in resisting the toiles and temptations which may
befall thee, in this straight way yt brings to heaven; persuade thy self, I
say assuredly that as herein be worldly toils and temptarions, so be there
heavenly comforts and consolations: and that to overcome these crosses and
ouerthwarts of nature, there are helps and succors of grace given, which
surpass nature. And with this consideration may thou remain a vanquisher,
and do all things (as did Saint Paul) in him that shall comfort thee, which is
Jesus christ our Lord and Captain.

Of the particular order we ought every day to observe in our daily Exercise.
Cap. 3.
DEscending now to more particularitie, for that such things as be well and
orderly disposed, be both more durable and profitable too: I have therefore
thought good to advertise thee, what course and order thou ought every day
to keep, which let be this: first, to rise in the morning so early as thou
may, having before taken convenient rest and sleep, which is had betwixt
six and seven hours, little more or less according to the diversity of
complexions. So soon as thou art awake, it is a good and godly devotion before
you settle thy mind to any other thing, to offer up to God the first fruits of
thine affections, and powers of thy whole body: as for example, thy heart
thinking of thy Creator, and sighing after him. Thine eyes casting them up to
heaven, and saying with the Prophet: Turn away mine eyes least they Psalm. 119.
behold vanity, and quicken me in thy way: thy legs, saying with the same
Prophet, direct my ways in thy word, Psalm. 119.
and let no vanity rule over me: thy hands also with the same saying: let my
prayer be incense before thee, and the lifting up of my hands an evening
sacrifice. Briefly, give him thanks for having preserved thee the night past,
desiring him likewise to defend thee the day present following from all sin,
and to give thee grace to spend it better in his divine service.

After this, some read part of the holy Scripture meditating thereon, desiring
God to direct thee, to do those things, which by his word thou art taught to
do, or make a little meditation, whereof I shall entreat hereafter, doing
this, thou do as our Savior himself advised thee, saying: Seek first the
kingdom of God and his justice, and all other things shall be Mat. 6.
given unto you. Having now recommended thy self to God, in manner aforesaid,
thou may with his holy blessing attend to thine occupation or temporal
business, referring all things yea temporal also to his divine pleasure,
choosing rather to do them for his love, then for thine own lucre. And
therefore ought thou to think eftsoons of him, whilst thou laborest or art
busied in any kind of thy temporal affairs, and to recommend thy self to his
divine mercy, offering up thy heart with all thy doings to him.

And in any wise, beware of one thing, that neither in thine occupation, or
any other temporal doings, thou use any guile, or exercise any unlawful
trade, and against conscience: for so should thy building laid upon Iam, 5.
1. Cor. 15.
such a foundation be very faulty. Thou must likewise take heed of swearing,
lying, using of idle words, and impertinent speeches, so much as may be; yea
not to hear any such if it were possible for thee.

Thus having spent the day till dinner time, see when thou go thereto, that
(being now at ye table), either thou or some say grace before thou eat, or at
least wise say some thanksgiving, for all such inestimable benefits, and
beware thou feed not too greedily, nor of too dainty and delicate meat: take
heed also of all such excess and superfluity, as may make thee unlusty and
less apt to read, pray, or do any other work. Take therefore so much as thou
may well think necessary for thee, and no more, remembering that meat is
rather to be received as a medicine, or refection to sustain the body, and
intertain the temporal life of ours, then to satisfy ye sensual delights and
desires of our flesh. And therefore must thou force thy self, not to feed with
ye whole man, but to eleuat thy mind up to god, and to listen to some holy and
spiritual lessons, if there were any read. And if thou find thy self
disposed to gluttony, thou must seek to repress the same with some good
thought, as for example, remembering that through thy sins thou deseruest not
that, which God of his mere liberality bestows upon thee: And how others
that are worthy of more, lack what thou leauest. Calling also to mind, the
toiles, torments and sorrows of our Savior, and how for thy sake he tasted
gaul and vinegar: with these and such like good cogitations may thou, as with
a wholesome Mat. 27. Luke 23. 40. 9, Psalm 88.
sauce, delay the too sweet and pleasant savor of thy meat.

After dinner, see thou rise not from table, before thou have thanked thy
maker, who in such wise has vouchsafed to sustain and refresh thee, with his
most bountiful hand, thou deserving rather through thy sins, to suffer
eternal torments. And so may thou at thy pleasure return again to thy
business, demeaning thy self therein, as is aforesaid in the morning.

At evening it should be very good, to read some part of scripture, with
meditation before supper, or to read a little, as I shall hereafter instruct
thee, that by this means thy soul may receive some refreshing before thy
body: howbeit if thy trade and business will not give thee leave to do so,
then may thou get thee to supper on Gods name, behauing thy self therein as
is said at dinner time.

The residue of time from supper till thou go to bed, thou may bestow in
some honest talk, or other good exercise and recreation, taking heed yet of
occupying thy self in any such thing as may hinder and disturb the quietness
of thy mind.

Afterward, having made some small pause or resting while, see thou prepare
thy self to bedward, considering that a good Christian ought to dispouse
himself in such wise thereto, as if he were that night to depart this life.

The manner how to prepare thy self is this: Four principal points to be
considered.
give god most humble thanks for having preserved thee that day: his angels do
behold thee, to the which God thou must not fail to recommend thy self. It
shall be likewise very good to remember otherwhiles, that even as thou now
laiest thy self down in bed, so shall others one day couch thee down in thy
grave: and ponder well that this must needs be the end of all the riches,
pompes and honors, and of the whole pride and glory of this world: say
therefore (as thou lie) some short prayer, namely the Lords prayer, craving
Gods good help and assistaunce, for that last hour of so great dread and
importance.

And beware in any wise of lying on too dainty and soft a bed, calling to
mind that narrow and hard Couch of the Cross, which for thy sake our Savior
lay upon, and thus may thou fall a sleep, either with this, or such like
godly thoughts. And look that when thou chauncest at any time to wake, thou
have God by and by in thy mind.

and let thy mouth be filled with his praises, saying some verse to thank and
bless him, or to recommende thy self to his divine mercy: and when thou
risest again in the morning, behave thy self as is aforesaid.

The exercises wherein a good Christian ought to occupy himself on holy
days. Cap. 4.
Having declared already, what order thou ought to keep, in thine exercises,
each working day through the week, it rests now to teach thee, how thou art
to behave thy self on the Sabbath day, the which we are precisely commanded
to sanctify and keep holy. It behooves therefore that we toil not only, and
take no servile pains on those days, but that we dedicate our selves more
diligently to gods service, and to the exercise of spiritual, good and godly
works, that by those means we may sanctify the same days, by indeuoring our
selves, to have more holiness on them. On sundaies therefore thou shalt
dispose thy life, and exercise in this order.

After thou art got up in the morning, offer and commend thy self to thy
Lord and maker, as on other days, and make thy prayers, read some part of
Scripture with mediration, preparing thy self to go to Church to pray, and to
hear the word of God, and to receive the holy Sacrament, if thou be minded
so to do that day.

When thou have thus don, and left such order for thy temporal matters at
home, as shall be meet, get thee then to Church to prayer, and to some sermon,
especially at such times as thou purposest to receive if conveniently thou
can. And take heed in the way to Churchward, thou roll not thine eyes up
and down gasing here and there, especially at thine entry into the Church, but
retire then home in modest and devout wise, and calling to mind thine own
unworthiness, and manifold sins, be sorrow full for them, asking God mercy
and forgiveness. And then may thou say that sentence of the Psalm: Putting
my trust and confidence in thy mercy, O Lord, I Psalm. 5.
will enter into thy holy Temple, in thy fear. Place thy self afterward in
humble and contrite wise like to the publican, in some convenient room, there
to hear atteutiuely both prayer and sermon; which are by the Preacher declared
in that place: and always to remain in the unity of the holy Church and all the faithful and lively members of Christ, that thou may afterward enjoy
everlasting happiness with them in the triumphant church above. Now at such time
as public prayer begins, lift thou up thy mind and heart with
thanksgiving, praising God when she praises him, praying when she prays,
and for the same things she prays, giving thanks when she does, and so in
all things imitating her and conforming thy self to her.

If there be a sermon that Sunday or holy day, give ear thereto with good and
great zeal and attention, preparing thy self before it begin, by
estraunging thy mind from foreign thoughts, and making thy prayer to God,
that it may please him to minister such speech and spirit unto the Preacher,
wherewith he may both profit thee and others, and then may thou say with
Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. 1. Kin. 3.


Of such things as the Preacher shall deliver in his Sermon, thou ought to
commit some such lessons to memory, as shall most concern thee, and that
chiefly has moved thee, supposing our Lord himself had delivered the same
unto thee.

These be the chiefest exercises, wherein thou art to spend the forenoon till
dinner time, and then behave thy self as on other days. Having then paused a
little while after dinner, it were a very fruitful exercise (if thou
could conveniently use it) to instruct and teach thy family in the
Christian faith, or learn thy self if thou understand it not well, whereby
every way does ensue great gain: for if thou teach others that be ignorant,
thou exercisest one of the seven spiritual works of mercy: and if thou Iam.
5.
learn thy self of others, thou winnest that which it behooued thee to know:
and that is more precious, then mountains of worldly wealth.

After this exercise thou may go and hear Evening prayer, and some good
lesson if there be any, governing thy self in all things, as is abouesayde in
the morning.

This being done, employ the spare time till night in doing some deed of
mercy, as in visiting some hospital or prison, comforting and performing some
James 1.
charitable office to those weak and comfortless Creatures, or otherwise thou
may associate thy self with some virtuous companions to report or hear
some spiritual discourses, or read some godly book, or find thee occupied
in some such like honest exercise: and if so be thou think it otherwhile
expedient to walk abroad for recreation, let it be in some secret and
solitary place, where other secular persons come not to disturb thee, and
with their profane conversation withdraw thy mind from God.

Finally, thou ought ever after dinner on those days, to occupy thy self
in some such exercise, as thy soul may thereby reap some spiritual profit,
and grow more zealous and fervent in the love of God, with new purposes and
inflamed desires to go continually forward, and to wax stronger in his divine
service, with greater charity toward thy neighbor, better knowledge of thy
self, and more humility in all thy actions.

Thus is the Sabbath sanctified conformablie to Gods will, and the intent of
the holy Catholic Church. Afterward, both in thy Meditation before Supper
(having the means to make it) and in the examination of thy conscience before
thou go to bed, thou shall both in these and each other thing of night, do as
is above said in the former Chapter. Noting this by the way, that on these
days all is to be done with so much more leisure, fervor, and diligence, as
the highness and holiness of the day does require it.

And here let every man that has children or a family, learn, that he is a
guide and governor to such as be under him, and therefore he is bound so
much as in him lies, to draw them to the service of God, causing them to hear
divine service, and to spend the holidayes in divine exercises, godly and
holy. And in no wise are they to allow, that any one in their house have any
public crime, or other notorious imperfection: as to be a swearer, a 1. Cor. 5
blasphemer, a gamster, or an offender in such like trespasses against our Lord
and Savior.

Of the profit and necessity of prayer. Cap. 5.
Now that I have already entreated of the order, that such as desire to live
like good christians, ought to keep both on woorking and holy days, it
rests that I entreat of another kind of daily exercise, very necessary for
each one to obtain this their desired end withal: chiefly yet for such as
mind to dedicat themselves more sincerely to divine service. And this is the
exercise of holy prayer, not only verbal which is common to each one, and
more frequented of all; but also hearty prayer, which very few wot of, and
so consequently very few do practice, being nevertheless the more
excellent kind a great deal. And therefore is it to be noted, that albeit
public prayer, to wit, that which is made with the mouth and voice, as Common
prayer, is a very profitable thing, instituted, approved and practiced in the
Church, yet is not this, but that which we call prayer of the heart, the more
worthy and excellent kind a great deal, and whereof the holy Doctors do
chiefly mean, when they speak of the excellency of prayer, and the singular
fruits which proceed thereof. The which spiritual kind of prayer, does so
far pass and go beyond the outward prayer of the lips, as does the
soul or spirit in dignity pass and excel the body, yet both necessary to
be used. Wherefore such as mind to exercise themselves thoroughly in Gods
service, and to batten and grow strong in spirit, ought not to content
themselves only with verbal prayer, but (as Saint Paul says) to pray with
1. Cor. 14.
mouth and mind together, having received at Gods hands both the one and the
other. How be it let us chiefly pray with spirit: for (as our savior said John
4.
to the Samaritan) God is spirit, and those which worship him, must in spirit
and 2. Cor. 3.
truth, worship him. Whereupon we know right well, that the holy Saints of
old time, did exercise themselves most chiefly, and commonly in this kind of
prayer, as having by experience proved, how much more profit and spiritual
comfort, the soul receives by this spiritual prayer, then by that of the
mouth. This thing also alone declares sufficiently of what importance they
deemed this exercise, and how necessary for all good Christians, in that they
are not afraid to call the same omnipotent: for so much as being made as it
ought to be, we thereby obtain every thing, like as Christ our Redeemer
has promised, saying: Verylie I say unto you, that whatsoever that you Mat.
21. Mar. 11. John 15.
shall ask by prayer, believe it shall be given you.

This prayer whereof we now speak, is a lifting up of our mind to GOD, which
is rather done with inflamed desires of the heart, then with variety of
outward words, and so are we less pained therein then in the other: yea,
look how much the longer we continue in this kind of exercise, and so much
do we find it the more sauourie and fruitful for our soul, for that each
time a man frequenteth this holy exercise, he still sucketh out new sap of
graces and spiritual treasure: yea, such as at some times the soul does (as
it were) handle and feel it most apparantlie. For like as Moses had his face
lightened and made glittering, through his often conversion with GOD, in such
wise as the Children of Israel (according Exo 34. 2. Cor. 3.
as holy Scripture tells) could not abide to look upon him; even so the
soul through perseueraunce in prayer, becomes more lightened, and
illuminated with the new graces it receives. We know moreover, how Christ our
Redeemer (as the holy Evangelist Saint Luke reports) being in prayer, was
transfigured, and his Luke 9. Math. 17. Mark 9. 2. Pet. 1.
face visiblie changed into as beautiful a brightness as the Sun, his
Garments also became as white as snow; even so is the soul of man in prayer
transfigured, and changed into God, and the darkness thereof turned into
light; frailetie into force; fear into hope; sadness into solace, with other
innumerable commodities that hardly can be rehearsed, which trial testifies
to proceed out of this holy prayer.

Sithence then this is for all so profitable and necessary an exercise, I
shall stretch my self out a little the further, to tell thee in what manner
thou ought to make it. And first shall I declare, what such may do as be
more spiritual, and have better leisure, being minded to make this exercise.

Afterward will I set down another method, for the simple and more busied
sort, such as want capacity and leisure to exercise them wholly in this
office, that by doing but what they are able to do, they may become partakers
of this so fruitful and necessary an exercise.

The manner how to pray in the spirit, and of the preparation we ought to make
before it. Cap. 6.
THIS prayer which we call spiritual, being (as I have already said) an
elevation, and lifting up of the mind to GOD; Like as the soul may diverse
ways eleuate it self to the knowledge of God: even so be there diverse
meditations or considerations, which are called by this name of prayer.
Nevertheless, I shall here entreat of these only, that be most devout,
easy, and profitable, and that with such brevity, as I may conveniently.

First (notwithstanding) am I to advertise thee of certain points, which must
needs be thought of before thou enter into this kind of exercise.

Whereof take this for the first, that thou force thy self (being one that
have leisure enough) to have an hour in the morning, and another in the
evening, which thou art to allot and destinate to this so profitable an
exercise.

Who so could not for all that have so much time as he would, ought not to
give over and neglect this exercise: yea, he rather were to take such hours
and time for it, as his business might best aforde him.

Now when thou come to these determinate hours, (being so thou may have
them in manner aforesaid) it behooves thee to prepare thy self (as the wise man
says) before prayer, to the end thou may have more attention, devotion and
reverence, with other parts requisite, for the better performing of this
exercise.

Thy prepartion therefore let it be in this manner, when thou come to the
time and place perfixed: endeavor thy self to lay aside all other cares and
cogitations, which in any wise may im peach thee, weighing well the weight and
seriousness of this affair thou art in hand withal. And to the end thou
may have the more attention and reverence, consider how when thou art in
prayer, thou speak not to the wind, nor to the walls: but stand most
assuredly before the face of the living God, and that God is there present at
thy prayers, listening thy words, vewing thy tears, and taking delight in thy
devotion and holy exercise. For albeit he universally assist all his creatures,
yet assisteth he chiefly such as pray to him, according as the sacred
scripture witnesses, saying: There is no Deuteronomy. 4,
other Nation in the world so great, to whom their god is so nigh to, as is
our Lord God, who assisteth us in all our prayers. Think now how great
attention and reverence is requisite, to speak and stand before the presence of
so divine a majesty: before that most Sovereign and omnipotent King, before
that infinite beauty, and incomprehensible greatness, if so great respect be
had in speaking but to a temporal Lord or King. This consideration shall make
thee humble thy self, and bow down to the very dust of the earth, and stand
with fear and trembling before that sacred sovereignty and dreadful majesty.

With this thought may thou kneel down in reverent wise, saying the Lords
prayer, craving of GOD briefly forgiveness of thy sins, but those especially
wherein thou have offended that day; as also grace to perform this affair
better then heretofore, and to spend that small time to his glory and the
profit of thine own soul, sithence we are not able without his grace to do
any good thing. With this affect and mind, may thou say the words of the
Patriarch Abraham, Loquar ad Dominum meu^ cum sim puluis and cinis, I will speak
to my Lord though I be but dust and ashes: or other especial prayers or
sentences, wherein you happily have most devotion, which shall all of them
serve for a preparatiue, to make thee have better attention, and to shut out
and exclude al foreign cogitatio^s. Having now in this or like manner got
attention, devotion, and reverence, fall then in hand with meditation the best
ways thou can: the which ought in mine opinion to be most necessarily of the
passion of Christ, as being a thing very acceptable to him, and of great
devotion and profit for our souls, since this our savior his passion is no
other thing then an epilogue and recapitulation of his whole life and doctrine,
and an abreuiate and short word wherein it pleased him to teach us the sum of
all wisdom, and the perfection of the Gospel: wherefore for thy better and
more orderly proceeding in this, thou maeist divide the points of the passion
by the days of the week in manner following.

Meditations of the blessed passion of our Savior, for every day in the week
especially on mornings. Cap. 7.
THE meditations which I think most profitable for thee to exercise thy self
most in, especially on mornings, are to be of the passion of Christ, which
thou may dispose in this order.

Monday.
ON monday morning at thine hom of exercise, thou may first think on the
last supper of our Lord and Savior, wherein (amongst other things) thou art to
meditate conformably the story of the Gospel: call chiefly to mind these
three points, to wit, that most profound humility, wherewith John 1^. Mat. 26.
Mar. 14. Luke 23.
he washed his disciples feet, the institution of the most holy sacrament, the
most sugared speeches he lastly preached unto them.

About the first, consider that humility (enough to astonish a man) wherewith
that most high and puissaunt Prince, (into whose hands his eternal father
had given the rule of all things) bowed himself to wash and cleanse his
Disciples feet, and amongst the rest, those filthy feet of Judas the
traitor, John 13.
neither yet did his puissaunce, nor his wisdom, nor his holiness, nor his
greatness, (each being incomprehensible,) let him to do this so base a work,
that we should follow the example, that he left us therein, not only to
humble our selves to our betters, but but to our equals and inferiors.

Touching the second point, consider that most fervent love our sweet redeemer
bare us, to the end whereby he (being now to depart from us) instituted 1. Cor.
2
this holy Sacrament, to remain in his church for a perpetual memory of his
passion, for so says saint Paul, As often as you shall eat this bread, and
drink of this cup, you show the Lords death till he come. And like as he
could not leave us any gift more precious then this, so ought we not to seek
or desire any other then this: disposing our selves eftsoons to receive this
holy sacrament, that being eftsoons united to him, we be made partakers of
the inestimable fruits, which are by means there of imparted to us.

Concerning the third, amongst the other words of that long and most lofty
Sermon he made to his disciples, take for thee, that his new precept of
charity, so highly commended of him, wherein he said, yt his disciples should
Io. 13. 14. 15. 16.
be discerned: and withal, note the patience thou must have in thy manifold
tribulations and persecutions, which thou must needs suffer in this world,
wherewith the Soul is cleansed, and obtains great and unspeakable grace.

Tuesdaie.
THou may on Tuesdaie meditate Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22.
three other points, whereof let the first be of our Lords prayer, which he
made three times in the garden of Gethsemane. Behold here the anguish, anxietie
that sacred soul of his felt, which he himself said, was sorrowful Mat. 26.
and heavy to death, that is to say, that the sorrow he felt was enough to
procure his death, and note the remedy we must fly to, when we hap to be thus
afflicted and made heavy, which is a zeal and perseverance in prayer, as he
used three times, praying so much the longer, as his affliction increased and
grew more grievous, through the vehement apprehension he had of his future
torments now at hand, which made him sweat drops of blood. Take therefore
this refuge of prayer in all thy Luke. 22.
tribulations, as Saint James does also admonish thee, and seek not after
Iam. 5.
any other faithless and vain remedies.

The second point for this day is our Saviors imprisonment, whereunto he
willingly offered himself, to loose thereby the Gives and Fetters of our
follies. Here may thou weigh that insuperable patience, wherewith he Esaias.
53. 1. Pet. 2.
willingly consented to be bound, injured and stricken with diverse blows and
buffets, without any moan making or resistaunce, yea he found fault with
Peter, who did what he could to defend him, saying. The cup that my Father
has given me, will thou not John. 18.
that I drink it? The virtue and meaning whereof thou ought to mark well,
and lay up in the treasure of thy heart, therewith to relieve and defend
thy self, in all thy griefs and persecutions: for whencesoeuer they come,
whether of the world or the Devil, all is the cup which thine everlasting
father gives thee, for the welfare of thy soul.

Thou must also meditate the three points, how the faithfullest Mat. 26.
Mar. 14. Luke 22. John. ^8.
Master that ever was, being abandoned and forsaken of all his Disciples, and
accompanied only with those cruel officers; was led to the houses of those
sacrilegious priests, and Caiphas, where they begun a new to refresh their
villaynous outrages, their hawkings and spittings, their blows and buffets,
their mockes and mowes, with other their grievous vexations, wherewith he
passed over all that night, abiding every thing with incomparable patience,
that thou in like case should endeavor thy self to imitate him.

Wednesday.
ON wednesday, meditate the ignominious progress and wearisome journey, our
savior made on the morrow, being conducted from one Judge to another, and
pause a while in each of their houses, to weigh the words he spoke, and the
injuries that were done him, but chiefly call to mind those words he
answered Pilate withal, asking him if he were a king, which were these, My
kingdom is not of this world. Which if thou chewe and ruminate Ioh. 18. 9
well; will let thee know the blindness of worldly men, who with so great
^ark and care desire to reign, and to enjoy the prosperity, pleasures and
pomps of this world (whereof the true and only king confesses in these
words, that his kingdom consists not) that thou should thereby frame
thy self to contemn the world, which he so little regarded. And Heb. 11.
learn to live like a Pilgrim and stranger 1. Pet. 2.
therein, making no account of the pompes, riches and credit thereof, which be
so vain and transitory. Concerning the scorns likewise done to him in
Herodes house, that unjust Judge, who to make him be mocked, caused him to put
on that Luke 23.
white fools coat, and thus having fooled and dolted him, sent him
afterward back again to Pilate, in the which voyage he suffered such
pains and spiteful reproaches, as thou well may think of. Learn here to
hold thy peace when thou art despised, mocked, or otherwise cutiously
questioned: thou may see likewise what pains and travail thou may
prepare thy self to take, (when need shall require for his sake) and thy
neighbors, sithence he has thus both for thee, and all their sakes made so
many wearisome iourneys.

Thursday.
ON Thursday meditate first, the cruel scourging of the son of God in Pilates
house, who weening thereby to appease the rage and fury of the Jews, caused
him to be whipped and beaten most bitterly. Behold then how Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
Ioh, 19.
they pull off his clothes, and strip him naked, who adorneth the fields with
all their beauty; and how they bind those hands to the pillar, which created
erst the heavens, and being thus naked and fast tied; how the cruel
executioners begin then with might and maine, to lay on that virginal flesh,
fleaing the tenders him of the immaculate Lamb, and causing that most sacred
blood to issue and spin out of all the parts of his body in great quantity,
yea in such sort was that most dainty and beautiful flesh fleane and wounded,
and thereby was rightly fulfilled the prophecy of Esai: saying, We reputed him
as plagued and as one smitten of God and humbled. Esa. 53.
In the midst of all these griesly griefs, the most innocent Lamb stood dumb
and quiet: without moving or making any resistance at all; sith he was Esaias
53. Mat. 26. Act. 8.
not so straightly fastened to the pillar with hempen cords, as with heavenly
charity, and the fervent love he bare us, which knitte his divine heart with
far more stronger bands then were the other.

For the second point, meditate how the tyrannous officers, being now tired
with beating him, albeit he not so with suffering for us; they then unloosed
him from the pillar, and without giving him any other succor or solace, let
him seek his Garments, thrown here and there about the Palace. Which having
at length with much a do found out, and put upon him, they straightway strip
him a new, to put on that old purple coat, where with they openly skorne and
make him their laughing-stocke: and anon crown him most cruelly with a crown
of sharp and pricking thorns. If thou vewe and consider all this with devout
Math. 27. Ioh. 19, Mark 15.
actions, it cannot be but it must provoke thee to love that savior, who for
thy welfare only vouchsafed to endure so fell torments, and make thee also to
fear for thy sins, and utterly to abhor thy lasciuiousnes, thy pleasures,
pomps and superfluous pamperings of the flesh, with the which thou have so
highly offended God, and for the Esaias. 53. ^. Peter 2.
which he has in this wise so painfulle satisfied. For if a King sons be
afraid, when he sees but a contemptible bondslaue beaten in his presence:
how shall not the most abominable bondslaue fear and quake again, seeing the
Son of God so cruelly handled for his offenses? If others sins be paid
thus dearly for, what payment shall he have that shall be punished for his
own?

Lastly thou may meditate this day, how our savior standing in this wise
crowned, wounded and mocked, Pilate commanded him to be brought forth, for ye
whole assembly of people John 19.
to look upon, to try whether he might this ways mollify their obstinate and
stony hearts: and thereupon said, Ecce homo, Lo here the man. Fail not thou
therefore with the eyes of thy soul, to take an advised view of this most
ruefull spectacle, beholding the hue and ugly shape he carried, who is the
brightness of his eternal fathers glory. And that to restore what thou had
lost through thine offenses. Behold how he stands in the midst of such an
assembly, fraught full of shame and sorrow, clad in that fools coat so
ill-favored an attire: with the crown of thorns enuironing his sacred Mat. 15.
Mat. 27. Ioh. 61.
head; the reed in his tied hands in lue of a scepter, that hard cord about
his tender neck, his Divine visage all puffed up and sweld with the blows and
stripes he has received, and abominably disfigured with filthy blood and
spittle, yea from top to toe, no one spot free from wounds: neither was this
enough to soften those flintie hearts.

Friday.
ON Friday meditate, how our Savior Ioh. 19.
accepting the most wrongful sentence pronounced against him, carried the
cross himself on his back, whereon he was presently after to be crucified,
for so had those his cruel enemies appointed, that thereby his torments and
reproachful ignominies might every ways grow greater. Now sithence our Lord
and savior bears thus upon his shoulders all thine iniquities, enforce thy
self to yield him thanks for this so singular a benefit, and to help him
(like another Cyreneus) Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 23.
to carry his cross, in imitating his example, and see thou keep these
devout women company that followed him, to whom he said, how they were
rather to weep over themselves, and their children, For if he do these things
in green wood, what shall be done Luk, 23.
in the dry? The which words thou ought to apply to thy self, in being
careful not to be like a piece of crabbed wood, barren and fruitless in thy
life, but to force thy self every day to bring forth fruit of good works,
though it be with labor and pain, for if thou bear him company in this life
in his grieves, thou shall (according as Saint Paul promises) be a companion
with him in the other life, in his joys and unspeakable consolations.

Meditate secondly, how those unmerciful tormentors, so soon as they were now
com to the mount of Caluari, stripped forthwith in cruel wise that loving Lamb,
tearing his skin to his excessive grief, being through the green wounds
festered to his Garments, and afterward stretched him out upon that hard bed
of the cross, which the world had prepared for him, and so with outstretched
arms of his abundaunt charity offered he himself up to his everlasting
father, as a true and lively sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. And
thus his hands and most holy feet being with sharp nails fastened to the
cross, they hoist him up on high, hanging most pitifully thereon. Weigh here
diligently, what griping griefs his most rufull virgin mother suffered,
hearing the strokes of the hammer wherewithal they crucified him, and seeing
him afterward hoisted so up, upon that hard cross with such opprobrius shame,
and infinite pains and torments.

Now then behold a while with the eyes of thy soul, this thy savior thus
hanging, nailed upon the cross, and gather upon this wholesome tree the fruit
of life, it plentifully affords it to thee: for here is always forth-comming
the supply for all thy needs: the salve for all thy sores, the satisfaction
for all thy sins: and herein may thou (as in a glass) plainly perceive
all thy wants and imperfections, since this is a much more beautiful and
bright glass then those were, that god commanded to be set in the Temples for
the Priests to look them in, at such Exo. 38.
time as they were to minister, for that the godly soul, which shall
attentively admire it self in this mirror, may soon espy, and easily find
out all her faults and follies whatsoever: That nakedness and extreme
poverty we see upon the cross, utterly overthrows all our pompes and
superfluous decking: that crown of thorns condemns our pride and ambition:
the gaul and vinegar which was given him to drink, cries out against our
gourmandise: and disordinate drinking: those weeping withered eyes, accuse the
looseness and lack of modesty in ours: those outstretched arms ready to
embrace both friends and foes, find fault with our rancor and revenge: that
most sacred body wounded all over from top to toe: argues (and that
severely) the lasciviousness and sensual appetite of ours.

Thus see thou, how all the stains and sinful spots of thy whole life, do
manifestly appear in this unstained mirror full of all perfection.

Thirdly if thou have any spare time left, thou may meditate the other
egregious and notable things, which happened about our Saviors death: but
chiefly those seven speeches he uttered being upon the cross, for in the first
(Father forgive them, for they know Luke 23.
not what they do) Is charity toward our foes highly commended. In the
second (Vertly I say unto thee, that this day, shall thou be with me in
paradise): Luke 23,
is mercy toward sinners, in sovereign wise set out, In the third (Behold
thy son, behold thy mother) a piety and Ioh. 19.
zeal toward parents. In the fourth (I thirst) a fervent desire of our
neighbors welfare. In the fifth (My God my Ioh. 19.
God why have thou forsaken me,) an humble Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Psalm, 21. Ioh. 19.
Luke 23.
prayer in tribulation. In the sixth (It is accomplished) a perseuering in
obedience till the end. In the seventh (Father I commend my spirit into thy
hands) a perfect and entire resignation into the hands of God, which is the
period and sum of all our perfection.

Saturday.
ON Saturday, meditate the piercing of our Saviors side with that cruel Ioh,
19.
spear, to the incomparable grief and heart break of his mother. And pause
here a while, to behold both this and other his infinite and most precious
wounds sithence these are to be thy refuge, thy physic and chief consolation.
In the old law we read, how God commanded certain cities to be assigned in the
land of promise, whereto such as had committed any offense, might securely make
their refuge: but now in ye law of grace, Deuteronomy. 19,
there is none so secure a refuge, as is ye harboring in these most sweet
wounds where to sinners may fly a great deal more securely, to eschew the
perils and persecutions of this world, then they could do in old time to
their assigned cities. And herein shall that wound in our saviors side chiefly
help thee, figured by the window which god commanded Noe to make in the side
of the Arc, by the which, all the beasts that should escape the flood, were to
enter in: even so now, al such as find themselves endangered in the terrible
sourges of this te^pestuous world, if so they covet to escape drowning; let them
have recourse to those most sacred sores, and wide wounds: let them enter at
this open window, and therein shall they be most secure, and find themselves
in true peace and tranquillity.

Meditate afterward, with how great devotion, the Redeemer of the world Mat.
27. Mar. 16. Luke 23. Ioh. 19.
was taken down from the cross and laid on ye earth before his lovers and
friends, who with a right rufull countenance fastened their eyes upon him. Think
here what streams of tears his beloved disciple Saint John, the blessed
Magdalen (with the other godly women) plentifully poured out upon him: behold
and ponder well, with what zeal and feruency, both they, and the two worthy
men Joseph and Nicodemus, anointed and wrapped him in his winding sheet, and
afterward bare and laid him in the sepulcher which was in the garden, and
endeavor thou to cleanse thy heart thoroughly from al corruption of sin, from al
filth of fond desires and evil thoughts, yt so thou may (as in a new
sepulcher) lay up therein this most precious treasure. And see thou fail not
this day, to bear patt with this woeful company in their entire grief and
sorrow, wailing with them, and taking compassion of their griefs; that you
afterward may participate of their ioies in ye resurrection.

Sunday.
ON Sunday, meditate the joys of our Saviors joyful resurrection, wherein
consider these three points. First our redeemer, having now perfected the work
of our redemption, and overcome our sinful death with his most sacred death,
the third day his most happy soul reentring, and remitting it self to his
blessed body, he becam most beautiful, bright, glittring, impassible and
immortal, albeit before he was disfigured with y^ blows and torments of his
passion Learn thou hereby not to faint, or to be discouraged when thou art
persecuted, tempted and afflicted; but with faith to expect the good Lord his
hour, who (after a tempest) sends fair weather, after troubles, quietness,
and uses, Psalm. 93.
according to the proportion of tribulations to visit afterward with joy and
consolations.

The second point thou may meditate upon this day, is ye singular comfort
those devout Mary's received, when they saw their beloved master, whom (even
now) they sought to anoint as dead, and now find thus glorious and revived
again: consider especially, the tender heart of that virtuous woman Mary
Magdalen, being wholly melted and dissolved into tears, through the zealous
love she bare our savior, and therefore would not depart, but stood still at the
sepulcher, till such times as she did seek, and seeking find her Lord, to
receive comfort of him, whom she so heartily longed for. Wherein thou may
note and mark well, how our Lord appeared, first to her that loved him most,
that perseuered most, and Mar. 16. Ioh* 20.
that sought him most, to the end thou may learn and know hereby, that
then the same Lord will appear and comfort thee, when with like tears, love
and diligence (as she did) thou shall enquire and seek after him.

Thou may (in like manner) meditate the third point (having spare time)
how this most desired master, appeared to his Disciples, whom (after his
resurrection) he eftsoons visited, comforted, and confirmed in their faith:
but chiefly ponder the sweere speeches, he used to those he went in company
with to Emmaus, who with great grief were talking of his passion; Mar. 16.
Luke 24.
whom he did afterward exceedingly comfort and inflame, and showed himself
unto them in the breaking of bread. Whereby thou may gather, that if thy
conversation and talk be such as theirs was, to wit (of Christ's passion:)
thou shall not lack his presence and company, and shall be illuminated better
to know and love him: and this chiefly, in the breaking of the bread, that is,
in the sacrament of the Lords supper.

Thou may likewise (at some other time) meditate on this day, his holy and
miraculous ascension, how forty days being now past over since his
Resurrection: in which time he appeared eftsoons to his disciples, reioicing,
comforting, and teaching them what they ought to do, the fortieth day he
lastly appeared to them being at table, and found fault with their
incredulity, and afterward having sufficiently informed the^ how they ought
to preach, he and they went together to the mount Oliuet, whence that most
worthy and glorious triumpher, having now blessed and bid them all farewell,
mounted up in all their sights to heaven, carrying with him the rich spoils of
the holy Saints, who with the troops of Angels, gave lauds and praises to
him, singing with unspeakable joy and exaltation to him, and thus was he in
this so solemn a triumph and rejoicing, received into heaven, where he sits
on the right hand of his Almighty father.

Consider here, how it pleased our sweet Lord, to ascend into heaven, in the
presence of those that truly loved him, to the end they should both with their
eyes and spirit follow him, and desire to ascend with him, knowing right well in
what a solitarines they were after to remain for lack of his presence, which
following and lo^ging after him, avails much for the obtaining of his divine
grace. Eliseus desired his master Elias 4. Reg. 2.
(as holy Scripture tells) to give him his spirit, after he was departed
from him, to whom Elias made this answer; If thou see me, when I shall be taken
away from thee, it shall be done that thou requirest me, otherwise not* Even so,
now they shall have Christ's spirit with them, that shall see and associate
him with their spirit, and such, who^ the love they bear to Christ, shall make
feel his absence, and continually to desire and sigh in heart for his divine
presence.

Meditate also the great joy, wherewith (as Saint Luke the Evangelist tells)
they returned back again to L^k. 24,
Jerusalem, receiving greater contentation through the joy which he was gone
to, whom they so dearly loved, then sorrow through the solitariness
wherewith they found themselves environed. For such is the nature of true love,
as it contenteth it self much better with the well doing of those it loves,
then with her own private and peculiar profit. And thus ought thou to
procure what touches the honor and service of Christ, before thine own
peculiar commodity.

These be the meditations which thou may make on mornings each day in the
Week, and wherein for the better perfourming of the same, and with more
fervor in the soul, it were good that thou did perfectly know the
History, or read it in the last Chapters of the Evangelists: it shall also
behooue thee, to put in ure and practice, the precepts that follow in the next
Chapter, and when thou have thus exercised thy self in these Meditations one
hour or a half, little more or less, give God thanks with all thine heart
in the best manner thou can, for all the things it has pleased him to do and
suffer by thee, and crave withal, that he will vouchsafe to make thee partaker
of all the fruits of his passion and redemption, as also to impart his other
graces to thee, which thou shall find thy self to stand in most need of:
pray likewise for his true Church, and such as thou are bound to remember, or
that have commended themselves to thy devotions, and for all such other
necessities as occasions may most require, and thus may thou herewith finish
this thine exercise.

Certain particular aduertisements, touching the meditations cotained in the
former Chapter. Cap. 8
TO the end thou may with more fruit and spiritual advancement, make the
meditations mentioned in the former Chapter: it behooves thee to observe
therein these few aduises following.

First, concerning these points of the passion, whereon thou art to meditate,
thou must understand, that they are in such wise to be meditated; as though
they happened even in that instant before thine eyes, in the self same place
where thou art, or within thy soul, or (otherwise) imagining thou were in the
very places, where such things happened, happily this ways thou feel
better devotion.

Secondly, thou must force thy self, to draw some doctrine and spiritual
fruit out of the things thou meditatest as for example, to note in every
passage, over and above that is already Four notable points to be
considered.
said, these four points: first what he is that suffered: secondly what he
suffered: thirdly in what manner he suffered: and lastly for whom he suffered.

Out of the first, thou may gather 1. Who it is that suffered.
what immeasurable love you owe to so loving a Lord, who being god almighty,
and of infinite majesty, has vouchsafed to suffer such great torments and
injuries for thee so vile and abominable a bondslaue: since if another man,
were he never so abject, had suffered the like or much less for thee: thou
would love him with all thy heart, and pain thy self to be grateful to him.

Out of the second point, thou may gather 2. What thing he suffered.
matter of great compassion, weighing thy savior, thus fraught with excessive
griefs alone, persecuted, blasphemed on every side, and from top to toe al
wholly wounded: so that if thou saw a brute beast suffer the like thy heart
would melt again with pity and compassion.

Out of the third point, thou may gather marvelous examples to imitate 3. In
what manner he suffered.
him in: learn first to be humble and lowly, pondering that his botomlesse
humility, wherewith he humbled himself, even unto the death: learn to be
patient, considering that invisible patience, wherewith he endured such
torments and villainous spites without making any resistaunce or lamentation:
learn to love poverty, seeing him so extreme poor, hanging naked upon the
cross, and buried afterward in another man's sepulcher, as also (al his life
time) having nothing of his own, nor where to rest his head. Learn to love
thine enemies, seeing with Mat. 8.
how great charity he prayed for those that crucified him: learn to be
constant and perseuerant in such good works as thou take in hand, and not to
give them over for any toiles or cross encounters, considering the firm
constancy of Christ, wherewith amongst so many toils, contradictions, and
torments, he perseuerd until death, and therewith finished the work of our
redemption. Finally out of this point if thou can consider it at leisure,
thou may learn innumerable virtues, and most worthy examples, which shine
forth in every passage of his passion.

Out of the fourth, thou may gather 4. For whom he suffered.
a great and general charity toward all men, and to despise none, seem he
never so vile and contemptible: considering, that our Lord has spilte his
most precious blood for him, and for all men in the world, neither is there any
so wicked and lewd a wretch, for whom alone, (if need had been) he would not
have suffered all the torments he suffered: learn thou therefore, seeing his
infinite charity toward all men, to love all men, and to make account of all
men: learn besides to detest sin above all things, remembering how that was
the occasion of our Lords most cruel death and passion.

Thirdly, thou must understand, concerning the foresaid meditations, that if at
any time it so happened, that in such points as be set down to meditate upon,
thou happily foundst in the first or second of them good devotion: therein
may thou stay so long as thy devotion shall last: not coveting to pass
over to the other points remaining behind in that meditation, for if thou
chance to leave some untouched for that time, thou may another day supply
that want. In like manner mean I, if through any urgent affairs thou should
sometime omit thine exercise, or appointed hour, that then thou force thy
self to supply that want with a new hour, and if not on the same yet on some
other day.

Fourthly, thou must procure by all Deuotiou to be cherished.
means, to cherish and intertaine thy devotion and godly purposes, with other
good guiftes (whatsoever) thou might happily have received in time of
prayer: and this shall thou do by indeuoring thee to go, as retired and
gathered in the day time as thou may, calling to mind eftsoons what thou
erst did meditate and receive, especially when thou hear the clock strike
or otherwise as thou may.

Now if on the otherside it so chanced, A document worthy great observation.
thou were disquieted with diverse foreign thoughts (as it eftsoons
happens) and thereby should remain without any devotion or taste in thy
prayer: yet ought thou not for all this to give over thine exercise, until
thy time be fully finished, since many times, yea most commonly it falls
so out, that one finds himself cold, and without taste or tallage in the
beginning, and afterward (through perseverance in his prayer) gathers heat,
and finds good devotion, yea when it so chanced, that thou should not
find any taste or savor at all, in the whole time of all thy prayer: neither
yet ought this to dismay or make thee quail, but rather believe assuredly,
that such is the Lord his good pleasure at that time thereby to try, and
exercise thy patience, thy loyalty and perseueraunce, like as he dealt with
the woman of Canaan, whom albeit he Mat. 19*
seemed at the first to make none account of, yet did he afterward most
abundantly comfort her, honor her, and grant her her desire; well, therefore
may thou assure thy self, that look how much more patie^tly thou bear
this drouth and barrennes of thy soul, so much fruits has thy soul
accumulated, and heaped up. Think moreover, that albeit thou haste not found
that devotion, and attention thou wishest for, yet has our Lord showed
himself favorable and friendly to thee, in suffering thee to remain so long
time in his presence: and so no doubt, but the time in this manner is much more
fruitfully employed, then in such other works, as may seem far better to thee,
if thou find no better devotion at one time, well may thou hope (in Gods
mercy) that it shall please him at another time to comfort thee so
plenteously, that thy former wants shall thereby be more then sufficiently
rewarded. And believe this assuredly, that how much the more thou shall
persevere in this exercise: so much the more profit and pleasure shall thou
find thereby, besides other marvelous gifts which are not known, nor
perceived at the first.

Nevertheless, for that by reason of this desire, (being common and natural
to each one, to covet and taste some devotion in their prayers:) diverse are wont
in seeking by force and violence to wrest it out, and do therein greatly
amiss, as by that means oppressing their understanding, and dulling their
affect and will.

Fiftlly, it is meet to advertise thee herein, that in the passages of the
passion, or any such other holy examples, thou shall meditate upon; thou
content thee with a simple and quiet speculation, of such points as thou
think on, and with that affection and taste God shall vouchsafe to bestow
upon thee, without forcing thine understanding Violence in meditation greatly
hurtful.
or imagination, to speculate and imagine things more plainly, ne yet thy will
to feel and taste the same: by wringing out affections and tears with violence:
for these immoderate excesses both on the one side, and likewise on the other,
are wont rather to hinder then help devotion: hurting the head with that
inordinat toil: And when the violence of this part affectiue is once past; the
will does remain then more cold and without taste. Make thy Meditation
therefore with quietness and peace, waiting with patient silence, what our
Lord shall work in thee: and holding thy self contented therewith as is
aforesaid.

Finallye (to advertise thee in every thing) know this by the way: that if
thou find pain and disquientnesse in kneeling (for so must thou needs
dispose thy self in the beginning) then may thou rise up and stand, sit,
or walk: as thou think most meet, for obtaining that quietness and rest
thou desire in thy soul.

Meditations to be made on Euenings, or a new week. Cap. 9.
TO the end that such as be better instructed, and have more opportunity and
leisure to give themselves to prayer, may have more large scope and ample
matter to exercise themselves in; I have thought good to set down other
meditations here, which may be used on euenings; meaning to refreshe and feed
the soul, each day morning and evening, as thy body each day does not want
those two repasts. As for others which are busied, and cannot intend to take
this refection and exercise each day so often, they may one week use one part of
these meditations, and another week the other. Nevertheless, such as I now
entreat of, be most fit for young beginners, wherein they ought certain weeks to
exercise themselves, before they proceed further to ye meditation of the
passion of our Lord and Savior, for that true contrition of our sins,
knowledge of our selves, and the fear and reuerence-towardes GOD (which are
gathered out of these meditations) help greatly for proceeding afterward
with more profit and avail, to the meditations of the passion.

Having therefore certain hours allotted to these present meditations,
whether it be at morning or evening, and observing the aforesaid
aduertisements, such as shall serve most fitly for this purpose: then may
thou meditate according to the method following.

Monday, 2. Med.
ON Monday, let thy Meditation be The sins of our former life.
of all the sins that thou have committed during thy whole life time, and this
shall thou do in manner following. Standing in the place of meditation with
great lowliness and shame, thine eyes fixed on the earth, and head bowed down
to the ground-warde, like as a thief should stand before a Judge, that had
taken him with the manner; thus shall thou begin to weigh with bitterness of
thy soul, all thy years and time misspent, wherein thou have committed so many
and monsterous crimes: which thou may reduce to memory, by running over the
ten Commandments, the deadly sins, the senses, powers, and all the parts
of the body, by every one whereof thou may find thee guilty of innumerable
offenses, committed against that God, whom thou so greatly ough test to have
dreaded and reverenced, for his Majesty and infinite power, and so singulerly
have loved for the great and continual benefits he has bestowed upon thee.

Secondly, think how greatly this Lord thy God detesteth sin; seeing he has
so rigorously punished it from the beginning of the World, with the waters of
that universal flood, with fire from heaven, wherewith he punished Genesis 7
that horrible vice of those five Cities, besides other his dreadful
scourges, Genesis 10
wherewith he has eftsoons chastised the world for the sin of man: and
lastly, for our sins vouchsafed himself to die, that by this means they
might be punished sufficiently.

Thirdly consider, how with every sin, thou have done as much as in thee lay,
to crucify him again. Out of these Heb. 6.
considerations thou may easily gather, the enormitie of these offenses:
how intolerable thy ingratitude has been, and how great torments thou have
deserved, and yet deseruest to suffer. Our first father Adam did eat but Genesis 3.
of one only tree, contrary to Gods commandment, and well do we wot, how
severely his sin has been punished, both in him and us; what punishment then
deserves he, that has Romans 5
transgressed so many commandments, and that so many times.

Hereby may thou know, the infinite clemency of God toward thee, seeing he
might so many times, so justly have thrown thee down headlong into Hell, as he
has done others, and yet has not done so to thee; but forborne thee, and
preserved thee from sundry and manifold dangers, especially from the
devil, whose will thou fulfilledst in sinning, and both would and could have
haled thee to hell, had not his mighty hand defended thee? Finally, he has
given thee many good inspirations, and invited thee to repentance, besides
many more great benefits bestowed on thee, which no father would have done to
a most tenderly beloved son:

Being then stirred up with such like considerations, and moved with true
compunction of heart, reputing thy self, a most abominable Caytife: prostrate
thy self (filled with shame and confusion) at our Saviors feet, as did that
public sinner ye blessed Magdalen, and with great sorrow and humblenes, pray
him to pardon thee Luke 7. Ioh. 12. Mar. 14. Mat. 26.
those infinite sins and abhominatio^s thou have committed, purposing fully for
the time past, earnestly to repent and to lead a new life in time to come.

And here note, that when thou vnbethinkest thee of thy former sins, it
shall not be needful or convenient, to stand upon such particularities, as
might procure alteration in thy flesh, which often happens in carnal
sinners: but generally to consider, how often thou have committed these
carnallities and beastlinesses, through thy whole life, being sorrowful for
them in general, without staying to discourse any particular manner or
circumsta^ce in such crimes, for thereby do commonly ensue very dangerous
alterations.

Tuesday, 2. Med.
ON Tuesday meditate thy present faults, and such wicked inclinations as thou
now find in thee, which daily cause thee to commit diverse disorders, and
weigh withal, the manifold miseries this present life is subject unto; that
so, what by the former meditation, knowing thy life past fraught full of filth
and sin, and feeing the sundry stains thou art now presently defiled with;
thereby thou may humble thy self, and force thee to amend such faults as
thou find in thee, and (withal) begin to hate this life so full of
calamities and dangers, wherein for thy better and more orderly proceeding,
consider these three points following.

1. Examine first the sundry imperfections, which thou presently find in
thee, how first thou lack est a pure and right intent in most of thy actions,
doing them for the world, or for some worldly interest, where (indeed) thou
ought to do them purely for God. Thou may find likewise thine
inclinations to be disordered, being wholly bent to the vain and transitory
things of this world. The like disorder shall thou find and perceive in all
thy senses, thoughts, words and works, seeing there is no true virtue to be
found in thee, which by the examination thereof, thou shall well perceive. As
first, for Charity, which thou want, as also Humility, Patience,
Chastity, Temperance, and so through all the rest; about the which thou may
discourse particularly, how often thou use to offend in each one, falling
into such vices as be opposite, and contrary to the said virtues.

Secondly, consider how smally thou have profited, since it pleased God to
help thee with his grace, and give thee these good motions and purposes: to
amend thy life, and how many times thou have left such works undone, as thou
purposedst to do, and how ofren thou have fallen in relapse of thy former
follies, which thou determinest in any wise to abstain from.

Think withal, how much better others have behaved themselves in this time,
and profited more in virtue then thou have done. And here ought thou to
purpose firmly, to imitate them, and to seek new remedies and means of
amen^^^ent, humbly craving grace of God to execute the same.

Thirdly, weigh what small affection thou ought to bear toward this
wicked world and present life, fraught full of such pains and grievous
miseries, and wherein no true sacietie or contentation is to be found: yea,
(that which is woorst of all) wherein are so many rocks to reele against, and
so infinite occasions to offend that sovereign Lord, who so woorthily
deserves to be honored, loved, and most dutifully obeyed.

Wednesday. 2. Med.
ON Wednesday, thy Meditation may be of death, a thing greatly profitable to
eschew sin. And this must thou meditate, even as though that hour were now
arrived, imagining therefore it is so, and how thou art now come to that
latter time of so great grief and frighting fear, disco^^^^ upon these
articles following.

First, how in that hour, there is a separation and divorce to be made, be
twixt the soul and body, by means whereof, the soul shall not only be
separate from the body, but also from all things it loved in this life, and
how thou must needs leave here behind thee, wife, riches, kinsfolks, and al
thy other dear friends; with each other thing be it never so well beloved,
neither shall thou carry any thing away Job. 1 1. Tim. 6 Eccles. 5
with thee, but only the good and evil works thou have wroght in this world.

Concerning secondly what we suffer in this sundering of our souls and bodies:
the agonies, temptations, and frightes, the vision of devils, which in
dreadful and terrible show appear before us, the perils that pinch the soul
on every side, the anxietie it receives, imagining what shall become both of
it self, and of the withered and consumed body. Thirdly, think how thy soul
thus parting from thy body with inestimable grief, the body shall then be
buried, and yield it food to worms, neither shall any one jot of riches rest
with it: but only that poor piece of winding sheet it shall be wrapped in,
and that small circuit of earth wherein it shall be enterred. Now the soul, it
shall be presented before Christ the dreadful Judge, to whom it shall yield a
most strict and narrow reckoning of all her life, and shall receive as she has
don in the body, an everlasting doom: weigh well here what the soul shall
feel, whiles it waits for this doom, not wotting on which side it shall be
sent.

Out of these considerations, may Documentes.
these right profitable lessons be gathered; to wit, how small trust and
confidence we ought to have in this life, wherein death may every day and
hour assail us: as also to riches, kinsfolks and friends, who cannot any
ways help us at that time, yea, all abandon and forsake us; On the other
side, what contentation we should then receive, by having lived well, and
gained a certain faithful friend, who might in that hour help and greatly
succor us. See therefore thou endeavor thy self, now to do that thou would
in that hour have done, and force thee to please thy true friend in deed,
which is Jesus Christ: that he may succor thee in that hour of so apparent
peril.

Thursday. 2. Med.
ON Thursday, thy meditation let be of the last day of judgment, which we
according to our belief, do certainly look for, and shall come without fail:
yea, perhaps in thy days, concerning the which, thou shall meditate these
three points.

First, how terrible and dreadful a day that shall be, as well by reason of the
signs and wonders that shall go before it, in the Sun, Moon, the sea, and
other creatures, with the ruin and overthrow of the whole world: as also
through that most dreadful sound of the terrible trumpet, whereby all shall
Mat. 13. Sap 3. Dan. 12.
be in one moment raised up again.

Secondly, consider the brightness and beauty which the elect shall rise 2.
Cor. 5. 10. 14.
in, and the vglines and grisly grimnes of the reprobate, besides the most
straight account which they shall yield to Christ, of all the works, words, and
thoughts of their whole life, and what utter shame and confusion the wicked
shall suffer, before all the Angels and millions of men.

Thirdly, think how highly the good shall be favored and honored, before
that universal assembly, and what the reprobate shall feel, seeing Christ in
such power and majesty, and Mat. 24.
with that final doom, throw them down to eucrlasting torments.

Out of these points debated at leisure, and in more particularitie, thou
may Documents.
gleane this profit, how to avoid this shame and confusion of that day, when
to every one their sins shall be discovered. There is no better a remedy, then
with David to pour out thy soul before God, in confessing thy sins, in
crying peccaui, and to call for mercy, at Gods hand, saying have mercy on me
Lord. And then repent thee of thy sins, weighing withal, that if men do
here travail so much to attain some temporal degree and riches, and so
greatly force themselves to fly the dangers and disgraces of this life; what
ought thou to do, to be made partaker of that sovereign dignity, and
inspeakeable riches, which the elect shall enjoy eternally? and what pains
ought thou to refuse, for avoiding that supreme contempt and incomparable
torments, wherein the damned shall sorrow everlastingly?

Friday, 2. Med.
ON Friday, let thy meditation be of The pains of Hell.
the pains of hell, that by this (as well as by the former meditations) both
the fear of God, and detestation of sin, may increase in thy soul, for the
meditating whereof, it shall be convenient thou frame in thine imagination, some
horrible and hideous place as might be an infernal pit or dungeon, without any
bottom, dark, and full of fire, whereunto the damned souls shall be thrown
headlong down. And that thou may the better so do, consider these points
following.

First, the terrible torments which Apoc. 16*
the wicked shall suffer in that place of horror, amongst all the devils,
which, surpass all other pains and torments that in this world may be
possibly imagined: and after the resurrection, shall they both in body and
soul, in all their powers, parts, and senses, suffer more pangs and pains,
then the tongue of man may any way express. For like as the wicked have
offended God, with all their parts, powers, and senses, and have employed them
all, as instruments to serve sin with; even so shall Gods divine justice
ordain, that in all the self same parts, powers, and senses, they shall
suffer sorrow and torment, that so, may that which is written be fulfilled:
How much he glorified himself, Apoc. 18
and was in delicacies, give him so much torments and lamentations.

Secondly think, how besides these sensible torments, they are to suffer that
which shall most of all afflict them and cause an excessive sorrow, which is, a
despair they shall have, wotting well, that in all eternity they shall never
see God. And as they shall always call to mind the infinite good they lost,
thorough their frantike folly, and know there is no remedy now to recover it:
this shall plunge them into a pit of unspeakable torments, making the^ rage, and
rave against God himself, and every other creature everlastingly.

Thirdly, consider the eternity of those pains, which if a man could
profoundly ponder, there is no one thing that appaleth or frighteth more; since
ye wicked shall continue in these torments more years, then there be drops of
water in the sea, or seeds of sand on earth, or any other number that may be
possibly imagined; yea, when they have suffered all the millions of years that
may be added thereto; then shall they begin a new to suffer, as though nothing
had been past. And finally, these their torments shall never, never, have
any one moment of release, or minute of relaxation. Hence may A notable
remembrance.
thou gather this fruitful note, that if so thou were now in those torments,
which eftsoons thorough thy sins thou have deserved, what would thou do
to come out of them? Think how any other pain whatsoever would seem
pleasant to thee, and what torment so ever were enjoined thee, thou would
right willingly perform: do therefore somewhat now of that thou would
then do, to escape these so great torments and perpetual calamities.

Saturday. 2. Med.
ON Saturday let thy meditation be The ioye^ of heaven
of ye happiness which ye elect enjoy in celestial glory, whereupon consider
these three points.

First the greatness, beawtie, and riches of that renowned region, where God
does show himself in glorious Majesty, to his Angels and holy Saints, to
the pleasantness and beauty whereof, not all the beawtifull and pleasant
things, that we either see or can here imagine, be in any wise to be compared.

Secondly ponder, what a comfort and sweet delight it shall be, to be in
that blessed society of so many angels, Saints, Apostles and martyrs, al of
them being so bright and beautiful, what shall it be to see the sacred
humanity of Christ, and how shall one be ravished with the hearing of the
sweet harmony, and melodious music that shall be there, and to enjoy so
sweet a conversation everlastingly?

Thirdly consider how yet besides these, there shall be another glory much
more excellent, and surpassing al humane capacity, which shall be to see God
face to face, wherein consists our essential beatitude, for that all other
Glory essential and accidental.
things, whatsoever may be imagined, be but accidental glory, which being so
exceeding great and incomparable, what shall then the essential be. Finally,
think there shall be the full accomplishment and heap of al goodness, without
intermedling of any evil, as in Hell shall al evil be without mixture of any
goodness. The Prophet Jeremy says, how on a time Ierem. 24
he saw at the Temple gates, two panyers of Figs, the one of good figs and
singular good, the other so naughty that they could not be eaten, so naughty
were they. These two panyers do figure these two rewards, so far differing
asunder, which GOD shall give to the chosen and to the reprobate. The reward
that is prepared for the Elect shall be so great, (as the Apostle says) as
Neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor man's 1. Cor. 2, 6 Esaias. 64.
heart or understanding can imagine. And the punishment of the reprobate shall
be so excessive, that no tongue can possibly express it.

Think now (good brother) that one of these twoe lottes must needs light upon
thee, for either shall thou possess that everlasting felicity which does
embrace and contain in it all good things, al riches, al saciety, and more
then may be imagined or desired; or else shall thou become thral to that
bottomless pit of all misery, griefs, and torments, and both the one an^
the other shall endure everlastingly. Consider therefore what thou ought to
do and suffer, to gain so incomparable a bliss, or to eschew so great and
extreme a misery, if men use here to toil so greatly for getting of some
temporal pleasure or promotion, or for the avoiding of some small sorrow and
shame, yea be it for never so small a time.

Sunday. 2. Med.
ON Sunday, let thy meditation be of the benefits of God, that he has
bountifully bestowed upon thee, to the end the knowledge thereof may give
thee occasion to yield him thanks, and to be more grateful toward him, for
the better doing whereof, consider these three points following.

First the general benefits thou have General benefits. The benifit of
creation.
received, which are these, The benefit of Creation, how God has created thee
of nothing, and given thee the essence and being thou have, far passing that
of other Creatures; con^ider the dignity of thy soul framed unto his own
likeness and simili^^de, and the body thou have recei^^d, compact with such
variety and ^^melinesse of members and senses, w^ereby is well declared, the
greatne^^e, power and wisdom, of thy m^^er: And this benefit may thou we
^^ wotte how great it is, by that tho^ would esteem thy self beehol^^n to
one, that could but restore or h^^le one of thine eyes, or any other mem^er
that thou lackest. The benefit of preservation, how every moment The benefit
of preservation.
he preserves and keeps thee, which if he did not, thou should
forthwith, return to that nothing which thou were first made of: And this is
as much, as though he created thee anewe: besides thy preservation, he has
made all the other Creatures that be in the universal World, whereof some be to
nourish thee, some to cloth thee, other to yield thee honest delight and
recreation to all thy senses, other to cure thy griefs and sicknesses, and
finally all the creatures thou see under the Cope of heaven, yea and Heaven
it self too, shall thou find, how God has created for some use and service of
thine. Weigh now well, if thou would think thy self so greatly bound to
one, yt had bestowed some Jewel or other gracious gift upon thee; how much
more art thou to repute thee bound and indebted to him, that has heaped so
many gifts together upon thee, and that without any mite of thine own
meriting? Think afterward of the benefit of redemption, which contains in
it al ye things thy sweet Savior did, and suffered for thy ransom paying,
first how he descended from heaven to earth for thee, The benefit of redemption.
and being borne, was for thee laid in a maunger, for thee began he the eight
day after his birth, to shed his precious blood, for thee did he all his life
long endure so innumerable annoiances, pains and persecutions, in going,
sweating, preaching, fasting, watching, praying, and finally for thee did he
suffer the most grievous and bitter torments, anguishes, and ignomious
reproaches that may be possible rehearsed, being obedient even unto the death of
the cross. If thou ponder these things more particularly and by peece-meal,
they will yield matter enough to inflame thy heart with zeal, be it never so
frozen, and provoke thee to love him, who has so dearly loved thee, and with
so great a price redeemed thee.

Secondly, call to mind the particular benefits thou have received, chiefly
Particular benefits. The benefit of vocation.
that of thy vocation: how god through his great mercy has called thee to his
holy faith and baptism, wherein he bestowed his grace and gifts upon thee,
whereof an infinite number of other nations never tasted. Think how many times
thou have lost his grace through thy sins, and yet God has forborne and
stayed for thy repentance, yea, provoked thee thereunto by many godly
inspirations, and after has received thee again, and forgiven thee. Consider
also the remedies he has left thee to recover, keep and increase this grace,
and spiritual life withal, which are the holy Sacraments, for the which he
deserves to be highly thanked, as having vouchsafed to leave us so great a
treasure.

Think also how many other particular benefits he has done, and does daily
bestow upon thee, giving thee more temporal riches, more honor, more
ability, more powers, more prosperity then others, recuring thine
infirmities, delivering thee from many perils, relieuing thy necessities, with
other innumerable and hidden benefits, that thou thy self art ignorant of.

Thirdly consider, that if thou had received the aforesaid benefits, or any
one of them of what man so ever, how entirely thou would have loved and
thanked him, and how willingly thou would have drudged to do him any kind
of service, and thought no pains too great, to have showed thee grateful unto
him; how much more reason is it then, thou show thy self such a one toward
thy heavenly Lord and God, to whom for his great goodness thou art more
deeply indebted, and the more worthy to be beloved and served? Do that
David says, Let thy soul bless the Psalm. 12. 0
Lord, and never forget his so manifold benefits. For if he see thee
thankful, having his benefits always in mind, and yielding lauds and
praises to the giver, thou shall every day, month, and year, receive more
relief and new bounties at his most bountiful hand.

These be the meditations, which thou may make on Euenings, or in an other
week, observing always in the beginning and ending of each one, what has
been foretold thee in the former Chapter.

Other Meditations wherein the better learned may at other times exercise
themselves: certain also for the simpler sort, wherein the mysteries of the
life of Christ be entreated of. Cap. 10.
FOrasmuch as this exercise of prayer, is of so great profit, and that
wherewith the spiritual life is, as it were, nourished and sustained, I have
thought good as amply to entreat thereof. And will add somewhat more in this
chapter, to that which has been said already, desiring to satisfy both the
learned and the ignorant, that is to say, both those that be more capable of
this exercise, and such as have not so great capacity. For the first sort,
whereof the former meditations be most fit and fruitful, nevertheless to the
end they may have more ample matter to meditate upon, some weeks they may The
life of Christ divided into three parts. 1
intermeddle the Meditations of the life of Christ, which is divided into three
parts or periods.

The first is of the incarnation of the son of God: until his baptism, wherein
are contained, his incarnation, nativity, circumcision, adoration in the
Temple, flight into Egypt, returning to Nazareth, and the doctors in the
Temple, where the blessed virgin had lost him, of all the which mysteries S.
Luke, and S. Matthew write in their first chapters of their Gospels. A man may
meditate likewise, what he did from 12 years upward, until his baptism,
according to every one their godly devotion, for that we find nothing written
thereof in the holy Gospel.

The second part of Christ his life, begins at his baptism, and continues
until his sacred passion, wherein are comprehended his baptism, fasting,
temptation in the wilderness, his preachings, and many miracles he wrought,
until his last supper, whereof the history of each one may be gathered out
of the holy Gospels.

The third part comprehends his last supper, his passion, his resurrection
and ascension, whereof I have already entreated in the seventh Chapter.

These Meditations of the life, and miracles of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, may be fitly distributed and meditated in one or two weeks, by such as
have ley sure and learning to gather the story out of the holy Gospel:
observing (pardie) in all their meditations, the aduices and instructions above
said, especially of picking fruitful notes and doctrine for their souls, out
of these holy instructions, and of governing themselves in the beginning and
ending of each one as is aforesaid.

Certain remedies for such as could not happily find savor or devotion in
the former meditations. Cap. 11.
WOtting well (as I have already said) what great good this exercise of prayer
does purchase to our souls, I have in this respect been more willing to
extend my self a little the further in entreating thereof. And for the same
cause have thought good likewise in this Chapter, to annex certain remedies to
relieve thee with at such times as thou find thy self barren of devotion,
and without any relish, or taste in the foresaid Meditations.

First therefore it is requisite, thou The first remedy against distractio^
have this in mind, how one of the principal means and helps for thee, both
in this life to live virtuously, and in the other to enjoy God everlastingly,
is the exercise of prayer, and therefore what pains and care soever it behooved
thee to take, for the gaining of so great a Jewel, ought in no wise to seem
grievous and irksome to thee, yea propounding this so richlye before thine
eyes, thou ought with all might and maine to remove such obstacles and lets,
as might any ways impeach the due and orderly performing of this exercise.
Thou ought therefore to take heed of distracting thy mind in diverse vain
thoughts, of spending thy time in profane and unprofitable conuersations, of
disordinate affections, of excessive passions of thy soul, as ange^,
heaviness, too much laughing and rejoicing in worldly matters, and of too
great a carke and care in thy temporal affairs and business. These and such
other like imperfections, whereby the peace and sercuitie of thy soul may be
shadowed and taken away, are in any wise (so much as may be) to be avoided.
Neither behooves it only to have this watch and ward over thy heart and inward
powers, but also to use the like touching thy outward senses, which are the
doors, whereby these distractions enter and penetrate into thy heart: as might
be a curious eye in viewing and listening after novelties, and impertinent
matters; too much speech and talk, and each other thing whatsoever, that
experience teaches us to breed distraction. No doubt therefore but
solitariness Solitariness a great help to devotion.
would in this case be a sovereign help to such as might conveniently use
it, for by it are all the occasions of distracting quite cut off, and thereby a
man may with more facility eleuate his mind up to God, and stand well guarded
within himself. Whereupon this saying has been woorthilie of long time used,
that a contemplative man ought to be deaf, blind and dumb, that by this
means (wanting occasions to distract his mind in outward things) he might
always be gathered and attentive inwardly in godly cogitations.

It shall profit likewise to procure devotion and elevation of mind up to
God, to use abstinence, fasting and other afflictions and corporal
chastisements Abstine^ce and discipline.
moderately applied. For like as these proceed of devotion, so do they
maintain and increase devotion.

A purity and cleanes of conscience Purity of conscience.
is also very necessary for gaining this devotion, the which ought to be kept
unstained with any sin: for that does abate and assuage the feruor of charity
which is the nurse and mother of devotion. It behooves therefore, if thou covet
to find a sweetness, and savor in thy prayers, to shun all kind of
sin, and such imperfections, as may gaul and fret thy conscience, as also to
shake off scruples and all superfluous remorse, the which like privy thorns,
lie pricking and paining the soul, and will not suffer it to enjoy any quiet
rest, or fruitful savor of devotion.

The second remedy which (concerning The second remedy against distraction.
this matter of meditation) is by diverse good and virtuous men proved to be
very profitable, is for one to strain himself continually to walk in the
presence and sight of Gods divine A continual ei^ upon go
majesty, supposing (as most true it is) that we always stand before his
eyes, he beholding every hour and moment what we do, speak or think, and
keeping with each one a particular account of every thing: seeing therefore
God evermore has us in his heavenly eye and presence, right meet and requisite
Psalm. 118. 16. 8.
is it we always have him in ours. And in very deed the taking up of this
custom, shall help in this respect very much, to make us afraid of
committing any filthy or dishonest act, when we bethink us that the eyes of
God are every hour upon us.

The third remedy that helps greatly The third remedy against distraction.
to gather attention and devotion, is an often frequentation of certain
prayers every day, which the holy fathers call darting prayers, for that they
be in Darting prayers.
manner of amorous and loving darts thrown up at Gods heart. The manner of
doing this, is, by saying with a zeal and inflamed desire, certain verses of
David, or some other such sentences of holy saints which thou must ever have
in memory, and at such time as thy devotion shall serve, to say those that be
fittest for that present affection thou then feel: as for example, finding
at some time a disposition of repentance and compunction for thy sins, then
to rehearse certain verses of the Miserere Psalm, or some Psalm. 51.
other such like brief sayings, serving to signify this affect of repentance.
At another time, feeling a desire to be more and more enflamed in the love of
God, say that verse, Diligam^te Domine Psalm. 18.
fortitudo mea. Another time, desiring to be with God, say, Quemadmodum Psa.
42.
desiderat Ceruus ad fontes aquarum, etc. Otherwhiles, longing to approach and
draw nigh to those heavenly bowers, say, Quam dilecta tabernacula Psa. 84.
tua domine, etc. Beati qui habitant in domo tua domine. Another time with an
affect to give thanks to God, for his divine benefits, thou may say
certain verses of the Psalm Benedic anima mea domino, and omnia quae intra
Psalm. 103.
me sunt, etc. or, Benedicam dominu^ in Psalm. 34.
omni tempore. And so in like manner (according to the diversity of each other
affect thou happily find thy self touched with in thy soul) for each kind
whereof, either in the Prophets, or in some other of the Saints and fathers,
thou may find very fit words and sentences, to signify thy meaning with.
But if so be thou want skill and knowledge thy self, to cull and gather them
out, then may thou frame words of thine own, (according as the holy Ghost
shall vouchsafe to instruct and teach thee) such as may serve most fitly for
thy purpose, and cause thy zeal to increase to Godward, and to good desires.
And albeit, at the first it may seem, thou dartest not those amorous arrows
with any great feruor or fiery heat of soul, yet fail not to spend and
breath them forth, for no doubt but they shall afterward kindle, and gather
heart, and help thee greatly to warm thy soul withal. But if happily thou
could not light on such words as thou wishest for, send then up certain
sighs and groans, drawn out from the bottom of thy heart, and these shall
supply and serve in stead of words to Godward, who well wotteth what thy
spirit does crave and long for.

These darting prayers, with the sentences, sighs, and speeches abouesaid,
shall likewise help such greatly as lack convenient leisure to perform this
exercise, in such manner as I have heretofore declared.

The fourth remedy which may be used, The 4. remedy is, ye reading of some
godly books.
at such time as thy distraction were greater then that the former aduises
could suffize to call thy mind home, and to cause attencion: then may thou
have recourse to reading, whereto shall be very expedient thou be provided of
some godly book, full of good devotion and sound doctrine, and thereon to read
with leisure, fair and softly; not lightly running over many leaves, but
pawsing at every period and sentence, to chaw the same, and to pick thence some
profit and fruitful devotion, staying therein so long as attention serves thee,
which once wanting, proceed then on forward to another sentence, doing likewise
in that: and thus might thou by means of such words as thou read, use
those speeches, sighs, and inflamed desires, whereof I lastly spoke in the
third remedy, since no doubt but they are very vailable, and of great force to
retire thy mind home, and to kindle in it a devotion and fervent love to
Godward. The fitst books for this purpose, are such as stir up a man to
piety and devotion, and that withal give good instructions for life and
manners, the books of Job, Psalms, the Proverbs, Preacher, the Epistles of
Saint Paul, etc. In these and such like books may thou occupy thy self, now
reading, now meditating on the^, and always committing some spiritual point to
memory, which thy soul may (amongst other thy business) nourish and comfort it
self withal.

The last remedy thou art to take concerning this matter, is to force thy
self to persevere in prayer, how distract and frozen soever thou shall The
fifth remedy against distraction is perseverance.
find thee, for that who so shall thus force and strain himself to endure the
tedious toil, and pain of prayer: whiles thus he feels himself frozen, and
carried away with diverse foreign thoughts and fancies, well may he believe, that
at the end of his prayer he shall (for the most part) receive comfort and
contentation, and that as it happened to our Savior, whom the angel came and
comforted in the garden, after his long perseverance in prayer, which he made
three several times, even so shall it likewise in the end befall to him. And as
in other works experience teaches us, that custom takes away the toil
which we feel at the beginning thereof, even so shall custom and continuance
in this exercise (not slacking or neglecting it at any time) cut off the toil
and travail thereof, and cause a conquest of all such difficulties, as in the
beginning seems right painful to us.

Of the avoiding of lewd company. Cap. 12.
TO conclude this first duty of him that intends to lead a spiritual life,
let this suffice: that there is nothing more pernicious unto a spiritual man,
than evil company: for that has drawn many a man from the way of our Lord
and Savior Christ. For the Apostle 1. Cor. 15.
cites to that intent, the verse of Menander an Ethnicke Comedy writer, Mores
bonos colloquia corrumpunt mala. Evil talk corrupts good manners, he cannot
be good which delights in evil company: for no man speaks evil, unless he
be before corrupted and depraved in his heart, against the purity of
Evangelical doctrine, as every man is and thinks, so does he speak. For the
speech of a man, is the truest witness of his heart; for as our Savior says,
The mouth speaks Luke 6.
of the abundance of the heart: Therefore, if he which speaks evil be not
good, we must take heed of all them which delight in evil talk and
scurility, and wicked speeches, whose mouth does always sound out filthy
things, and never talk of godliness. Filthy speech is a sign of an unchaste
heart, although no outward work do follow. Therefore a christian man, which in
his baptism has promised to forsake the Devil and al his works, and
consequently those that be his members, must eschew the company of wicked
men, and evermore avoid them that speak wickedness, and uncleanness. We must
ever remember the saying of the Wise man: He that touches pitch defiles his
fingers, and he that keeps company with the proud, shall put on pride. Gregory
says, Those that be weak must eschew evil company, least the faults which
they daily see, and be not able to amend, become pleasant unto them. And S.
Chrysostom, If a good man company with a wicked man, either they become equal,
or else the one is quickly separated from the other. For friendship either
does require or make men to be equal, that is to say, of one mind. For so is
ye nature of things, that as often as a good man is joined with a bad man, the
good man is not made the better for it, but is rather defiled there by: for
contrary things can never have concord: and wicked company has allured many.
As one diseased sheep infecteth ye whole flock, so one perverse and wicked
christian, is cause of a great number of transgressions in the church. For S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 5
That a little leaven sowreth the whole lump of dough, so weak Christians
that converse with obstinate sinners which do profess perfection, are quickly
infected with their evil conditions.

It is Written, Blessed is the man which has not walked in the counsel of the
wicked, nor has stood in the way of sinners, nor satte in the seat of the
skornefull. That is, of all them, who are not pleased or contented with other
men's doing, but skorne every man but themselves, they always open their
mouths against the humble man, they love brawling and tatling in other men's
matters, their Counsel shall not prosper, and if they be aloft, they shall
fall suddenly; their pride is hated of God, because being fools, they boast
themselves to be wise and learned, their foolishness shall be disclosed, and
a grievous destruction shall fall upon their heads, their hearts think on
foolishness, and there is no peace in their circuit. They shall be hated of
their kinsfolk and neighbors, and no faithful friend shall know them: they
lead their life in hypocritical dissimulation, and by their foolishness they
draw many out of the way; They hate peace, they love discord, they shall be
taken in the sluggishnes of their mind, and none shall have compassion upon
them.

They shall be bruised with double affliction, the Devil has made his neast
under their tongue, and satan has pitched his tents in their mind, therefore
there is no Christian love in their heart, because they seek to set discord
between christian and christian: They boast that they are the friends of God,
and yet understand not what is the way of humility. They open not their
mouths to spiritual edification, and nothing but vanity proceed out of their
hearts. They run dissolutely and like vagabonds up and down all day long.
Their talk is idle and unprofitable, never thinking of their souls health,
whose belly is their God.

Keep thy mind from this talk, and set not thy foot in the way of his
communication, whosoever desires to be a Christian and servant of God, must
be wary and watchful in all his works, and always fly from their company in
whose life there is no edification, he must be a companion with lowly people,
and Christians that love perfection, and imitate them that be grounded in the
fear of God, let him walk willingly with them, which love discipline and
purity of mind, and not be like a man that is tossed up and down with
every wind, but confirm his soul in a good purpose, least he be deceived with
the council of ye wicked. Fly from a disobedient and rebellious Christian, as
from the face of a snake* because he swells with the poison of malice, and
destroys his own soul, in the haughtiness of his mind. Let not a detractor
be in thy company, because he is far worse than a thief. Him that is
light-minded and dissolute in manners, account as a man that teareth hedges in
the field. Avoid a drunken man as the nourishment of letchery, and the sink
of all sin. He that trusts to the devise of his own head, is near unto
destruction, and aspireth speedily unto the danger of his own soul. Company
not with a stubborn man, nor have any friendship with him, which by his rash
nesse, backbites the doings of his Elders. Be evermore in the midst of well
nurtured men, and let thy soul walk gladly with men that are humble minded:
for he that walks with good men, partaketh of their virtues, but he that
walks with the wicked, falls into the ditch.

The friendship of a good man helps the soul, but the company of the wicked,
corrupts the innocence of simple men. There is nothing more precious then a
friend that fears God, and nothing more pernicious then a froward minded
companion. If sinners begin to hate thee for the fear of God, be not sorry
therefore: for unless thou displease the wicked, thou can have no society
with the just. For it is a laudable thing to displease yt wicked, for
righteousness sake, and it is a manifest sign of the love of God. If thou
love thy soul, fly from ye company of wicked men, and communicate not with
skorners, walk with the just, and let him be thy councellor that fears the
Lord.

Of the second thing that is required of him, that intends to lead a new
life. Cap. 13.
THe Prophet David thought it not a sufficient answer to his question
propounded, Who is that man which desires life, and wishes to see good days:
to say, Declina a malo, Eschew evil:l but he adds, Do good. For as saint
Jerome says, Declina a malo and fac bona. Saint Ierom upon the 34. Psalm.
Eschew evil and do good: that is, pull down vices and build up virtues.
It is not profitable to pull down except a man build: as if a man would say.
What man would have life without these things? none at all. For there is no
goodness in him that destroys no evil; Eschew evil, and do good. All
evil does proceed of the instinct of the devil, and goodness comes of God.
Forsake those things which the devil causes thee to do, and do those things
which Christ commands thee to do.

Now Saint Augustine teaches how Saint Augustine in his book of continency,
c. 7. Tom. 4
this ought to be don; saying, Vniuersaliter ergo contine^tia nobis opus est,
etc. Therefore generally says he is continency necessary for us, that we may
eschew evil: but to do good, belongs to another virtue, and that is justice.
The holy psalmist does warn us of this, where we read, Eschew evil, and do
good: and he adds to what end we ought to do it, saying enquire out peace
and follow it. For then shall we have perfect peace, when our nature
inseparably cleaving to her Creator, nothing within us shall be against us. To
the same end it seems that our savior speaks in the Gospel, saying, Let
your loins be girt and burning lamps in your hands, what should it be to gird
up our loins, but to tame the lust of the flesh, which belongs to
co^tinencie? but to have burning lamps in our hands, is to shine with good
works, and to be earnest therein, which is the part of justice, hitherto S.
Augustine. Let every man consider, to what end he was created, and he shall
find that it is to see God, which as yet being clad with mortal flesh, we
cannot; but we walk here in this world as pilgrims from the Lord, still
aspiring to obtain that felicity, which is prepared for all the elect children
of God. Now the way which we ought to walk in, for the attainement thereof, is
the path of Gods commandments, and evangelical perfection, which excludes al
contamination, and spotting of sin. For blessed are the clean in heart, Mart. 5.
for they shall see God. Now, because a man grounding himself upon the words
of our Savior Christ, will say that the way to salvation is hard and difficult.
For our Savior says, Enter in Mat. 7.
at the straight gate, for it is the wide gate and broad way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because the gate is
straight and the way narrow, which leads un to life, and few there be that
find it: it would not be disconuenient to set forth the temptations, which
ordinarily do offer themselves, to such as intend to lead a Christian life,
that a man may plainly see and feel, the saying of our Mat. 11
Savior to be true, my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Of the tentations which ordinarily offer themselves, to such as have begun to
walk in spiritual ways. Cap. 14.
Having hitherto entreated The Authors most excellent method.
of the most necessary exercises, that every Christian man (minding sincerely
to dedicate himself to divine service, and to live spiritually) ought to use
and spend his time in; it remains that I now speak of the encumbrances and
temptations which ordinarily offer themselus in this spiritual life, and of the
remedies we are to use to overcome and vanquish the^ withal. For this must
needs Job. 7 Our life is a continual warfare.
be presupposed, That Our life (as Job says) is a continual warfare upon
earth. The which does grow so much the greater, as a man grows nearer to
Gods service, and means to abandon this worldly life, especially in the
beginning, till such time, as he The devil afflicts us most in the beginning
of our conversion.
have somewhat dompted the passions of the flesh: according to that the wise
man does forewarn us, saying: My son drawing near to the service of God, stand
in righteousness and fear, and dispose thy self to Temptation. For look how
much a man grows stronger, and gains more spiritual treasure, by leaning
to god, and leaving the world: and so much Eccles. 2
more does our ghostly enemies the devils malicious rage increase, and with
more violence do they force themselves, by sundry temptations to afflict us;
yet are not we to trouble our selves thereat, nor grow faint hearted, or give
over the race we have so happily begun: yea, rather ought we to fight
valiantly, and to be joyful, considering that all the temptations and
persecutions, wherewith our adversaries may any way afflict us, if we force our
selves to fight, and manfully withstand them, shall occasionate our greater
gain. For Tentatio^s profitable. Job. 13
by means of these tentations our souls is proved and purified, and the pride
of man repressed from growing insolent (through Gods gifts or his own 2. Cor.
12
good works, wrought through Gods grace) whiles by these tentations, he sees
his own weakness and miserable frailetie. Now therefore good brother, if
having once begun to follow A sweet exhortation and encouragement.
thy Captain his steps, thou feel thy self afflicted with diverse temptations
and cross ouerthwarts, be not dismayed therewith: but pluck me up a good
heart, not believing for all this, but that thou walk rightly, and in our
Lords way. Think how in like manner it happened to him: he vouchsafing to be
tempted for our example and consolation, whom if thou imitate rightly, in
resisting and fighting manfully against them, thou shall afterwars by trial,
find that true which is written. Happy is the man that sustaineth tentation:
James 1. 2. Tim. 2 4 Apoc. 2, 8 Job. 3
who being by this means proved, shall receive the Crown of life, which is
not given, but to those that courageously do fight the combat. Thus being
both counseled and encouraged by this good consideration, take up such
weapons, and brandish them before hand, wherewith thou must fight, and resist
thine enemies at all times, when any need shall require and urge thee.

General remedies to be used against temptations. Cap. 15.
SIthence it is so weighty a matter, and of so great importance, to fight and
to resist tentations, for fear of being overcome, and falling into sin: it
behooves us to have always a vigilant eye, and to be furnished of al such
weapons, as be most requisite for this future combat. Such therefore as may
serve generally to defend thee from all kind of sin, be these considerations
In time of true we ought to prepare for battle.
following: which thou must exercise, not only in time of fight, but in time
of peace too: that when need requires, thou may the^ have the^ in more
readiness.

First, consider the dignity of thy The dignity of man's soul. Genesis 1 Colos. 3
John. 12
soul, created to the very likeness and similitude of God, and how whiles it
persisteth in grace, it is so beautiful and bright, that the maker himself
delights to dwell in it; and all the holy angels and quyers of heaven do
reverence and rejoice in it. But anon, after it has consented to sin, GOD
straight ways departs out, and the Devil enters in, polluting and changing
it into so foul, ouglie, and abominable a state, as if the Sinner could then
behold and see himself: he would be therewith utterly confounded, and
have himself in extreme horror, if therefore thou An apt comparion
would so loathly soil any fresh and gay garment thou had lately bought;
how much more then ought thou to detest that consent to sin, which so
filthily polluteth thy soul? a much more precious thing, without all
comparison, then any most gorgeous and glittering attire of body.

Secondly, consider how besides this One mortal sin cause of in numerable for
rows.
evil, even one sin does cause thee to incur innumerable other miseries:
since by committing but one mortal sin, thou loosest the grace of God, and his
amity anexed to his grace. Thou loosest Chry. hom. ^7. in Genesis
the infused virtues, and the gifts of the holy Ghost, which adorned thee and
made thee beautiful in the sight Chry. hom. 8. ad pop. Antioch.
of God. Thou loosest thy repose and serenitie of a good conscience. Thou
loosest the reward of all such good deeds as thou have done before, and the
participatio^ of the merits of christ Eze. 18, 33
our head, since thou art not now united to him by grace and charity, and so
remainest Mat. 7, 23. Luke. 13
an enemy to the Creator, deprived of the inheritance, which christ by his
precious blood had purchased for thee, condemned to everlasting torments, a
thral and bond-slaue to the devil, who by all means possible seeks John. 8.
thy utter overthrow, briefly thou incurrest so many other dangers, as no man's
tongue can sufficiently declare them. What man is he then that will be so
mad, as for a short and beastly delight that sin affoordeth him, to
incur such huge heaps of extreme miseries, and incurable calamities?

Thirdly, consider how by striving to resist temptations, they tarry not long
but vanish and fleet away, and how by having vanquished them, thou shall remain
enriched with greater meed, honor and consolation. The blessed angels Matt. 4.
of heaven, shall also come and serve thee, like as they did our Savior,
having overcome his temptations: but if on the other side thou let thy self
belewdly overcome, the delight of sin shall forthwith fleet away, and the
gripes, confusion, and coffeehouse that remain behind, and gnawe the
guilty conscience, and afflict thee The grips of a guilty conscience.
much more then any resistance-making might possibly have done.

Fourthly, consider that if thou easily consent to sin, thou must afterward
consider, and painfully redress the evil thou have committed, since thou must
needs suffer much sorrow in bewailing it, besides a million of many mo
difficulties, all which thou may avoid, by fighting manfully, and not
consenting unto sin.

Fifthly consider, that look how much more thou use to consent to sin, An
evil custom hardly to be cured.
and so much more shall thy temptations increase, and thy strength decay, and
thus at length shall thou cause a wicked custom, which afterward will be
impossible for thee to forsake and leave.

The last general and right sovereign remedy, not only to vanquish
temptations, but not to be troubled with them, is, to shun and carefully
eschew the occasions, whence they commonly do proceed, as be superfluous
riches, profane conuersations, lewd company, the tumult of people, places
and times where and when sins are committed, and finally, all such dangers
and occasions, whereby thou remembrest to have erst fallen into sin, or at
least into temptation.

A preamble concerning the remedies against particular temptations. Cap. 16.
ALbeit the particular sins, as also the temptations, which induce us thereto
be very many, yet are they all reduced Seven capital or deadly sins.
into seven, which are commonly called capital, as being the heads, roots
and fountains whence the others are derived: with these 7 sins be these three
1. John 2 The flesh, the world and the devil.
enemies, that assault us, the flesh, the world, and the devil, according as
is gathered out of that saying of S. John the Evangelist: Every thing that is
in the world is concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and
pride of life. The flesh does repute and induce us to three sins,
lasciviousness, gluttony, and sloth. The world to covetousness, and carke of
temporal things that are in it. The devil does suggest and alure us
principally to pride, wrath and envy, I shall therefore according to this
order entreat of the weapons, which we are to weelde against these three
sworn enemies of ours, and of the remedies, we must use to preserve us, from
such sins as they induce us to.

Of all the temptations, those of The temptations of the flesh most dangerous.
the flesh be most difficult and dangerous, as rising of a domestical and
very importunate adversary, and therefore does it herein behoue us, to use
greatest diligence and circumspection.

Remedies against lasciviousness. Cap. 17.
THe first remedy a man is to The first remedy against lust.
take against lasciviousness, is with all diligence to fly occasions, such as
commonly use to inflame our flesh with inordinate Occasions to be eschued.
concupiscence, as is the conuersing with such persons, as either are wont, or
at leastwise might provoke and kindle such fire, as a fixed view, and curious
regard of others comeliness, since (as Saint Isidore says) The S. Isid. li.
2. summo bono Ca. 39. Job 31. Eccle. 9.
first darts of lust are the eyes. Which Jerome said, had given his soul in
prey. And to make us understand this danger the better, Saint Gregory says,
S. Ierom. Three. 3.
how it is not lawful for us to fix our eye on that which is not lawful for
us to desire, seeing that death is commonly wont to enter into us, by the
windows of our eyes, and other senses. Iere. 9.
And therefore must thou take heed in like manner, of uttering any dishonest,
and ribald words, which corrupt good manners, as the Apostle says, as also of
Col. 3. Ephe. 5.
listening to them, or of reading books wherein such lascivious and filthy 1.
Cor. 15.
words are written. But much more ought thou to shun the touching of such
persons, as occasionate a carnal 1. Cor. 7.
alteration in thee, and never to be in their company alone, sithence this
fire is wont with solitariness and opportunity soonest to be kindled.

Take heed also of receiving any Ier. vbi supra. ber. se. 1. de modo. bin.
viu.
letters or tokens being absent, as also of sending any to them, since these
are but sticks to kindle and keep in this wicked fire. Finally, this vice,
(as S. Austen says) is much better flying Flight more safe then fight
then by fighting, and therefore behooves it, thou always fly the peril, not
to perish in it. Eccle. 3.


In this respect, to beware of being idle at any time, of too much pampering
Eze. 10. ber. ser. 51. de modo ben. veu.
up thy flesh with disordinate diet, in eating and drinking, with too
sumptuous and effeminate attiring, with sleeping in too soft and easy bedding.
Briefly beware of all such like delicacies, which are all of the^ incensiues,
and prouokers of this brutish appetite: For otherwise, no doubt, but experience
shall testify that a most true saying Pro. 29.
of holy writ, That, who so nourishes his servant too daintilie, shall
find him obstinate and rebellious. It shall therefore be greatly profitable
for such as be young, to use now and then some honest kind of labor or exercise,
in subduing the body by corporal endeavors, as also reading profitable
treatises, wherewith the brodes of our flesh are easilye bridled, and it made
obedient and subject to the spirit. For if S. Paul did in this wise chastise
and bring down his body (as he witnesses him self he did) much more ought he
to do 1. Cor. 9.
the like, who stands in greater need of this medicine. Besides that, each
of these chasticements shall make thy reward increase, since they are all of
them the works of repentance.

Secondly, thou must be maruailous heedie and circumspect, to expel these
wicked thoughts presently after they The second remedy, wicked suggestions are
to be eschued at the first.
begin once to solicit and trouble thy mind, and to tickle thy flesh, forcing
thy self all thou may, not to give them any entrance, but in lieu thereof to
occupy thy mind in some other good and godly cogitations. And thus must we
likewise behave our selves in each our temptation and suggestion, but
especially in this our flesh. For look by how much the more thou look for
such thoughts to enter in, and perseuerest in them, and by so much the more
will they fortify themselves, and by great difficulty be driven out again,
which would never hap, if at the very beginning thou did shake them off, and
oppose thy self manfully to bear off these first brunts. Whereupon a holy
father said right well, that the thought of fornication, if we resist it in
the beginning, when the Devil does first put it in our hearts, is as brittle
as a Bulrush, and may right easily A pretty similitude
be broken: but if we receive it with delight and pleasure, and linger any
time therein, then does it become as hard as iron, and very hardly can be
broken: whereto may that saying of the Psalmist be fitly applied, Blessed is
he shall break his little ones, Psalm. 137.
To wit, the beginning of his temptations, with the stone which is Jesus 1.
Cor. 10.
Christ. But if in case through thy retchlesnesse, and small regard, these
temptations had made a breach and were already fortified in the flesh, and
thou thereby in danger to consent, and yield unto them, let this be then.

The third remedy, to cry amain upon God, with great zeal and affection (like
as they do which in the maine Seas, are suddenly endaungered with some
horrible tempest) craving his divine help with certain short and pithie
sentences like to these, Deus in Psalm. 69. Esaias 38. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 73. Mar. 1.
Mat. 15.
adiutorium meum intend, etc. Domine vim, patior, responde pro me. Domine ne
descedas a me, ne tradas bestiis animam confitentem tibi* Jesus fili David
miserere mei: With these and such like words may thou call for his divine
favor, it shall likewise avail thee to seek some virtuous man, if happily in
that instant thou could hitte of any, who with his godly exortations and
good prayers, might not a little procure thine avail and benefit.

The fourth remedy in this case The 4 remedy. Sensible affliction very
necessary in extremity
shall be to give some affliction to thy flesh by fasting, watching, disciplyne,
yea and in the time of danger, to cause some sensible and present grief, that
thereby the stinges thou feel, may be choked up, and thou made forget those
unlawful delights, thou art provoked too.

The fifth remedy is eftsoons to think The fifth remedy.
of death, forasmuch as no one thing says S Gregory is of so great force to
domp the desire and concupisence of the flesh, as to think of the vglines there
of being once dead, now therefore these particular remedies, together with the
general spoken of, in the former chapter: may greatly help to defend against
sin. And yet besides those common considerations there assigned, thou may take
for another remedy others that serve particularly against this sin, as might
be the aduises following.

First consider how God does look upon thee and his Angels beholds all
thine actions, that by this means thou be ashamed to parpetrate so dishonest
an act, in their celestial sight, and presence, since before any never so
simple a man, thou would not be so impudent, and shameless as to commit the
same.

Secondly consider how this vice, most notoriously polluteth, thy flesh it
self, and all thy members (which whiles thou perseuerest in grace, are the
temple of the holy ghost) become now through his sin the members of an harlot,
as S. Paul says, and from a companion and fellow of Angels (which thou art,
lying in chastity) and make thy self a pheere and fellow to brute beasts by
living dishonestly.

Thirdly consider the particular discommodites, that rise of this detestable,
and stinking sin, first it shortneth life, impaireth strength, changes
complexion and comely hew of body: consumes a man's substance, and spoileth him
of his good name, since there is no sin so infamous amongst all men, as this
is. Briefly, this vice occasioneth an infinite number of many evils which
daily experience does declare and teach us.

Fourthly consider, that albeit thou would never so feign wallow still in
this pestiferous puddle of sin, and desire never so greatly to saciate this
corrupt desire of thine, yet shall it be impossible so to do, this being one
of the things that is never saciated. And therefore look how much more thou
wadest in this vice, and so much more shall the thirst of concupiscence be
enflamed, even like to fire, the which look how much more wood there is
heaped on it, and so much more does it kindle, and the flame grow greater.
All these things if thou weigh them well, and often, shall suffice. I hope to
make thee abhor this brutall sin, and cause thee courageously to resist all
such temptations as shall induce thee to it.

Remedies against the second sin of the flesh, which is gluttony. Cap. 18.
THe second sin of the flesh, Gluttony a great friend of lasciuiousnes.
is Gluttony a great friend and Fosterer of lasciuiousnes, since when the
paunch is puffed up, and the flesh too delicately fed: this fire is quickly
kindled, and a man falls easily into the filth of lechery, according as the
scriptures do in sundry places admonish us. It behooves Prou. 20. Eccles.
23. Ephe. 5 Iam, 5. 2. Pet. 2.
thee therefore, to be armed at all assaies, against this vice, which is the
door or entrance of many others, and of the victory and conquest, whereon
depends the victory and conquest of the rest. Whereupon those holy ancient
fathers, that lived erst in the wilderness endeavored themselves all the night,
to dompt and suppres this vice: woting well that but if this were first fully
vanquished, the other could very hardly be subdued, yea, experience teaches
this for truth, how the devil most commonly begins to give his first onset
with this. Witnesses whereof, are our first parents Adam and Eve: the very
first Genesis 3.
temptation he propounded to our Lord and Savior Jesus christ, was of this
Mat. 4. Luk, 4. Mark, 1.
sort, wherefore, to defend thee from this so venomous a vice, being one yt
does hatch and breed so many other: apply these remedies and aduises following.

The first is that in thy eating thou The five kinds of gluttony. Gre. lib 13.
moral. ca. 13. 1. Eating out of due time. Cassian. li ^. cap, 10.
seek to observe five things, that preserve thee from five sundry sorts of
gluttony, whereof Saint Gregory does in one of his books make mention. The
first is concerning the time, when a man cateth before his ordinary hour,
which thou must beware of: forbearing and forcing thy self, not to take above
two repasts a day, to wit, thy dinner and supper, and that at such convenient
and accostomed hours, as they keep that govern themselves most orderly: more
then at such times thou oughtst not to eat, without some notable necessity, use
these moderations therefore in your diet, least soden temptations overcome your
weak resistance.

The second kind of gluttony consists The 2. kind of gluttone.
in the quallity, I mean in eating of too dainty and pleasant meats, whereof
thou must take great heed; contenting thy self with such meats, Dainry
meats.
as may suffice to sustain and norish thy flesh, and not to delighte and
pamper it, according to that Saint Barnard does exhort thee, and but if they
seem course and unsavory, then Ber. epist. 1. ad Rob. nep^t^m. Job, 6. Pro.
27. Ber. vbi. supra.
apply that sauce which he prescribes, to wit, hunger, and that shall cause
them to be sauory enough.

Remember thee also of that singular abstinence of the ancient Fathers of
Egypt, who deemed it superfluous to eat any wanton meats, as S. Jerome S.
Jerome.
tells us. Let therefore this their rigor, shame and confound thy riot, and
make thee refrain eating of delicate and sweet meats, for fear thou be
like to those amongst the people of Number. 11 Psalm. 77.
Israel, that desired flesh in the desert, and thereby provoked the wrath and
indignation of God against them.

The third kind of Gluttony, concerns The third kind of gluttony. Exces.
the quantity, that is, of eating more then suffices to sustain nature,
whereof follows, as Saint Jerome says: That look by how S. Jerome.
much the more the belly is filled, and by so much the more is the soul made
feeble.

Thou must therefore shun such excess, since meat is (according to S.
Austins counsel) to be taken in manner Aug. ca. 31. li. 1. Con.
of a medicin, whereof we use not to receive any great quantity. Take heed the^
of over charging thy heart with too much meat and drink, as our savior does
Luke 21. Romans 13.
admonish us, that by this means thou may escape his future indignation,
and a myllion of mischiefs that proceed out of this vice. Eccle. 37


The fourth kind of gluttony, respects The 4. kind of gluttony.
the manner, when a man eats his meat too greedily and with too great a
fervor: which appears Greediness.
well by his hasty and disorderly feeding, and when he is too much bent and
affectionate to his meat. Eccles. 37


This vice does the wise man in these words reprehend, saying: Long not after
every kind of meat, nor eat not greedily upon every dish. Whose counsel, see
thou endeavor thy self to follow, minding not so seriously thy corporal food
and nutriture whilst thou eatest: but either listen to good conference, if
there be any used, or lift up thy mind to God, with some good thought, or
enterlace some prayer or psalm amongst; that by thus doing, both thy soul
and body may be fostered and fed together.

The fifth and last kind of gluttony, is The fifth kind of gluttony.
an excessive care and thought, to seek out diversity of cates, and new
fangled tastes; which thou oughtst (as a blame A curious desire of strange
tastes.
worthy thing) greatly to eschew and beware of, for fear of being like to
those the Apostle speaks of, that Phi. 3. Romans 10.
Make their bellies their God, seeking with as great care to serve and satisfy
it, as were requisite for discharge of their duties to God ward. For remeie
both of these and all other kinds of gluttony, these considerations following
shall greatly help, which thou may take for a second remedy.

First consider, how much the ouercharging The 1. Remedy.
and heaviness of thy stomach, or that remains therein (having after
surfetted) does more hurt and troble thee; then the diversity of delicate and
sweet meats can delight and do thee good: the taste and pleasure whereof lasts
no longer, then whiles the meat is passing from the mouth to Taste, how smally
it tarrieth.
the throat, neither after it is once gone is there any memoryial or sign of
this delight remaining.

This may thou much better understand, if thou examine what now rests, of
all that ever thou have swallowed and swilled al thy whole life time. Note well.
What have thou now left of all thy repasts, and all thy sweet tastes, of all
the dainty morsels that ever thou deuouredst? what have thou now extant forth
coming of all this? thou see, how al is quite vanished away, as though there
had never bin any such: make account therefore, when thou feel thy self
tempted with this vice, that the pleasure is already gone, which so speedily
does pass away. And care not for condiscending to thy flesh, in yt it thus
disordinately may covet an desire.

Secondly, consider the inconueni The 2. Remedy. Amb. lib. de Helia ^^ ieiunio
ca. 12. and, 16. Eccle. 17.
ences that arise of this sin. First, the cost and trouble thou must be at, to
satiate this thy gluttony. Secondly, the number of bodily infirmities, that
grow by means of surfeiting. Thidly, it dulleth and does obfuscate the mind,
and makes a man afterward unfit for spiritual exercise. Fourthly, call to
mind that everlasting hunger, and thirst that Oseae. 7.
shall be in the next world; where no one drop of water shall be granted, as
we gather plainly by that example of the rich glutton. Remember also, what
Luke 6.
a filthy substance, thy tenderly pampered flesh (once being dead) shall be
Luke. 16
dissolved too.

The third remedy, is to think on The third remedy. Mat. 12. Mar. 2. Luk, 6.
Christ and his disciples abstinence, being forced (through hunger) to pluck
off the ears of corn, and eat them; how our Savior likewise fasted forty
days and forty nights, in the desert; Our sauiors abstinence. Mat. 4. Mark 1
Luke. 4. Mat. 27.
and the gall that was given him in his extreme thirst to drink, being upon
the cross, whereof thou ought (every time thou art at meat) well to
bethink thee.

The fourth remedy, is eftsoons to The 4. remedy. Mat. 22. Luke. 14. Apoc.
19. The plentiful supper in heaven, should cause a spare dinner on earth.
remember that eternal supper of heaven, whereto we are all invited, as our
Savior (by one of his parables) does signify. Consider, how minding to enjoy
this so happy and royal a supper, it behooves to abstain in the dinner of
this life, that by so doing, thou may so fill and saciate thee better; like
as we see in the world: he that is invited to a sumptuous supper, uses
commonly to be moderate, and spare at noone, not to loose the commodity and
pleasure of his appetite at night.

The last remedy, and that a very The fifth remedy.
secure one, is, so much as thou may possibly, to fly all occasions of
gluttony; Occasions to be eschewed.
as the feasts and iunkettinges of worldly men, where there is so great
abundance and variety of viandes, so many meats, drinks, delicate and pleasant
fruits, amidst the which may very hardly any manne keep sobriety, there
being so many things to allure him to gluttony. Remember what holy Writ says
of our mother Eve: How She saw the tree, that it was good to eat, Genes. 3
and fair and pleasant to the eye, she took of the fruit, and did eat, and
gave thereof unto her husband. And thereby was cause of so great a loss, both
to her self, and to the whole race of miserable mankind. In like manner may
thou fall into many miseries, if thou Romans 5
fly not the hazarding thy self in such like dangers.

Remedies against the troublesome temptations of sloth and Idleness. Cap. 19.
THere is yet another vice of Idleness engendered of lasciuiousnes and gluttony.
Ber. ser. 3. at 6. de Ascens. Gre. 3, par. curae pastor. admoni. 16.
the flesh, engendered of the two former, spoken of in the former chapter, and
is called sloth and idleness, which is a lothsomnes, and disliking of
spiritual things, and a negligence or fainting to begin any good thing, or to
finish that which is entered and begun already.

Against which vice (not a little hurt fulit is convenient likewise to be
armed, since thou shall not be without this weariness and loathsome
temptations, whiles thou art harbored in this fleshly body, which as the
scripture says: does aggrauate and molest the soul. Sap. 9.
Seeing that many times through attending to our bodily necessities, and the
importunities of our flesh, we become slothful, distract and dull, to do any
good. Wherefore, to the end thou be not overcome with this domestical enemy:
help thy self with these considerations and remedies, that I shall now
prescribe thee.

First, consider the strict account thou The first Remedy.
must yield, of the time that God does grant thee in this life, to work well
in, for that as S. Bernard says: There is no Ber. de trip cust manus linguae
and cordis.
time given thee in this mortal life, whereof thou must not render a reckoning,
how thou have employed it. For if we be to yield an account of every idle
word, as truth himself does tell us in the gospel) Mat. 12.
how much the rather are we to do the same, of time spent idly, an without
Every moment to be made account of.
any fruit or goodness? The which a devout and spiritual man marking well, every
time he heard the clock strike, said thus in his heart. Ah my Lord God, P.
Ignat, in horas singulas col ligebatsese cap. 1. lib. 5 vitae ipsus.
lo now another hour of my life spent, whereof I am to yield thee a
reckoning. And so forced himself withal, to spend ye next hour better then the
former.

Secondly consider, how if thou once let slip the time vnfruitfullie, that is
given thee to fructify and do good in; Galath. 6 Time past, is past recovery.
it can never be possibly recovered again, and so must thou needs
afterward lament the loss of so precious a thing, through thy negligence;
and yet want means to win it any more, for albeit thou have a meaning to do
well hereafter, yet is it uncertain whether thou shall have time and leisure
Mat. 24. 25 Apoc. 3.
granted thee to do so. And if thou have it, yet is the good thou shall then
do; due to that present time, and so thou both might and ought have done
before.

Thirdly consider, how long and painful The toil of worldlings, confounds
the sloth of Christians.
the toiles and sweates of worldelie men be, to scrape a few riches together,
and to purchase some temporal promotion, and how they refuse no pains to
satisfy others humors, and to gain their gracious looks and favors. And
thus be thou utterly confounded, that they to get vain and transitory things,
should be more diligent; then thou to purchase a most precious and everlasting
riches. Be ashamed likewise, that they are more Luke 16.
diligent and careful to please men, (but bondslaues of the world) then thou
to please God, that celestial and omnipotent monarch.

The second remedy to make thee The second remedy. The hope of gain in heaven
ought to make us take pain^ in earth.
take pains, and to work well in this life, is, to think eftsoons of the
glorious fruit, that these thy good travels and labors will one day afford
and yield thee. For if the husband do dig and delue, and till his ground in
frost, snow, and the coldest winter winds, that blow, and withal this
hardness goes so lustilie away, in hope of summers yield, that sometimes
does deceive him; how much more reason is Iam. 5.
it, that thou should travail and take pains to serve God in this life:
hoping, as thou dooest for so plentiful a harvest in the life to come, which
never did, nor can possibly deceive us? as both our faith, and all the holy
scriptures do assure us. And if the hired servant weigh not the toil of his
whole days travail, for joy of the wages he Math. 10. Luke 6. 1. Cor. 3.
looks to receive at night; why do not thou in like manner animate thy
self, to work in this life, remembering the abundant and incomparable hire,
that shall be paid thee at night, to wit, after death? Neither can any man
attain to so great a reward, but by great pains and travail (as Saint
Gregory testifies.) Call to mind also, the anguishes, griefs, and infinite
torments, that S. Gregory
such suffer, and shall do everlastingly, as in this life (through sloth and
negligence) refused to take any pains to serve God, and to fulfill his divine
Mat, 3, 7 ca. 21 Luke, 13 John. 15.
commandments, and so be dead, like barren branches, without bearing fruit;
which if thou seriously do think of, will put life into thee, and make thee
bear right patiently any pains whatsoever.

The third remedy to redress this vice, and to animat us, not to shrink at
The third remedy against sloth.
the toiles which we must, take in this life, to serve and please God with,
is, that which the apostle prescribes to the Hebrews, to wit, the often
thinking, Heb. 12
and rethinking of the life and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, sithence,
if Ber. ser. 43 in Can. Our sauiors passion ought to make us paineful.
we eftsoons did consider, how this good Lord of ours, was (from his
infancy) brought up in travel, and how he passed his whole and most holy life,
even from the crib to his cross, in continual turmoiles and troubles; these
his afflictions of this world, suffice to eaze and lighten ours, seemed they
never so intolerable, his drops of sweats would assuage our heates and
encourage us to bear him company; wotting well, how Matthew. 10 Luke. 6 John. 13
and 15.
unseemly a thing it is, for the servant to be in better estate then the
master. If he therefore take such pains in this life, for love of us, it is not
much that we (on the other side) take some pains for his love, and our own
profit. This consideration caused the holy faints before time, with such fervor
and diligence to walk in our Lords ways: herewith did they cheerfully pass
their trobles, fastings, watchings, and other loathsome labors, of this
temporal life, and so may thou do in like manner, if thou set the same
mirror continually before thine eyes.

The last remedy, that shall in this matter help thee greatly, is, to make The
Fourth. remedy. Every day to be accoumpted our dying day. Luke 12. Math. 24.
25. Mark 13
account, that each day is the last day of thy life: which with good cause
thou may do, and think on, seeing thou art not assured, whether the next
day shall be given thee or no. Think therefore, how thy whole state for ever,
depends only on this one days behavior, and so animate and cheer up thy
self, saying, My dolors shall endure but for this day, it is not much, that I
behave me diligently therein, especially, knowing the profit that is to ensue
thereof.

Remedies against the sin and temptation of Covetousness. Chap. 20.
THe second enemy that we The tentations of the second enemy. Ber. Ser. 59.
ad soro rem.
have in this life, is the world, which is meant and understood by the
concupiscence of our eyes, conformably to the authority of S. John aforesaid;
sithence the great variety of things, that are in this world (as riches, and
other temporal commodities) do engender in us a certain curious desire, to
see them; of seeing, grows a longing, and seeking to have them, weening they
should be both profitable and pleasant to us: and then having once obtained and
gotten them, follows a covetousness, which is a disordinat desire, wherewith
Couetise defined.
we love, possess, and enjoy them, as also an insatiable appetite, to have
always more then that we have already.

The which vice, (for that it is a very dangerous one, yea, as the apostle
says the root of al wickedness is covetousness:) 1. Tim. 6
It behooves therefore we be provided of good weapons, and sufficient remedies
to resist the same, for fear of being overcome withal. Wherefore the best and
most convenient for this purpose, are these aduises following. Remedies for the
poor man covetous


First if thou be poor, and have a disordinate love to riches (which love
makes thee more covetous, then if thou had riches, and did not love the^)
refrain this hurtful desire, and content thy self with thine estate,
considering that by thus doing, thou shall have more security, more rest, and
more speedy means (a great deal) to gain virtue withal, then if indeed thou
were rioh, This did the Philosophers of old The old philosophers despised
worldly wealth. Lact. initio ca. 1. lib. 1 divine. Inst. Hier. lib. 3. in cap.
19 Mat.
time, by natural discourse only understand right well; and for that cause,
forsook such riches as they had, knowing them to be a let and hinderaunce to
the obtaining of wisdom, and all other virtues. Now if these men, guided
only by the light of nature, made choice of poverty, having means to be
rich; why should not thou (being illuminated with a higher light) and more
glittering brightness of heaven lie grace, welwot the same truth, and make a
virtue of necessity, contenting thee with that poverty, that god of his To
make of necessity virtue.
great good providence has given thee, as a very substantial and secure
mean of salvation? Why do not the examples of other men's falls, convince thy
folly; and their great and Examples of others harms happened through their
couetise. 4. Reg. 5
grievous harms, make thee more heedeful? Remember how Gehezi, the Prophet
Elizeus servant, being not contented with his calling, but desirous to be
rich, deserved (with his riches) to have a perpetual leaprosie laid upon him.
We read likewise, how Ananias and Zaphira, through a covetousness they had to
retain some Acts. 5 Ananias and zaphira
part of the goods, which they had erst begun to renounce; were deprived
of their corporal lives. Thou can not be ignorant, into what a miserable
blindness, this covetousness brought that accursed Judas, as the Judas.
scripture does testify.

Both of these, and many more such Matthew. 26 Luke. 22 Mark. 18
examples, if thou consider well: thou shall thereby discern, how much more
secure the poor man's estate is, being contented with his poverty: the^ that of
the rich man, being never satisfied with all his plenty.

Thou ought not therefore, thus greedily to long for wealth and worldly
substance, which may cause thee fall into so many dangerous and perilous
temptations.

Secondly, consider the perils and difficulties, as well of the bodies, as
Covetous men fall into the Devils snares.
souls of the rich men, and such as with so great anxiety do seek after
worldly wealth; since by this their longing desire after riches, they fall into
the devils snares, (as Paul says) Thou s^est besides, 1. Tim. 6 Ber sub fin.
Cap. 11. lib. de conuers. ad Cler,
with how great care and pain they be gotten, and with how great fear they
be kept, and with how great grief and sorrow they be lost: And when al is
don, these men can have but meat and cloth, and this shall not thou want with
half that care, if thou will principally seek for the kingdom of God, and
the heavenly riches of thy Math. 6. Luke 12. 1. Pet. 5. Phil, 4.
soul, like as Christ himself has promised thee.

Thirdly consider, how by loving of poverty, and willingly embracing it: thou
art by that means more rich and noble, then all the rich Gentlemenne of this
world be; for thus art thou an The contented poor man, more rich then the
richest. Ber. ser. 1. de vigil. Not ser 4. not. Amb. ca. 13, de instit. virg.
imitator of Christ, and like to him, who so highly set by poverty, and with
so great rigor (from his infancy, to the hour of his death) observed and
practiced it, as by discoursing over all his life, thou may right evidently
see. What greater honor, or degree desire thou, then to be of the same state
and condition, as so high a Lord was of? yea, thou art (withal) most rich,
for thus is the kingdom of heaven, and the king and Lord thereof, thine: and
so by possessing of him, thou possessest all riches, and much more precious
treasures, then may be in this life either attained, imagined or desired.

Fourthly, another good remedy, Covetous men's company to be avoided.
not to fall into the temptation of avarice, is to shun (as much as may be)
the haunting of rich men's company, especially if they be covetous, least (by
their consideration) thou be smitten with their infection. Take heed in like
manner, not to see or deal with much money, riches, or any beautiful or
precious things of this world, the sight whereof does commonly kindle our
hearts, to desire and long for them where otherwise, by not seeing them, thou
should want this greedy desire of having them. Fly therefore (as much as thou
may) to touch or to deal with money, which is like to pitch (as is testified
in the Scripture) defiles such Eccle. 13.
as touch it; it shall help thee also not a little in this matter, to go
sometimes Money desileth like pitch.
and visit hospitalls, and to converse with poor folks; weighing also, how
others that be poorer then thou art, bear patiently their wants and penury.

All these remedies may (in like manner) serve to help the rich, albeit in very
deed, there be others, that might (by the considerations following) be more
fit for their purpose, to make them withdraw their minds from so greatly
sancying of worldely wealth. The third remedy against covetousness.
First consider if thou be rich, this will help thee much, for this is the
last remedy; be not overwhelmed with avarice, for that is, to force thee (seem
it never so painful and grievous) always to be giving good Alms to the
Alms giving.
poor; assuring thy self, as most certain it is, that thou have not any so
assured riches, as that which in this wise thou distributest to the needy:
since this can neither be robbed by thieves, Mat. 6. Luke. 12. 1. Tim. 6.
nor corrupted by time, as the other which is left in deed behind, yea, that
which is more, this only will accompany thee, when death does rob thee of
the rest. See therefore thou take this secure way, to lay up treasure in heaven,
and encorage thy self to do thus every day, with more cheerful and frank
heart then other, considering that what thou bestowest upon the poor and
needy, Christ himself Mat. 10. 25 Mark. 9. Amb. ho. 6. et 7. varior. arg. et
cap 5 lib de Nabuth. D. Thom. 22. 9. 32. art, 5.
receaueth it as he affirms, who (with this condition) has given thee what
thou have, that thou should liberally dispense the same to the poor, and
taking for thy self that is meet and requisite, to dispose the surplusage
amongst thy needy and distressed brethren.

Remedies against the temptation of the third enemy, to wit, the Devil: and
first against pride, whereto he principally induces us. Cap. 21.
THe third and last enemy, against whom we have to fight in this world, is,
the Devil: (who in the authority of Saint John, above alleged) is
understood by the pride of life, since this John 2.
was that, made him at the very first, to be hurled headlong out of heaven,
into Isai. 14.
the bottomless pit of hell. And therefore albeit he induce us to all other
sins, and tempts us, with each one; yet is this inducement to pride, (the
most heinous sin of all) principally attributed unto him, as also the
suggestions to wrath and envy, which issue and proceed therout; wherefore, like
as I have given thee weapons and remedies, to resist the rest withal; so shall
Inowe (God willing) prescribe thee some preseruations against these; beginning
first with pride, which is a disordinate desire, and appetite of a Pride what it
is.
man his own excellency, whereby he seeks to be singular above all other.

The first remedy therefore thou art to use against this diabolical sin,
shall be 1. Remedy against pride. Eccl. 10. Isa. 14. Apoc. 12. Dan. 4. 1. Mac. 1.
2. Mac. 9. Mat. 18 20. 23. Lu 14. 18, Mat. 12. 21 Phil, 2. Heb. 2. Luke. 1.
Ber. ser. 1. in die^s. Andreae. e^* ser. 6. in Psa. 90 Qui habitat.
to consider, how greatly God detesteth pride, and how grievously (from the
beginning of the world) he has punished it, as well in angels as also in men;
in angels we see by Lucifer, and the rest of his adherents; in men, by
Nabucadnezzar, Antiochus, with many mo, (as holy Scripture does witness) that
came to ruin through this vice, and were most severely chastyced. The same
does eftsoons likewise testify, how singularly he has always loved and
exalted the humble, whereof both our Savior, and the blessed virgin his
mother, do bear sufficient testimony.

The second remedy, is the consideration of thine own self, since (as S.
Barnard testifies) thine estate being well examined, shall teach thee what
thou want, and prayer shall obtain thee that thou want it not. For God
loves the soul, that diligently discusseth with it self, and that after dew
discussion, does without flattery and partiality judge it self. The ^ remedy
against pride.


Consider therefore what thou art, both in body and soul, and so shalt thou
find more causes of confusion and shame, then of haughtiness and of arrogancy:
touching thy body, bethink thee what a filthy substance it was ingendered of,
dirt and doung: The misery of ma^s estate.
and shall ere long be made a prey for worms. And as for thy soul, it is
fraughte with heaps of follies, errors, ignorance, fears, fancyes,
anxieties, (and that which is worste of all) of so many monstrous crimes, it
has committed, against that divine and dreadful majesty. Finally look how
much better thou shalt know thy self, and so much more plainly shalt thou
parceaue, thee to be such as Job describes, saying. A man borne of a woman,
living but a small time, is full of many miseries, who springs up like a
flower, and Job. 14.
withers quickly, and vanishes as a shadow, and never continues long in
one estate. For presently thou shall see him merry, and by and by sad, now
whole then sick, now rich, now poor, now quiet, now troubled: The
mutability of man's nature.
in fine, not in the maine seas, be there so many waves and diverse mutations
to be seen, as man (by daily proof) finds contrary chaunges and
alterations in himself. Who so therefore, considers these things and
thoroughly weighs them, as they be; shall find much more cause to be
confounded, and to accuse himself: then to be a bosting bragger, or any ways
proud and insolent and when he thinks thus basely of himself, then is he
best of all at ease, and most of all contented.

Thirdly, if thou find thy self puffed up The third remedy against pride.
with any wind of vain glory, which thy companion has not, shun them with
all speed and means possible: for if happily thou can fast more then thy
friend, yet has he more humility, more patience, more charity, and more
several graces then thou have. See therefore thou consider the virtues of
others, sooner then their vices; se not more motes in their eyes the^ there
remains beams in thine own: but weighing each case to thy own good, think
(without dissimulation) thee to be most infamous of all other: thus humbling
thy self before thy Lord and God he shall exalt thee everlastingly.

Fourthly, if good deeds be in thy The 4 remedy against pride 1. Cor. 4 Ephe.
2. We ought not to be proud of that is not our own.
remembrance which thou haste don, or any such commendable part in thee
consider al is but received from God: and therefore ought thou not to glory
in any such thing, but rather think that by the Lord (for any such vain
thought or work of pride) all shall be taken away from thee, and thou after
be contemned of them, that before commended thee.

Fifthly, to beat down all vain glory The 5. Remedy against pride.
and boasting, which men are commonly wont to have (through the credit and
worldly wealth they enjoy in this life,) it is very good to weigh well; how
vain and transitory al things are, like as man's life it self is very short,
and most uncertain. Therefore consider, S. August.
if thou vaunt of any thing, thou art but mortal, dust and earth, and shortly
shall come to earth. Where be those generals, and chief Captains of Armies,
and other proud minded monarchs, of much more moment? all Note well.
turned to earth, dust and ashes. Now is the memorial of their lives contained
in few lines, they are past, thou to com, to be food (to day or to morrow, yea,
in a moment) for the worms of the earth. Then humble thy self down proud
devil, to fire eternally; or crouch to him before thy time, and attain joys
everlastingly. Thou can not (if thou ponder these and sundry other things)
be proud and vainglorious of any earthy thing whatsoever.

Sixthly, it shall greatly help to make The 6. Remedy against pride.
thee detest all pride, to consider, how highly God hates such as be infected
with it, who (as the scripture witnesses) does resist the proud, and gives
grace unto the lowly. This kind of people is likewise abhorred of other men,
who can by no means away with their loathsome and disdainefull conversation;
yea, to themselves are they also very noisome and tedious, in seeing
themselves environed with so many dangers, dreades and suspicions; having
every one to malice and lie in wait for them, to gainsay and cross them in
all their enterprises.

Whereupon, it is reported of a certain holy king, who having a marvelous
rich and precious crown given unto him, to be crowned withal; held it
(musing a pretty while in his hands) before he would put it on his head: at
length he said openly on this wise. O more noble then happy Crown, which if
any man knew well how full of cares, perils, and manifold miseries thou art
fraught; albeit he meet thee with his feet, yet would he not vouchsafe to
lift thee up. What this king said of his crown, may thou well apply to
each dignity and precious thing: see therefore thou take not so great travail
and toil, for a thing, that is so hard to hold, and nothing so soon fleeteth
away, as does the wind of pride and vainglory.

The last remedy to shake off pride The 7 remedy against pride
withal, and to purchase that so necessary a virtue of humility, is to force
and accustom thy self, (seem it never so paineful and loathsome to thee) to
exercise diverse actions of humility, as to do the basest offices in the
house, to converse with the meaner sort, to sit in the lowest place, to
cladde thy self in Homlye attire, not so homely though, as to be taken or
accoumpted singular since that shall be esteemed a pride likewise: not to do or
say any thing, whereby to make show of excellency and pre-eminence, or to
cause admiration in other men's eyes. And finally to call eftsoons to mind, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's humility, and also that of his holy saints.

Remedies against the temptations and sins of wrath. Chap. 22.
Diverse of the remedies, that have been prescribed thee against pride, may in
like manner help thee against this sin of wrath and anger, seeing that most
commonly such as be proud and hautie, are wont also to be angry and yrefull;
yet nevertheless be there other The proud ma^ireful.
peculiar remedies to be used against this vice.

The first is, to ponder, how far it is The first remedy against anger.
out of all good frame and reason, that any man should be angry, and desire to
hurt another: since if brute beasts, be they never so fell, fight not one with
another, The unity of brute beasts co^uinceth ye malice of mankind
but live in peace and unity with those of their own kind; how much more
reason is it, that men should do the like, who are not borne armed as brutish
and savage beasts be, nor provided of weapons to defend themselves, or to
offend others?

Secondly, behold the ugliness and The 2. Remedy against anger.
deformity of an angry man, both in his countenance, gesture, words and
actions: in all the which thou shall at that time see him wonderfully
disordered, and besides himself: see thou beware therefore of being angry, if
thou will An angry man be side him self.
not fall into those defectes, which in others do so greatly dislike thee.

Thirdly consider, that whosoever, he be that has proffered thee any The
third remedy against anger.
wrong or injury, has done himself much more harm then thee: and if thou
grow angry thereat, and seek revenge, in so doing thou shall hurt thy
self, much more then thine adversary, for that as Chrysostom says, No man is
hurt but by himself. Which should be no less a folly, then for a man Mark well.
to kill himself, to tear his enemies cote; sithence thine enemies body is as
his coat, which thou meaning to tear, in seeking to kill him, do first
kill and slaie thine own soul. For as saint Augustine says: The knife S.
August.
pierces the heart of the persecutor, before the body of the persecuted.
Strive therefore to master thy self, and to vanquish thine ire, and so shall
thou gain greater honor and victory; then if thou hadest subdued a mighty
City, and by this means, in not seeking thy self to take revenge, God shall
take it for thee, as he himself has promised thee.

Fourthly, if the devil (to stir thee up Deuteronomy. 32 Eccles. 28 Romans 12 Heb 9.
The 4. remedy against anger.
to wrath) do agrauate thine injury received, and make it greater: do thou
(contrariwise) what thou can to lessen it, and to make it smaller: thinking
thus, how he that in this manner has injured thee, is at that time overcome
with some passion, or indiscretion, or else call to mind some good turns he
has erst done thee, or how thou have otherwise done him the like injury, or
some other, which he then did tolerate at thy hands, and therefore is it meet,
thou bear likewise with him. If thou can not withhold, call to mind, how
God has forgiven thee many thousands, and borne them all at thy hands: for
his sake forget such kind of sudden injury, and let him be a just recompense
for all.

Fifthly consider, that such like crosses The fifth remedy against anger.
are sent from above, as scourges for thy sins. Take now his chasticement on
earth, least the last coming pay for all. Believe then, that by the bearing
patiently of all villainies and injuries that shall be said and done against
thee, it will (by the Almighty) be disposed and turned to thy exceeding
benefit, and comfort of thy soul.

Sixthly, if thou feel thy self overcome The 6 remedy against anger.
with anger, take heed then thou speak nor do any thing, whereby this sudden
indignation bring further sin upon thee, then thou would after wish it
had nere been done. For the Devil, who eggeth thee thereto, stands ready to
betray thee to utter darkness, and bring thy soul to confusion: then pacify
thy self, and meditate on him that will be avenged, referring all to his
will; then think Satan banished, by mighty and invincible conquest of
patience and prayer.

And beware the sun never go down upon thine anger, according as saint
Paul admonishes: that is to Ephe, 4
say, that thou expel it quickly, and Aug. epist. 149. ad profutur.
suffer it not long to soiourne in thy soul: for so might it turn to hatred,
and become more dangerous and harder to be healed.

These remedies may thou at such time put in ure, when thou perceiuest Amb
cap. 21. lib. 1. of ex. Romans 12. Genesis 27 Jacob fra^ri indigna^ ^i consil.
thy self offended toward others. But if thou contrariwise, see another
offended and angry with thee: then frame thy self to do one of these two
things, either covertly (in the best manner thou can) to wind thy self out
of his company that is angry, until the Wrath he has conceived be worn
over; or else (wanting opportunity Basil. hom. de ira var. arg. 10.
to do thus) force thee to overcome evil with good, according to the Apostles
counsel, seeking to Romans 2
appease him with some fair and humble speeches, since (as the wise manne
says) A mild answer aswageth Pro. 15. and 25.
anger, and hard speeches kindle fury and rage.

But if thou should want means to do either of these: take such order (at
leastwise) as to be silent, whilst thou see him in those fretting fumes, and
in thy heart to pray to God for him, for that as saint Gregory says: It is a
d. Gre. 3 pa^.r past. cur. ad 17
great deal more glorious to shun wrath by silence, then to subdue it by
aunswering.

Lastly, that if the anger or impatience, The last remedy against anger:
which thou feel in thee, proceed not of any injury or wrong don to thee by
any person, but through the adversities and tribulations that befall thee, in
this life: then shall it be a very good remedy to remember the examples of
such perfect and holy men, as have endured with great patience Ber. ser. 16.
ad soro. de mo. be. viu.
far greater tribulations and calamities, then thine be. Remember that
invincible patience of Job, who Examples of patience.
with so stout courage sustained so many losses, so many soores, such
infinite number of griefs, corsies and harte-breakes, as happened to him in
one instante; neither did he amongst Job. 2.
all these millions of miseries, once droope, or show by word or deed, any
sign of blame worthy impatience, as the holy Scripture testifies: Think also
of that holy man Tobyas, his rare patience, who Tob. 2.
in his blindness, pouertye and all his other annoies, had continually a
constant mind, and comformable to the will of God. Consider also that
mildness and marvelous patience, of the holy Prophet Moses, whom Exo. 15,
16 Number. 14.
not all the continual troubles, and murmurings of that ungrateful people,
which he had brought out of Egypt, could suffice to disquiet or move to
anger. The like patience and mildness, may thou note in that 2, Reg. 16.
holy King David, amongst all the manifold persecutions and afflictions he
suffered, through the whole course and period of his life, the which may
enforce thee to endure all things very patiently.

Thou may also (in this case) apply A good consideration against anger.
another remedy, by considering the great commodity thou shalt reap, by
these tentations and tribulations which thou suffer. This consideration S.
Gregory.
(as Saint Gregory affirms) does mitigate the force of the whip and skourge.

Think therefore, God sendes to thee (like a Father) that loves thee 1. Pet.
1 Sap. 3. Prou. 17 Heb. 12 Apoc. 3 Prou. 3
as his dear child, and by chastising thee, does purge and puryfie thee:
whereas if thou lackest this disciplyne, and his holy rod of correction; thou
would not deserve to be called by the title of his son.

All these things if thou consider very well, as these and sundry others have
done: thou will not only abide patiently all such paineful tribulations now
present, but yealde thy self to God, with thanksgiving to him, who has so
singularly loved thee, as to se^d them for thy benefit, and to the enriching
Iam. 1. Tim. 2. 4, Apoc. 2. Tob. 3.
of thy crown; knowing that it was not possible to come by so great a reward
as we look for, without great pains and travail. And truly great reason is
it, that Christians (like good soldiers should) follow their Captain Christ;
tracing his steps, and walking the same way he went before, and so entered into
his glory.

Remedies against the sin and temptation of envy. Cap. 23.
IT now remains to set thee down some remedies against the tentations of
envy and malice, wherewith the feende (in like manner) is wont to assault and
tempt us; for as the holy Sap. 2. Genesis 3.
Scripture does witness: Through the malice of the Devil death first entered
into the world. This made the Jews Mat. 27.
to seek our Lord and Savior his death, 1. Gen, 4. Sap. 14. Ioh. 5.
and by this vice have many murders and innumerable wicked acts been
committed in the world.

This is also that most cruel beast, Jacob. 3. Genesis 37. 44.
which Jacob said had devoured his son Joseph; and therefore must thou
carefully foresee, that this venomous viper begin not at any time, to norish
her self in thy soul; but forthwith (at the very first brunt) to kill and
cast her out, using these just rudements or instructions (for that purpose)
following. First consider, how this sin of malice Aug. lib. 11 de Genes. ad
lit. 14
or envy (which is according to S. Austen, a grief and sorrow at others
felicity) is more hurtful and unprofitable, then any of the other, for albeit
other sins do hurt the soul; yet afford The first remedy against envy.
they (I know not in what kind of miserable estate) some taste and pleasure
to the flesh; but this vilde vice does both hurt the soul, and afflict the
flesh: since it scaldeth the heart, pineth the body, withers the face,
appaleth the countenance and comlie sanguine hue. Briefly it tormenteth and
overthrows, the whole manne, being like unto the Worm that consumes the
Wood whereof she comes. And hence is it, that the envious manne finds
himself in the worst case, and most wretched, when the other whom he maliceth,
The 2. Remedy against ^nuie.
is best at ease and happiest.

Secondly consider, how by shaking off this so fettering and fruitles a vice,
and by being in the state of Gods grace, thou art a partaker of all such
things as others do possess: since charity does Gregor. past. curae^ 3. ad. 11.
make them thine, and therefore ought thou to be joyful, that other enjoy
such goods and live so happily, rather then to be sorrowful, or any whit
grieved thereat.

For by rejoicing in charity, thou art Charity. makes each one partakers of
others happiness.
made happy in their happiness, and by maliciously repyning thereat, thou
losest thy part, and they remain still with their prosperity, which albeit
they lost, yet should not thou recover it.

Thirdlye, whatsoever helpethe against pride, does likewise help against
envy, as proceeding (for the The 3. remedy against envy. Pride the mother of
envy.
most part) out of the other: since the proud man bearing impatiently,
that any other should be his better or pheere, and fellow with him, he
maliceth those, whom (in any respect) he deemeth to be his betters, or more
happy then he is. See therefore do thou endeavor thy self, to pluck this
poisoned root out of thee, and not to set thy love upon the temporal things
of this world, which are so miserable, spare, and skant; and if thy neighbor
have them, thou must go without them, and many times must look that which
another might conveniently leave. But if on the other side thou set thy mind on
spiritual or heavenly things, no man can bereave or bar thee from them, yea
look how much the number of such is greater, that enjoy and possese the same
Gre. lib. 5. moral. cap. 34.
goods thou do, and so much shall thy happiness increase, and grow the
greater: and by this means shall thou be so far of from malicyng of any
man, as thou shall heartily desire, that each one might gain the goods which
thou possessest, woting well, that so should thy riches and bliss be not a
little multiplied.

Fourthly, if the desire of thine own The 4 remedy against envy.
excellency, make thee malice thy neighbor, for being thine equal, or more
high in dignity then thou art: consider, that in doing thus, thou losest that
thou so greatly seek for; since herein thou disbasest thy self, and give
others occasion to contemn thee, perceauing this thy cancared, and vile
nature, which thus dishonestly thou thy self discouerest. But if
(contrariwise) thou striuest to master thy self, and to rejoice at thy
neighbors welfare, as at thine own; then should thine estimation and credyt
grow much greater, since every good man would esteem thee better, and highlye
commend this charity and noble mind of thine, whereof (by thus doing) thou
give the world, an apparent and plain testimony. Thy spiritual profit
should herewith be in like manner greatly increased, for either would God
give thee the same goods and graces which thou reioysest at, in thy neighbor:
or at leastwise reward thee ple^tifully for thy charity.

And therefore does S. Chrysostom say, that the virtue of charity is very
great and marvelous, which (without spoiling any man) does rob and Chri. ho.
51 ad pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. The virtue of charity robs all. The 5 re medy
against envy.
take all: since by rejoicing at other men's welfare and goods, we make them
ours, win possession of all that which others do possess.

Fifthly, all such means as help to excite and stir up charity toward all,
shall likewise help greatly to subdue and vanquish this vice; as for example,
to think how we are all brethren as touching our flesh, descending Genesis 2.
from the same parents Adam and Eve, and as for the Spirit, all created Causes
to procure Charity.
of one Lord, regenerated by one virtue, redeemed by one price, and by the
self same redeemer. We have all of us one mother, the holy Catholic
Church, the same faith, the same Sacraments, and all of us hope for the same
bliss, where each ones good shall be common to all, and that of all to each
one. Whereas therefore so many and so great causes, of unity and charity be;
envy ought to bear no swaye, no grief at others good, no mirth at others
misery; yea rather ought we to rejoice at others weldoings, and lament their
harms and evils, as if they were our own, perfourming thereby what Romans 12.
Saint Paul prescribes, to rejoice with such as rejoice, and to weep with
them that weep.

But if happily all these causes of union sufficed not, to make thee reckon
thy neighbors goods as thine own, he seeming still a stranger and a
forriner, never did thee any good, but rather harm and injury. Remember how
thou being Psa. 49. 15. Mat. 14.
a greater stranger, and far more vnwoorrhie, Christ has bestowed so many
and so great benefits vpone thee, whereof he will have thee to make a
recompense, with other benefits not done to himself (since he stands in no
need of thy good Mat. 10. 15 Mark. 9
turns) but bestowed upon thy neighbor, seem he never so unknown and
unworthy to thee: for look what good thou do to such a one, and this Lord
will accept it, as done unto himself.

Sixthly, consider how to vanquish this vice of envy, the law of nature The
fixed remedy against envy.
(common to all) ought at least to move thee, which teaches us, to do to
others as we would be don to our selves. As therefore thou would not that
others should be grieved at thy Tob. 4. Mat. 7. Luke 6.
good: so ought not thou to be offended at others welfare, for otherwise
should thou show thy self a senseless creature, and without al reason,
yea, well may we say by the malicious man, that he has lost his reason and
natural judgment since he would not stick to make choice of his own loss,
if by that means he might procure harm to those he hates. Like as A pretty
example declaring ye cancar of a malicious mind.
we read of a certain King who meaning to make a proof of ye cancard
nature, of an envious person, and a covetous wretch; caused two such to be
called unto him, to whom he made this proffer; to crave of him whatsoever they
would, for willingly it should be given them: provided that the second should
have double that the first did ask, these twain being now at great
contention, which of them should first begin, least the other might gain
the double; the King being constrained to take up the matter, commanded the
malicious man to speak first, who requested this, that one of his eyes might
be put out, that ye other might have both his put out, chosing rather his own
harm then good, that the other (whom he hated) might by receiving the
double, according to the offer, be the more harmed. The which story, if it
were true, declares plainly, to what blindness this vice brings him, that
lets himself be lewdly overcome with it.

The last remedy which (feeling thy The 7 re medy against envy. Mat. 5, 8. Luke
6, 23 Act. 7
self tempted with this vice) I have to prescribe thee, is, to force thy self
continually to pray for him whom thou malycest, and bear envy too, as also
to speak well of him to others, yea, (occasion so serving) to do him some
service, albeit thou seem to do it fainedly, and against thy stomach fith for
this force and violence, which thou shall use in mastring thy self, and
breaking of thy will; no doubt but God will give thee the gift of charity,
whereby thou shall be perfectly healed of this detestable vice, and may
afterward love all thine enemies, one and other whatsoever.

Certain other aduises and remedies concerning the same matter of tentation.
Chap. 24.
BEsides these tentations, spoken Te^tations of infidelity, blasphemy and
desperation.
of in the former Chap. wherewith the Devil does most commonly tempt us; there
be diverse other means, whereby he uses to molest and trouble us by
propounding otherwhiles, temptations of infidelity, doubts against our belief
and faith, or suggestions of blasphemy, yea sometimes he brings us into such
a mase and perplexity, as whither soever we turn us, or whatsoever we say or
do: yet seem we still to be caught and entangled. An other time he indeuoreth
to bring us to desperation; and thus does he with these and diverse other
vexations, disquiet and grievously assault us.

Against all the which his crafts A singular doctrine against the aforesaid
tentations.
and subtilties, take this for a general rule, never to stay to dispute, or
talk with the Devil of set purpose: for if thou do, thou art like to be
overcome as Eve was, for having done the same. It is therefore much Genesis 3.
more secure, not to stand reasoning or listening to that the Devil shall
tell thee, but forthwith to fly the tentations in the very beginning, by
thinking on some other matter, quite The devil is not to be disputed with.
contrary, to that which he would have thee. As for example, if he propound
thoughts of infidelity, saying: how is it possible that this mystery should
be thus and thus: make none accoumpt to answer him, by showing any reason of
that truth which thou beleuest, but say; I believe as god A remedy against
infidilty.
has taught me in his word, neither descend to any other particularities.
thus likewise must thou do, if in case he molest thee with temptations of
blasphemy, saying. Thy blasphemy be to thy perdition, for I adore and love my
Lord Against blasphemy.
God. With this, or some such like short speech, may thou set thy mind at
rest, intending to some other business, and different cogitations, neither let
these his suggestions dismay or troble thee any whit, for all of them shall not
make thee lose any jot of grace and Gods favor, yea, by doing as I tell thee,
thou shalt greatly increase thy reward. If likewise he go at any time about
to bring thee in any perplexities, scruples, or other obscuryties, whereby
thou wotest not A refuge in time of perplexity.
well on which side to turn thee, accoumpte not of them, but convert thy self
wholely to God saying: I will my Lord my God, both in this and each other
thing whatsoever thou will, neither do I will or yield consent, in any thing
that may displease thee. And thus may thou (with this saying) be in quiet
and in great security.

In like manner if he induce thee to Against desparation.
desperation, laying before thee, the multitude and enormity of thy sins;
behold Christ thy judge nailed upon the cross, in whom thou have more
goodness (without all comparison) then in thy self thou can have evils. And
thus, putting all thy confidence Christ crucified, ought to be our common
refuge.
in him, may thou despise and defy all the devils: and not only in this,
but in all other thy temptations, would I have thee make Jesus Christ
crucified, a familiar defense and buckler for thee, since that, like as Moses
gave to the children of Israel, being stung in the desert, or bit of venomous
serpents, that serpent of brass raised up on an high piece of wood, whereon
who so looked Number. 22.
fixedlie and with faith, were cured of their greefes: in like manner, and much
better, al such as with faith consider and behold, our Lord and Savior Christ
crucified, and heaued up on The brase^ serpent a figure of Christ crucified.
the wood of the cross (whom the serpent of brass did in figure represent)
shall be healed of all their bitinges and stinges, of trespasses and
temptations. At such time therefore, as thou feel the serpent assault and
bite thee with the sin of pride, behold Christ Against pride. Phil, 2.
humbled on the Cross, and obedient even till death.

If with covetousness; behold that Covetousness.
poverty and nakedness, wherewith he hangs thereon, in such extreme Mat. 8.
distress, as he has not where to rest his head. If thou find thy self
assailed with the delights of lust: behold Carnal lusts.
his bruised and beaten flesh, fraught full of extreme anguish, and how for
thy sake he hangs on the Cross, all wounded from top to toe, and
afflicted with most grievous torments.

If thou feel thy self provoked to Gluttony.
gluttony: look upon him fastened to the Cross, who being extremely pained
with drought, had gall and Math. 27
vinegar given him to drink. If thou perceive thy self stirred up to Anger,
Anger.
behold that invincible patience of our Savior, in abiding all those his most
villainous blasphemies, and incomprehensible torments. If thou be vexed
with the venomous vice of malice: consider that most fervent Malice.
charity, wherewith our savior shed his blood on the cross for all, and
prayed for his persecutors that crucified him. Luke 13. Sloth.


If sloth or idleness, cause thee to wax cold in good works: fix thine eye
upon those feet, so cruelly nailed to the Cross, which were never wearied
with wandering, and seeking for thy welfare.

Finally, in this thy Lord and savior thus crucified, if thou seek in time
to him, thou shall find sufficient remedies against all manner of temptations,
wherewith in this miserable life thou may be any ways assailed.

It rests now to admonish thee, of one only thing touching this matter; A
necessary advertisement.
that when at any time thou should, either with this, or any other of the
aforesaid remedies, repulse thine Enemy, and resist his suggestions: yet must
thou not think thy self to be secure, as though the battle were ended, and
the field fully fought and won, The malice of the feend.
since this is the property of the devil, when he is overcome in one
tentation, to arm himself forthwith, and to make preparation for another.
Like as he did to our Savior in the wilderness, whom when he could not one
way Matthew. 4 Mark. 1 Luke. 4
overcome, he assailed, and set upon another. And therefore, albeit thou ween
thy self to be at some rest, and find the feend to have taken truce with
thee, for a while after he is vanquished; yet beware thou trust not too The
Devils truce not to be trusted.
much to him, for when thou suspectest least, then will he return to make a
fresh assault, and to molest thee with new tentations. And if he then hap to
find thee unarmed, and unprovided of means to encounter and withstand him;
easily will he subdue and conquer thee, and the advantage which thou had won
before honorably, he will then make thee lose dishonestly. Take heed therefore,
thou never lay thy weapons aside, but always be provided and in readiness
for the combat: neither be thou tired with his importunate infestations,
whereby he (for the most part) overcomes those that wax weary to withstand
him, but like wise, as he is importunate in tempting thee, be thou as constant
and importunate in withstanding and resisting him. And by this means shall thy
crown be the more rich and precious, A per ser. 61. de mo. ben. ven. de Tent.
as the temptations, which (by Gods help) thou ouercommest, be more irksome
and importunate.

What a good Christian ought to do, when he falls sick, or draws nigh the
hour of death. Cap. 25.
ALl such things as I have hitherto entreated of, will help thee, during the
time it pleases God to grant thee health and strength of body: but because
this temporal life of ours, is subject to many infirmities, and in the end
(no remedy) but all of us must needs once die, according to God his good
ordinance Heb. 9, 27
and appointment: I have for this cause thought good in this chapter, to add
certain aduises and instructions, to teach thee the better how to govern thy
self, both in time of sickness, and in the hour of death: neither ought
thou with worse will to read these, nor with less diligence Note well.
to execute them in their time, then the former. Nevertheless, these aduises
shall principally profit those, that in their health did employ their time in
such exercises, as have bin heretofore spoken of in this little Treatise,
preparing themselves continually to death, as all good and faithful Christian
people ought to do. For such as prolong their preparation and conversion,
until the hour of death, having lived loosely, and without the fear of God
al their time of health: albeit they be not to despair, but to make the best
shift they can for their poor souls, in the small time that is left behind:
yet are they in great danger no doubt and in a very perilous estate. These
The wicked liuer^ dying to be doubted.
being they whose salvation saint Augustine doubts of. Let us therefore as
saint Paul warns us, (Do well whiles we have time) continually watching
Galath 6
and preparing our selves to death, according to out Sauiors council: Mat. 24
Since we neither wot the day nor hour thereof: therefore watch, and with care
prepare thy self.

First, see thou cleanse and purge thy soul with wholesome prayer and
exhortation The first advise in time of sickness.
either before or in thy sickness, especially before the purging of thy
body. For God many times sends sickness to the body for the sins of The
soul to be purged before the body.
the soul, And therefore it may be, the cause once ceasing, to wit, sins,
thy sickness also, being the effect, shall also cease. The body afflicted for
the sins of the soul.


Now, if having used this remedy, thy sickness continue, then take this
second advise: accept it with a willing mind, as a gift which thy heavenly
father, for thy souls health, to forward thee, look to the safeguard of ye
same, with consideration of the singular love he bears thee, so unworthy a
member, think therefore to conform thy self to his will, that thy painful
pilgrimage, may be past over, to his glory, and the usual health of thy soul
and body.

These and such like aduises, for thy troubled body, thou may use, during
such time as God shall put thee in such remembrance by visitation, to escape
and be cured of. But if thy mallady be mortal and no remedy, but this
temporal life must be determined, and ended by it, then over and above take
these aduises following.

The first is, perceiving sickness increase that thou most vigilantly awake and
rouse up thy self, to dispose both of thy temporal and spiritual affairs, as
if then these words were spoken unto thee, delivered by the prophet Esaias, to
king Ezechias: Dispose of thy house, for thou shall die and not live. Dispatche
therefore and make perfect thy Will, which every good Christian ought to do in
the time of health, when he may with better ease, sounder judgment, and more
mature advise, perform and do the same, and not to drive it till the last
hour, when all these commodities do fail him, since daily experience does
inform us, how through the lets and encumbrances of sickness, the Wills that
are made in that time, be very rawly performed, and many times vnperfectlie
drawn and penned. Having therefore, I say, thy Will in a readiness by thee,
with thy satisfaction therein contained, thou may then as shall seem best
unto thee, alter or add thereunto, any thing by way of council: but if thou
have been heretofore negligent in this matter, then may thou amend with
wisdom such wilful ouersighte, either by aduisement of thy friend, or how
thou will dispose it, to thy contentment.

The second is, when that is fully finished The second advise in time of death.
(touching temporal causes I mean) then to occupy thy mind with heavenly
matters, forgetting the World, as if it were not, but as if thou A forgetting
of worldly affairs.
hopedst to enjoy a glorious kingdom above: and give thy self over to thy
Lord and Savior most willingly, least thou be in thy conscience otherwise
afflicted.

The third is to give warning, that thou be not troubled with any household
matters whatsoever. And see this chieflye done, when death is at thy door,
and thy life draws fast to an end; let this advise be most carefully
executed, least the sight or hearing of such matters, might then with draw thy
affection to them, quite from Divine and heavenly things, which at such time
thou must and ought to be in love withal.

The fourth is, that some devout The 4. advise.
manne being called, if thou chance to fall in those terms, and confer with
him, upon other matters, belonging to thy souls health, considering thy body
is not but earth: and passing the time in godly conference and prayer, thy
soul may lift and eleuate it self The death of Christ a help in death, and
our sweetest comfort.
to heavenly and spiritual joys, celestial and most glorious, thinking
especially on the passion of Christ Jesus, for thy better resolution of thy
fixed faith. And thus pray with them, in the best manner that thou can.

Of the tentations that are commonly felt in the hour of death, and the
remedies against the same. Cap. 26.
THere be many anguishes, and anxieties, which ye soul does commonly feel,
in the perilous trance and hour of death, this being the most terrible
thing, that can happen unto us in this life, since at that time the soul does
suffer on every side, and which way soever it turns, does find great cause
of corsie and extreme annoy.

First, it suffers in respect of the The extreme anguishes of ye soul, in
ye time of death.
body, from which it parts with no small pain. It suffers likewise in
parting from temporal things, which it leaves here behind: and look how
much they were in life time loved of it, and so much more do they in that
hour of death torment it. It suffers through the great dread it has of the
strict accoumpt, which it knows well must forthwith be passed to the dreadful
judge, of every thing it has done in all her life time. It suffers through
the horrible visions of Devils, which in that hour appear; the sight whereof
is an intolerable torment. And much more does it suffer, through the grievous
and bitter assaults, wherewith in that hour, they far more siercelie set upon
it, then ever they did before. For like as toward the end of the world, and
time of general judgment, the prince of darkness, shall most terriblie, and
with greater rage and fury, assault mankind, as he knows better, how small a
time is then remaining for him to do the same, and to infest it any longer. In
like manner do the devils behave themselves, toward such, as be at ye point
of death, against whom they bend all their might and maine, all their
sleightes and subtileties whatsoever; since they know well, that if the soul,
in that last hour, do escape their dreadful clookes, they loose what they
pretended to gain all her life time, in this world. For so do the Doctors
commonly say, upon the sentence of the Apocalypse. That Apoc. 2
the devil descends with great rage, wotting well that he has but a small
time left. So that the anxietie and bitterness of that hour, shall be great,
and no man by words shall exaggerate.

Therefore, it is good to remember that hour before, and arm our selves to
prepare us to a ioiful meeting of our redeemer, at this so perilous a season.
And although we perswad our selves, so loving a God will not permit us to be
tempted at such time, above our strength; yet must we busy our selves in the
defending of such batteryes as the enemy will otherwise prefixe against us:
that being avoided, then the more happy and blessed shall we be, in the eyes
of the omnipotent, for that Satan is busy to overthrow us. Mark then the
manner of his temptations, and the sure defenses for the same, that so thou
may the more securely escape so great a peril, and gain the Crown
prepared for the valiant conqueror.

The first, as S. Ambrose testifies, is The first tentation. Ambrose.
the devils very drift, to take us in some error of our belief, to which
temptation, thou can not resist better, than as I told thee before in the 26.
chapt. The devil is to be despised.
to wit, by despising and scorning, both the answer to him, and it. But if of
force thou must answer something; let it be this. I believe firmly, what God in
his word has taught me to believe, and that which the holy Apostles have
believed and taught, whose faith and doctrine almightye GOD, (whom none can
deceive) has confirmed with innumerable miracles, and for the confession
whereof has so much blood of Martyrs been spilt. Stick fast unto this
answer, and care not to his other objections, or to answer them. Thus then
behauing thy self, no doubt but thou shall be conqueror.

The second suggestion, is blasphemy: Blasphemy the 2. tentation.
persuading at that hour, some indecent thing of our blessed Savior. Heereto
may thou resist, by returning this answer to the devil himself, that
propounds it, in this manner.

I am more than assured, that my Lord God is infinitely good, and worthy of all
sovereign praise, and love, A retorting of the feends suggestion
and that all his holy saints are most perfect, and replenished with all virtue,
and therefore thou art most abominable, and for these blasphemies to be
utterly despised and abhorred. Then turning to thy maker, giving all praise and
glory, with humble blessings of his holy name. So shall thou cast and shake
off the devil.

The third temptation, is despair of The third tentation.
forgiveness of thy sins, which is most grievous at that time to us, by
considering divine justice, whereto it belongs, not to suffer any one sin
unpunished: and then his persuasions is, to make thee think, that all in vain
is repentance at that hour.

The remedy for this, is to humble thy self in the sight of God, and to
invoke The remedies against despair.
his divine Clemency, calling to mind his passion, whose most grievous and
bitter wounds, thou must offer up to his father, for all thy sins and
transgressions whatsoever: saying as follows.

A prayer against desperation.
I Know my Lord God, that although my sins be great, enormous, and
innumerable, yet is the satisfaction, which thy most obedient son, my Savior
Jesus Christ, has given thee, both for these of mine, and all the world,
far greater, more precious, and more infinite. I know likewise, that thy
incomprehensible mercy and pity, does far surpass all my misery, and
impiety: and therefore will not I dispare, as Cain and Judas did, Mar. 27. Act.
1.
especyally knowing how this should be, to add a greater offense to my
former trespasses, since despair is that which most of all displeases,
dishonoreth and offends thee; yea rather will I hope in Psalm. 1. 50
the multitude of thy mercies, which thou have used toward other most
unworthy sinners, and sure I am that thine eternal truth and infallable word,
neither can, nor will ever deceive, whereby thou haste promised to pardonne and
receive such as hope in thee, call upon thy mercy, and unfeignedly turn to
thee, being contrite and sorrowful for their sins, which grant us all to be
for thy dear sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

This is the Anchor whereto thou must cleave fast, and never forsake thy hold,
albeit the Devils never forsake to drown thee: as is aforesaid. The forth
temptation is too great security.


The fourth temptation is quite opposite and contrary to the former: this being
a rash and fond security, the Devil buzzeth in our ears of our too rash
resolution, how we are beholding to the Lord for such a constant perseverance
and driving us to such a vain glory that he will take us tardy after
desperation is overcome by our selves to bring us by fauning with us to his
subtle entisements, by the great content we find to please our minds withal.
But the remedy for this is, to have such authorities of holy Scriptures in A
remedy against vain security and pleasing of our selves. Eccle. 9. Esaias. 64.
1. Luke 17. Psalm. 55. Romans 11.
readiness, as serve to beat down this vain pleasing and disordinate
confidence in our selves, as is that saying of the wise*man. That no man living
knows whether he be worthy of love, or hatred. And that of Esaias, All our
righteousness is a defiled cloth. And that which our Savior says, and when
ye have done all that is commanded you, say ye, we are but improfitable
servants. That also of the psalmist, Thy judgments are great and an inscrutable
depth. And yt sentence of the apostle, how incomprehensible are the judgments
of God. By these and diverse other authorities thou see how smally thou
ought to please thy self, or grow secure by reason of good works; think
thus therefore and never resolve securely for fear of a fall. In doing this
thou shall The best way to heaven lies between fear and hope.
remain between fear and hope, the most assured path to pass to heaven, and
look when the Devil does puff up thy mind to presume of thy self, throw
thy self down with the memory of such causes, with a sure hope and confidence
in the Lord, our most merciful Savior.

The fifth tentation if it be in long The 5 tentation is impatience.
continuance of sickness is impatience, this must thou vanquish, by thinking God
of his omnipotency visits thee with his love, to chastise thee so favorably
on earth, giving him eternal praise therefore least he increase thy torments,
and give thee more punishment for thy obstinacy, which if with patience thou
withstand, the Devil shall have no power over thee; but thy reward shall
increase the greater in heaven.

Besides these already mentioned, the wicked spirits do with diverse other
molest the souls of me^ in this hour; but continuing in this hope and
wrapping thy self in the wounds of our Savior; thou shalt overcome them
all, and so most happily gain a conquest, of these and all other tentations
that may assail thee, and at length ariue at that most happy port of eternal
rest and quietness.

A conclusion and brief rehersall of that which has been in this little
treatise set down, and of the things that every good Christian is bound to
learn and have by heart. Cap. 27.
IN this little treatise (gentle The some of the hole book.
reader) has been hitherto as briefly as might be showed thee, the rules
and aduises, whereby thou ought to guide thy self as well on working as
holidaies; and how thou may exercise thy self in prayer, and because this
mortal life cannot be passed over, without the tentations and assaults of such
our adversaries, as here in this world do enuiron us, there are weapons, and
remedies given thee to vanquish them with, and to preserve thee from sin, by
means whereof thou may also atchiue such virtues, as be needful for
thee. Again forasmuch as this our temporal life is thrall to many
infirmities, and in fine to dint of death, (the port perforce, we must all of
us pass by) for this cause have I herto annexed two Chapters, wherein is
showed thee, in what sort thou must govern thy self, in time of sickness,
when it shall please God therewith to visit thee, as also how thou ought to
behave thee in a transe and hour of death, when our Lord through his good
providence, shall think meet to bring thee thither. This have I thought and
deemed sufficient for thee, that, if of the giver of all goodness, thou have
received a good will and desire to amend thy life, and to live like a true
Christian, thou may by perusing this pamplet, learn how to attain thine
Intent, and to have a firm trust and confidence to attain eternal life the
only end whereto thou wast created:

It remains now that for the conclusion, and knitting up of this little
work, I admonish thee, beseech thee, and exhort thee, as much as I can and may
possibly, that if thou haste once laid hand to the plough, and to exercise thy
self in divine service, taking Luke. 9.
the rules and aduices which in this treatise are prescribed thee, for thy
guide and government; that in no wise thou look back again, nor let not thy
self by any trouble and toiles, which may cross thee in this life, be
overcome and vanquished. And if at any time it so chanced, as well it may do
eftsoons by reason of lets and hindrances, thou should be for some time
forced to intermitte thine ordinary and wonted exercises, be not any deal
dismaide therewith, but when this time of trouble is once over shot, renew
again thy course and follow Mark. 13. Mat. 24. Luke 22. Apoc. 16.
it, as if thou hadest never failed perseuering till the end, as is needful
if thou mind to attain the crown, and to win everlasting happiness. For in
doing thus I dare on the behalf of our Lord Jesus christ, assure thee, that
this perseverance shall ease thy pain, that pincheth at first; and look how
much the more thou do persevere; and so much more comfort, help, consolation
and heavenly light shall thou receive of his most bountiful liberallity. See
therefore thou content not thy self with once reading over of this treatise,
but read it eftsoons over, for so it is most expedient.

For So Much as the things that are here in treated of, since they be the rulers
and remembrances, which thou ought in spiritual life, to level and guide
thy works by, it behooves at all times to read them, when thou purposest to
practice them. For besides that, the bare reading, shall be a laudable and good
exercise for thee, and serve as a part of prayer, the reiterating and
frequentation of reading, shall help thee to learn by heart, what in action
thou art bound to execute, and so may thou afterward exercise thee in each
point with much more facillity, and less a do a great deal. And therefore
albeit this little labor may profit each one that with a good, and godly
intent will vouchsafe to read it, yet was it principally intended for the
simple, and more ignorant sort, and for that cause have I thought good to annex
here, in the end such things, as many of them wotte not, and yet are bound to
know. Seeing that every artisan thinks it meet to know such things as
belong unto his art, how much more is a true Christian bound for to know,
what appertains to his profession? (an art boue all arts) and to be prepared
as the apostle Saint Peter says, to yeald account of yt he believes, and
hops, and what it behooves him to do: to live according to Gods will and
pleasure, and to obtain everlasting life withal. Wherefore for such as be in
this behalf blame worthy negligent, I have here set down such things, as
without danger of their own weldooing, they neither ought nor can be ignorant
of, that by reason of those notes and short remembrances, they may both
understand what they want, and learn it here commodiously. And as for the
texts, I have here set the^ forth, both in Latin and vulgar tongue, for every
one to learn them, as best shall like them, not respecting so much the words
as the substance and sap contained in the same.

Finis.
Faults escaped.
Fol. 12. lin. 23. for temptarions, read temptations. fol. 13. lin. 21. for
some read, read some. fol. 34 line 10, for patt, part. fol. 59. line. 20. for
sercuitie, security. fol. 59. line 24. for heart, heat. fol. 96, li. 1 for do
thou, thou do.

A brief meditation on the Lords prayer.
O our Father High in Creation, Sweet in love, Rich in possession.

Which art in Heaven. The spectacle of Eternity, The crown of Majesty, The
treasure of Felicity.

Hallowed be thy name. That it may be honey in our mouths, Melody in our
ears, Religion in our hearts.

Let thy kingdom come. Sweet without mixture, Quiet without trouble, Secure
without loss.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. That we may hate what thou
hate, Love what thou love, Fulfill all that thou likest.

A Meditation on the Lords prayer.
Give us this day our daily bread. Of doctrine. Of charity. Of life
everlasting.

Forgive us our trespasses. Done against thee. Against our neighbors. Against
our selves.

As we forgive the^ that trespass against us In their words. In their persons.
In their deeds.

Lead us not into temptation. Of the world. Of the flesh. Of the Devil.

But deliver us from evil. That is past. That is present. That is to come.

LEt dread of pain for sin in after time,
Let shame to see thy self ensnared so:
Let grief conceived for foul accursed crime,
Let hate of sin the worker of thy woe,
With dread, with shame, with grief, with hate enforce:
To deaw thy cheeks with tears of deep remorce.
So hate of sin shall cause Gods love to grow,
So grief shall harbor hope within thy heart:
So dread shall cause the flood of joy to flow,
So shame shall send sweet sollace to thy heart.
So love, so hope, so joy, so sollace sweet
Shall make thy soul in heavenly bliss to fleet.
Woe where such hate does no such love allure,
Woe where such grief makes no good hope proceed:
Woe where such dread does no such joy procure,
Woe where such shame does no such solace breed.
Woe where no hate, no grief, no dread, no shame,
Does neither love, hope, joy or sollace frame.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by Peter Short, for William Leake.


