(...) ^lect goes to my Lord Chancellor if he be at home, at his place, or
near unto it, with v. or vi. of the Aldermen, and Master Recorder with him, in
their violet Gowns, either by foot, or by water, as the dwelling place of the
Chancellor requires. The common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers, and
those that be at liberty atend on him.

The morrow after Michaelmas day for the Sheriffs going to Westminster. All
the Aldermen must be at the two Sheriffs houses in the morning at viii. of the
clock, in their Violet Gowns furred, and their Horses, without cloakes: but
my Lord, M. Recorder, and the two Sheriffs must be in their scarlet gowns
furred, and their cloakes borne to Westminster with them, and so ride to the
Guild Hall, and from thence to the Vintree, there taking Barge, landing at
Westminster bridge, and in the Hal put on their clokes, and so go up to the
Exchequer: and there the two new Sheriffs be presented, and the old sworn to
their account.

Then they put off their clokes, and take barge, landing again at the Vintry,
and there take horse, and my Lord rides to the eldest Sheriff to dinner, M.
Recorder and the Sheriffs riding next my Lord, the two Sheriffs carrying two
white rods in their hands, and their henchmen going after them.

The order for Simon and Iudes day. The old Mayor shall have so many of the
Aldermen as Dine with him, come to his place at viii of the Clock in the
morning in their Violet gowns furred, with their violet Clokes furred, and
horses: and the Sheriffs to fetch him to the Hall, and there tarry in the
council Chamber, until the new Mayor comes, and the rest of the aldermen
come, with the company of either of the Lords before them: and after they
have bin together a certain space, come forth into the Orphans Court, and put
on their furred clokes, and go to the Husting Court, and there being set in
order, the common Crier makes proclamation, commanding every man to keep
silence.

Then M. towne-Clearke gives him his Oath, and when he has taken his oath,
the old Lord arises, and gives the new Lord his place, the old Lord taking
the new Lords place: and then Ma. Chamberlain delivers first to him the
scepter, next the keys of the common seal: lastly, the seal of the office of
the Maioraltie, after M. Swordbearer gives him the Sword. Then they arise and
put off their clokes, and the old L. rides home with the new Lord to his
place, and there leaves him, and as many of the aldermen as Dine with him. And
the old Lord with the rest of the aldermen ride to his place, the sword borne
before him, and so after dinner, the aldermen depart home at their pleasure.

On the morrow after Simon and Iudes day, for my Lord going to take his Oath at
Westminster. A Velvet Whood.
All the aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my new Lord at viii of the clock, in
their scarlet gowns Furred, and their cloakes borne with them, and their
horses, and so ride to the Guildhal, and the Bachelors and the Livery of my
Lords company before him.

But the old Lord rides from his own place to the Hall alone, Whood.
having no Officers to wait upon him, but the common Hunt, as a Gentleman Usher
going, and the common Huntsman, Velvet Whoodes for both Majors.
and those officers that be at liberty, with his own men following him, and
so tarrieth at the hall.

And after they be come al together, they take their horse and ride to the
Vintree, and there take barge to westminster bridge.

And after they be landed, the Lord Mayor and the aldermen, put on their
Cloakes within the Palace, and go round about the Hall, making courtesy in the
Hall, and so up the Exchequer, to be sworn. Then after the oath taken in the
Exchequer, come down again, and go first to the Kings bench, then to the
common place, and so put off their clokes, and go about the Kings Tomb in
Westminster Abbey, and then take barge again: and being Landed, rides to the
Guildhall to dinner, and all the Companies of this City with him: and at their
coming into the hall, the new Lord Mayor with ii. of the ancient Aldermen, M.
Recorder, and the Sheriffs, go up to my Lords table to bid them welcome, and
likewise all the other guests there, and from thence to the Lady Maioresse
table, and so come out to the Gentlewomens table, and to the Judges, and so
from thence my said new Lord Mayor goes into the Chamberlaines office, where
he dineth, and the old Lord Mayor at their first coming into the hall, goes
up to the high table in the Hustings, and there keeps the state for that
feast. And after the hall is almost served of the second, then the new L. Mayor
goes with Master Recorder, and those aldermen that dine with him, to bid the
old Lord and all the guests in the hall welcome. Then after dinner goes to
Paul's with all the Companies waiting before my Lord.

For going to Paul's on all Saints day, Christmas day, Twelfth day, and
Candlemas day. All the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my Lords place in
their scarlet Gowns Furred, A Velvet Whood. All Saints day is the last day
that the old L. ^ideth with ^or the new.
and their cloakes and horses, and from thence ride to the Guild Hall, my Lords
Company, and the Batchelers before him, and there hears Evening Prayer: and
when prayer is done they ride to Paul's, and there both the new L. Mayor and the
old put on their Clokes, and go up to the Quire, and there hear the Sermon,
which done, they go about the Church, and there put off their cloakes where
they were put on. Then they take their horses again, and the aldermen bring my
Lord home, and then they have spice bread and hypocrasse, and so take their
leave of my lord.

Upon S. Thomas day. The Lord Mayor and every alderman is to sit in his ward in
his violet gown and cloak furred.

For Sunday after Christmas holy days. My Lord and the aldermen must be in
their violet gowns without their clokes, to the end to hear the sermon.

For Monday after Twelfth day. My Lord and the aldermen meet at the Guilde-hall
at eight of the clock in the morning in their scarlet gowns furred, and their
clokes furred, without horse, to receive of their wards their Indentures of
the warmot Enquest, and for the swearing of the Constables and Scauengers.

For good Friday. My Lord and the aldermen meet at Paul's Cross, at one of the
clock, to hear the sermon in their pewke gowns, and without their Chains
and Tippets.

For Monday and Tuesday in Easter week. All the aldermen and Sheriffs come
unto my Lords place before eight of the clock to breakfast, Whood for my Lord.
in their scarlet gowns furred, and their cloakes and horses: and after
breakefast, take their horses, and ride to the Spittle, and there put on their
clokes, and so sit down in order to hear the sermon, which done, ride homeward
in order till they come to the Pumpe within Bishopsgate, and there so many of
the Aldermen as do dine with the Sheriffs, take their leave of my L. and the
rest go home with him.

For Wednesday in Easter week. Like as before in the other 2 days, but that my
Lord and the Aldermen must be in their violet gowns and suitable cloakes.

For low Sunday. All the aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at Paul's
school in their scarlet gowns furred without their clokes, or horse, to hear
the Sermon.

For Monday and Tuesday in Whitson week. If my Lords pleasure be to go.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen must meet with my L. at Paul's in their scarlet
Gowns, without cloakes, to hear the Sermon.

For going to Paul's the first Sunday of every Term. All the aldermen meet my
Lord and the Sheriffs at Paul's, in their scarlet gowns furred, or lined,
without Clokes or horse, as the time of the year requires, when the Term
begins.

For the election of the Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament. All the
aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at Guildhal, at nine of the clock in
their Violet Gowns and their clokes, furred or lyned, as the time of the
year, when they shall be chosen requires and sits in the Hustings Court
while the Commons choose them. The order is, that they must choose Master
Recorder for one of their Knights, and one gray cloak for the other, and two
commoners for the Burgesses, which done they depart.

For the election of master Chamberlain and Bridge Masters, if any of them
depart within the year. My Lord and the aldermen sits in the Hustings
Court, while they be chosen, in their Viole^ gowns, without their cloaks, and
do not remove until the election be done.

The use of my Lords cloak. Beginning upon Michaelmas Eve.
From Michaelmas to Whitsontide, Violet Furred, and from whitsontide to
Michaelmas scarlet lined.

The Lord Mayor and thos^ Knights that have born the office of Maioralty, ought
to have their cloakes furred with Gray Amiss: and those aldermen that have not
been Majors, are to have their cloakes furred with Calabre.

And likewise such as have been Majors, are to have their cloakes lyned with
changeable Taffatie, and the rest are to have them lined with green Taffaty.

For the burial of Aldermen. The aldermen must be in their Violet gowns, but
they that have of their friends black gowns.

And if any alderman dies, master Sword Bearer, is to have a black Gown, or
xxxiii. s. iiii d. in money: and if he gives my Lord a black Gown, Master
Swordbearer must have another, or xl. s in money, the price thereof: and so
carry the Sword in black before my Lord.

Master Chamberlain is not t^ wear his Tippet, but when m^ L. Mayor, or my
masters the Aldermen wear either Scarlet o^ Violet.

For the Orphans Court. My L. and the aldermen com^ unto the Guildhall in their
viole^ gowns, without cloakes, but m^ Lord Mayor must have his cloak^ on.

Which Court the common Cri^^ warns.

The four Pleaders, the Cham^berlaine, Towne-clarke, common Sergeant, ii.
Judges of the Sheriffs Court, the Secondaries under Chamberlain and Bridge
masters are to attend my Lord a^ his house, before his going abroa^ upon all
festival times and general days.

FINIS.

