HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon (of the House of Stuart)
blazon of the City of London
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guild Hall, Civitatis London, tricesimo
primo die Augusti, anno Regni Domini nostri, JACOBI nunc Regis, Angliae,
Franciae, and Hibern. Fidei Defensor. etc. decimo nono. Coram Francisco Jones
milite, Majore Civitat. London, Heanagio Finch Armigero, Recordatore ejusdem
Civitat Thoma Bennet milite, Thoma Low milite Johanne Leman (...) Alexandro,
Prescot, Martino Lumley, Willielmo Gore, Willielmo Holliday, Hugone Hamarsly,
Jacobo Cambel, and Nicholas Aldermannis, ac Edwardo Allen, and Roberto Ducy
Aldermannis, and Vicecomit^ (...) Civitatis (...) majori part Commun^ (...)
Civitatis existent. assemblant. etc.
FOrasmuch as the due execution of the place and Office of Constable has of
late been more neglected then heretofore, as well for that by reason that men
of ability and the better sort, are for small fines discharged of that service:
as also for that such as are Constables are not ready to be found, and many
times turn the services which themselves ought to perform, to inferior
ministers.

For reformation whereof, and for the better direction and ordering of the
election of Constables within this City and Liberties, and Suburbs thereof, It
is ordained and enacted by the right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the right
Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in this common Council
assembled, and by the authority of the same, That no person shall be from
henceforth freed or exempted from bearing the Office of Constable within any
the precincts of this City, or the Liberties thereof, if he be thereunto duly
elected (except Strangers born, and such as by the Laws of this Land ought to
be exempted bu^ shall undergo and serve the same Office in his own person, and
shall be sworn for the due execution thereof. Nevertheless, if any person
hereafter to be chosen Constable, shall after such Oath taken, make known to
the Alderman of the Ward, within which precinct he shall be chosen Constable
for the time being, or to the Deputy or Deputies, and common Council of the
same Ward, That he is not able to execute the same, in regard of age, or
weakness of body, or by reason of some necessary affairs beyond the Seas, or
other occasion: and that they, or the greater number of them, shall allow of
such cause: If then such person so elected shall procure a fit person, such as
shall be allowed and approved of by such Alderman, Deputy or Deputies, and
common Council of such Ward, or the greater number of them, to serve him, and
as his deputy in the Office of Constable, then such person so to be procured,
shall be admitted and sworn to serve the same place and Office.

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Constable or
his deputy to be allowed and sworn as aforesaid, shall watch in his own
person as his turn or watch night comes about, and shall not put in his
place the Beadle of the Ward, or some one of the watchmen, as has too
commonly been accustomed, except such Constable or deputy shall be then sick,
or hindered or let by any reasonable or lawful cause.

And for that the Ward of Faringdon without is very spacious, and many
dangerous and suspected persons inhabit, lodge, and resort thither, It is
therefore ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the sixteen
Constables of the said Ward, shall by two in a night (within their precincts)
watch in several places of the said ward, viz: One on S. Sepulchers side, and
the other on Fleetstreet side. And that the several Deputies of the several
wards may have, from the Chamber of London, printed Pasports to be delivered to
the several Constables or their deputies, as cause shall require, to pass and
send away such rogues and vagrants as appear not to be incorrigible, from
Constable to Constable, to the proper place of their abode, according to the
Statute in that behalf made.

And forasmuch as the City generally is more full of able and sufficient men to
bear the Office of Constable, then has been heretofore, It is therefore
enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Constable hereafter be chosen
and sworn, and shall have served one year in precincts where they have
formerly been chosen two years before, and that there be sufficient choice of
men in the precincts, Then the Inhabitants within the several precincts may
have liberty at their pleasure, to excuse and dispense with that Constable for
his second years service: provided, That he pay toward the necessary charges
and service of the ward, in any extraordinary accidents or occasions, such
sum of money, and not exceeding five pounds, as by the Alderman, his Deputy,
and common Council men or the greater part of them shall be appointed, the
same to be paid to to the Churchwardens of the Parish wherein the said
precinct is, to the use of the ward, and to be called for by the Alderman, or
his Deputy or Deputies, when occasion shall require.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That such persons as now
serve, or hereafter shall be chosen to the place of common Council men, in the
several wards of this City and Liberties thereof, if they shall alter their
habitations from the ward wherein they were so chosen to another ward, that
then they shall not be chosen in that second Ward, to inferior place of
Scauenger or Constable, nor be returned by the Wardmote Inquest, to be of the
grand or petty Iuries, if there shall be other able and sufficient men to serve
and supply those places and services; any thing heretofore used to the contrary
notwithstanding.

G^^ ^a^^ the King
Printed by Robert Young, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, Anno Dom.
1640.


