An order of prayer and thanksgiving, for the preservation of her Majesty and
the Realm, from the traitorous and bloody practices of the Pope, and his
adherents: to be used at times appointed in the Preface.

Ecclesiastes 10. Wish the King no evil in thy thought, and speak no hurt of
the rich in thy privy chamber: for the birds of the air shall carry thy
voice, and with their feathers shall they bewray thy words.

Eodem. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall therein himself, and who so breaks
down the hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

Proverbs 21. There is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no
counsel against the Lord.

The horse is prepared for the day of battle: but the Lord gives victory.

Published by authority.

Imprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1586.

royal blazon of Elizabeth I, surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English
lion and the Welsh dragon HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

The Preface.
COnsidering the great peace and quietness, wherewith God has continually
blessed this Noble Realm of England, since the time that it pleased him by the
hand of her Majesty to have the sincere truth of the Gospel of our Savior
planted among us, and his great blessings of all sorts, wherewith he has
enriched us, and given us our hearts desires to our comfort, and the
admiration of our neighbors round about us: It were too great impiety, not
to show our selves daily thankful for these great mercies, and not to crave
the continuance of Gods holy hand over us. But weighing further, with what
peril of violent death, by means of wicked popish practices, our gracious
sovereign has maintained the truth, which we profess, upon whose life (next
under God) the profession of the same in this land, and the continuance of the
lives and welfare of us her faithful Subjects, do depend: and knowing that
the Almighty most miraculously has preserved her highness, from al treason
hitherto intended against her most Royal person, and kept our blood from
flowing in every street like water, our Cities and Houses from sacking, and
the whole Land from extreme ruin: with what zeal ought every one of us to be
inflamed to praise the Lord, for the detecting and confusion of our secret
foes, who^ his right hand has bruised? and how ought we to detest that
doctrine which brings forth so traitorous and bloody fruits? Moses and
Miriam, and the whole host of Israel had never greater cause to sing unto the
Lord for the overthrow of Pharao and his army: nor Debora and Barac for the
victory of Sisera: nor Judith, and the Citizens of Bethulia for the end of
Holofernes and the flight of his host, then we have for the wonderful
preservation of the life of our most gracious Queen, and thereby for our own
safety. Wherefore, let every one that fears the Lord among us, not only
with the Jews in the book of Esther yearly hold a memorial with great joy
of so notable deliverance, but daily in common assemblies have this great
goodness in remembrance, and pray that God will not suffer the light of Israel
to be quenched, but that it will still please him to preserve his anointed
from the peril of the sword, and to give her long and happy days, to the
glory of his Name, to the comfort of his chosen, and to the stablishing of his
truth in this Land, till the coming of his Son in the clouds of Heaven.
That this may the better be accomplished, this little book is by authority
published, daily to be used in Common prayer, where any is, or otherwise at
such times as are by law appointed for Divine Service: viz, the Prayer, and
one or two of the Psalms following, according to the discretion of the
Minister, and likewise to be adjoined unto those prayers, that are already of
late set forth, for turning from us the scarsitie of victual, and war, at
such times as they are appointed to be read in the Church.

decorative device whose focal point is a Tudor rose
The prayer.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, we thy virworthie creatures most humbly
do confess, that we are not able with our tongues to utter, nor in our
hearts to conceive, the exceeding measure of thine infinite goodness in this
latter age showed to this Noble Realm, in that thou (O Lord) have in most
dangerous times, by thy providence, beyond expectation of man, preserved ye
Noble person of our now Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by thy grace: First,
according to her right to come to this kingdom and Royal seat of her Noble
Father, and next, by her (being therein established) to deliver us thy people,
that were as captives to Babylon, out of thraldom of ye enemies of thy true
Church, and to restore us again to the free fruition of ye Gospel of thy Son
our Savior Christ. For ye enjoying whereof now many years, we do confess
and acknowledge, that when we by our daily unthankfulness, and by our sinful
lives, have most justly provoked thee to withdraw these thy favors from us,
thou (O Lord) with thy mighty power did strengthen thy servant our most
gracious Queen, constantly against the threatenings of the greatest of the
world to persist, in maintenance of us in all manner of prosperity, peace and
wealth: But most singularly in a peaceable freedom, to enjoy the blessed
benefits of thy holy word against the mighty enemies of thy Church daily
conspiring against this Realm, and especially against the Royal person of our
gracious Queen, thy humble servant and true handmayden, whose estate being in
the opinion of a number of wicked persons many times in great and secret
dangers, yet thou (O Lord) of thy heavenly goodness have always preserved
and defended her by many miraculous means, and (as we have good cause to
think) by many other means, and at many other times, then to us are yet
known. But yet, besides thy preservation of her person from the attempt of two
wicked persons, that suffered for the same of late years, even now in this
present time, when we had no thought, yt any would have minded such a wicked
fact, we have fully felt the power of thy miraculous goodness, by the
discovery of sundry wicked Conspirators, very secretly bent and combyned to
make desperate attempts against her life, and against the peaceable estate of
thy Church and this Realm. The stay whereof only has proceeded (good Lord)
by thy most continual, tender and fatherly care over her, in the strange
discovering, and the manner of apprehending of the malefactors, being many, and
not by the wit or strength of any worldly creature. For otherwise then by thy
special goodness, we do now perceive, and that with trembling of our hearts,
that she could not at sundry times have escaped the danger of violent death,
wickedly and resolutely against her intended, so that we may truly say with
David in his Psalm, That all men that see it, shall say, This has God done:
for they shall perceive, that it is his work. Wherefore we now thy humble
creatures, acknowledging our unworthiness of these great graces, beseech thee
(O Lord) that thou will without regard of our former unthankfulness, and
contempt of thy word, show thy mercy to us, and continue thy blessings over
us, that we may, for these so unspeakable benefits, be more thankful then
we have been, not only in words, or as hearers, but in deeds also, as doers
of thy will, according to the direction of thy holy word. And that it would
please thee still to hold this thy blessed hand over our Queen Elizabeth, and
preserve her Royal person from all manner of open or secret perils, whereby
her years may be prolonged, as far as it may please thee to grant, by the
course of Nature, for the maintenance of thy glory, and of thy son Jesus
Christ, and of his Gospel, and for continuance of us thy people her natural
subjects in the due fear and service of thee, and in our natural obedience to
her, whereby we and our posterity may still enjoy such peace, as we have had
these many years, under her Majesty's government, far above any like
example in any age by past. Grant this (O heavenly Father) for Jesus Christ's
sake, thy only son our Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all
honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

The first Psalm.
We rejoice in thy strength, Psalm. 21.
(O Lord:) exceeding glad are we of thy salvation.

Thou have given us our hearts desire: and have not denied the request of our
lips.

Thou have prevented us with the blessings of goodness: and have made us glad
with the joy of thy countenance.

For the ungodly had drawn out the sword, and had bended their bow: Psalm. 37.
to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right
conversation.

Their sword shall go through their own heart: and their bow shall be broken.

All thine enemies shall feel thine hand: Psalm. 22.
thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee.

Thou shall make them like a fiery Oven in the time of thy wrath: the Lord
shall destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the
children of men.

For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device, as they
are not able to perform.

Therefore have thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow have thou
made ready against the face of them.

Thy mercy (O Lord) reaches unto the heavens: Psalm. 36.
and thy faithfulness unto the clouds.

Thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains: and thy judgments are
like the great deep.

Thou Lord do save both man and beast: how excellent is thy mercy, O Lord?
and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

O continue forth thy loving kindness unto them that know thee: and thy
righteousness unto them that are true of heart.

O let not the foot of pride come against us: and let not the hand of the
ungodly cast us down.

Withdraw not thou thy iuercie from us, O Lord: let thy loving kindness and
thy truth always preserve us.

But let the ungodly perish, let thine enemies consume as the fat of lambs:
yea, even as the smoke let them consume away.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture shall give thee thanks
for ever: Psalm. 79.
and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to generation.

The second Psalm.
Deliver us, O Lord, Psalm. 14.
from the evil men: and preserve us from the wicked men.

Which imagine mischief in their hearts: and stir up strife all the day long.

The proud have laid a snare for us, and spread a net abroad with cords: yea,
and set trappes in our ways.

They courage themselves in mischief: Psalm. 6a.
and common among themselves, how they may lay snares, and they say no man shall
see them.

They imagine wickedness and practice it: that they keep secret among
themselves, every man in the deep of his heart.

But let not the ungodly have their desire, Psalm. 140.
O Lord: let not their mischievous imaginations prosper, least they be too
proud.

Thou, O Lord, shall soddenly shoot at them with a swift arrowe: that they
shall be wounded

And all men that see it, shall say, This has God done: for they shall
perceive, that it is his work.

Praised be the Lord daily, Psalm. 68.
even the God that helps us: and powers his benefits upon us.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes Salvation: God is the Lord by
whom we escape death.

He has given victory unto us: Psalm. 144.
and has delivered David his servant from the peril of the sword.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: Psalm. 107.
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

That they would exalt him in the congregation of the people: and praise him in
the seat of the Elders.

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out
his works with gladness.

Then shall our sons grow up as the young plants: and our daughters be as the
polished corners of the Temple.

Our garners shall be full and plenteous with all manner of store: our sheep
shall bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

Our Oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall be no decay: no leading into
captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea blessed are the people, that
have the Lord for their God.

The third Psalm.
WE will magnify thee, Psalm. 145.
O God our King: and will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee: and praise thy name forever and
ever.

Great is the Lord, and marvelous worthy to be praised: there is no end of
his greatness.

One generation shall praise thy works unto another: and declare thy power.

The memorial of thine abundant kindness shall be showed: and men shall sing
of thy righteousness.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works.

The Lord is night unto all that call upon him: yea, all such as call upon him
faithfully.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will help them.

The Lord preserves all them that love him: but scatters abroad all the
ungodly.

Though we walk in the midst of trouble, Psalm. 138.
yet shall he refresh us: he shall stretche forth his hand upon the
furiousness of our enemies, and his right hand shall save us.

The snares of death compassed us round about: Psalm. 116.
and the pains of hell gate hold upon us.

But thou Lord, have delivered our souls from death: our eyes from tears, and
our feet from falling.

Thou have turned our heaviness into joy: Psalm. 30.
thou have put off our sackcloth, and girded us with gladness.

Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceassing: O God, we
will give thanks unto thee for ever.

The fourth Psalm.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: Psalm. 106.
and his mercy endures for ever.

Who can express the noble acts of the Lord: or show forth all his praise?

For we have sinned with our Fathers: we have done amiss and dealt wickedly.

We have not regarded thy wonders, nor kept thy great goodness in remembrance:
but have been disobedient to thy holy will.

Nevertheless, he has helped us for his names sake: that he might make his
power to be known.

For lo, the ungodly had bent their bow, Psalm. 11.
and made ready their arrows within the quiver: that they might privily shoot
at us.

Many Oxen purposed to have come about us: Psalm. 22.
fat Bulls of Basan intended to close us in on every side.

They gaped upon us with their mouths: as it were ramping and roaring Lions.

The counsel of the wicked laid siege against us: they set trappes in our
ways.

They had privily laid their net to destroy us without a cause: yea, Psalm. 35.
even without a cause had they made a pit for our soul.

But thou (O Lord) have delivered our soul from the sword: Psalm. 22.
thy darling from the power of the dog.

Thou have saved us from ye Lions mouth: thou have heard us from amongst the
horns of the Unicorns.

A sudden destruction is come upon them unawares, Psalm. 35.
and the net that they had laid privily, has catched themselves: they are
fallen into their our own mischief.

They are confounded and put to shame, that did seek after our soul: they are
turned back and put to confusion that imagined mischief for us.

Wherefore praise the Lord, Psalm. 22.
ye that fear him: magnify him al ye of the seed of Jacob, and fear him
all ye of the seed of Israel.

For he has not despised, nor abhorred the low estate of the poor: he has
not hid his face from him, but when we called unto him, he heard us.

Therefore our praise is of thee in the great Congregation: our vows will we
perform in the sight of them that fear him.

Glory be to the Father, to the son etc.

Hereunto also may be added at the discretion of the Minister the lxxxiii. the
Ciii. and the Cxxiiii. Psalms. And for the first Lesson, when he shall see
occasion, he may read one of these Chapters: Viz. Exodus xv. Judge. v. Esther.
vi. vii. viii. and ix.


