AN ORDER OF PRAYER AND THANKES-GIVING, FOR the preservation of the Queens
Majesty's life and salfetie: to be used of the Preachers and Ministers of the
Dioces of Winchester.

With a short extract of William Parries voluntary confession, written with
his own hand.

Imprinted at London by Ralfe Newberie.

The Direction how to use this Order
FIRST, where any Preacher is, the next Sunday after the receiving of this
order, he shall make a Sermon of the authority and Majesty of Princes,
according to the word of God, and how straight duty of obedience is required
of all good and Christian subjects, and what a grievous and heinous thing it is
both before God and man traiterouslie to seek their destruction, and the
shedding of their blood, which are the Anointed of God, set up by him to be the
Ministers of his justice and mercy to his people. In the end of which Sermon,
he shall set forth and declare the brief notes of the confession of the wicked
purpose conceived of late by Doctor Parry, to have murdered the Queens
Majesty, animated thereunto by the Pope and his Cardinals, as you may see it
set down here following. Last of all he shall say the prayer here prescribed
for that purpose, and desire the people to lift up their hearts to God together
with him. After the prayer, there shall be song or said the xxj. Psalm, or
some other Psalm to the like effect.

A SHORT EXTRACT OF A VOLVNTARIE CONfession, made by William Parrie, written
with his own hand, the (...) of February. 1584.
WILLIAM Parrie Doctor of Law, carieng an offensive mind against the state,
by reason of his conviction, in a trial of life and death at Nevvgate, for the
attempting of the murdering of one Hugh Hare, for the which notvvithstanding
he received her Majesty's most gracious pardon, and thereupon departing the
Realm, in the year 1582. for that he conceived no hope of advancement here,
because he was in his own opinion a pretended Catholic, and had not in 22.
years received the Communion. At his being in the parts beyond the seas,
having first reconciled himself to the Church of Rome at Paris, and then at
Millain, conceaud with himself a mean (as he pretended) to relieve the
Catholics of this Realm, which was by killing of the Queens Majesty.

And nothing stayed him in this concept, but only to be assured in conscience,
that it was lavvfull and meritorious, and before the execution thereof to
receive absolution from the Pope. For his assurance, or rather settling of his
conscience herein, he received full satisfaction, first from an old Jesuit in
Venice: next from the Popes Ambassador, resident there, then from other good
fathers (as he terms them) in Lions and Paris, and lastly was encouraged to
proceed therein by the Nuntio to the Pope, reside^t at Paris, who promised
him, after he assented to that wicked enterprise, to recommend him to the
altar, and also to procure the like to be done generally through Paris, which
was accordingly performed in general terms, by Recommending of one that had
taken upon him to do some dangerous enterprise, tending greatly to the
advancement of the Catholic religion. The said Nuntio did also conueigh the
said Parries letters directed to the Pope, and to the Cardinal by the which he
did signify to them his full resolution to proceed in his enterprise, and for
his better success in the same, prayed his benediction Apostolical, whereunto
answer was made by letters written in Rome by the Cardinal dated the last of
January, which he received from him when the Court lay at Greenevvich, in
March last.

The tenor of those letters was a commendation of his enterprise, an
allowance thereof, an absolution in his holiness name of all his sins, and a
request to go forvvard in it, in the name of God.

Which letters confirmed his resolution to kill her Majesty, and made it
clear in his conscience, that it was lavvfull and meritorious, as he sets
down in his said confession. Whereupon he insinuated himself into the
Court, and by ways and means sought to win credit, etc. to the intent to
bring his wicked purpose to pass. Which at sondrie times he had done, had
not the gracious providence of God, by strange means, interrupted his purpose.

A Prayer for the Queen.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, with humble hearts we confess that we
are not hable, either by tongue to utter, or in mind to conceive, the exceeding
measure of thine infinite goodness and mercy toward us wretched sinners, and
toward this our noble Realm and natural country. Not many years since, when
for our unthankful receiving of the heavenly light and truth of thy Gospel, we
were justly cast into thraldom and misery, and thrust again under the
kingdom of darkness, so that our consciences lay groaning under the heavy
burdens of error, superstition, and idolatry, even then, even then O Lord,
thou did vouchesafe of thy great goodness, not only without our desert, but
far beyond our hope and expectation, to preserve for us thy faithful servant
our gracious prince and Sovereign Queen Elisabeth, and to save her from the
jaws of the cruel Tigers, that then sought to suck her blood and to work to
us perpetual tirannie, and bondage of conscience. This thou did, O
gracious Lord undoubtedly, that she might be to this thy church of England, a
sweet and tender nurse, and that this realm under her happy government,
might be a blessed Sanctuary, and place of refuge for thy poor afflicted
Saints, in these dangerous days persecuted and troubled in many contreyes for
the profession of thy Gospel: yea, and that this our benefit, and their
comfort might be the more assured, thy divine providence from time to time has
many ways mightily and miraculously preserved and kept her from the craiftie,
cruel and traitorous devises of her bloody adversaries, and the deadly
enemies of thy Gospel, which with barberous cruelty have sought to extinguish
the light thereof, by sheading her Majesty's most innocent blood: but this thy
gracious goodness and mighty providence, never so apparently showed it self,
at any one time, as even within these few days, when a traitorous subject,
never injured or greened by her, but sundry times helped, relieved, and
countenanced far above his state and worthiness had of long time retained a
wicked and devilish purpose, and often sought occasion and opportunity to lay
violent hands upon her royal person, and to have murdered her. But still the
vigilant eye of thy blessed providence did either prevent him by some sudden
interruption of his endeavor, or by the Majesty of her person and princely
behavior toward him, did strike him so abashed: that he could not
perform his conceived bloody purpose. And at the last this wretched villainy
was by thy means disclosed, and his own tunge opened to confess his
detestable and wicked intent. For this thy inestimable goodness toward us (O
heavenly Father) with humble hearts and minds we thank thee: and bless thy
name for ever and ever. For assuredly if thou had not been now on our side
(as the Prophet David says) the whole fluds and waves of wickedness had
overwhelmed us, and we had been sunk into the bottomeles pit of infinite and
unspeakable miseries. We beseech thee therefore (O Lord) that thou will bless
us so with thy grace, that we may be rightly and truly thankful to thee:
that is, not in word only, but in deed also, daily studieng to frame our
lives according to the direction of thy holy word, which thou have sent among
us: And that her Majesty thus feeling the mighty hand of thy providence
fighting for her salfetie, may more boldly and constantly with an heroical
spirit stand in the protection and defense of thy blessed Church, which by thy
word thou have planted among us. And lastly that ye cruel spirits of
Antichrist that seek the subversion of the Gospel, may by the hand of thy
justice, feel what it is to set to sale for money the innocent blood of thine
anointed Princes, which thou have prepared and set up, to be the nursses and
protectors of thy truth: Grant this O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ's sake
thy only son our Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given
all honor and glory: world without end.


