illustrated border framing title page Matthew the evangelist, represented by a
winged man or an angel royal blazon or coat of arms John the evangelist,
represented by an eagle emblematic representation of Faith with sword and
shield FIDES
emblematic representation of Humility with a lamb HVMILITAS
Mark the evangelist, represented by a lion Luke the evangelist, represented by
an ox A FORM of Prayer to be publicly used in Churches, during this
unseasonable Weather, and abundance of Rain.

Set forth by Authority.

HOSEA 5.15. In their affliction they will seek me early.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1613.



A form of Prayer to be publicly used in Churches, during this unseasonable
weather, and abundance of Rain.
At Morning Prayer after the 95. Psalm, O come let us sing unto the Lord, etc.
Read the 105. Psalm, and the 10. Psalm.

For the first Lesson, the 6. and 7. of Genesis.

For the second Lesson, the 17. of Luke, or the 24. of Matthew.

After the Collect, O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God,
etc. Say this Prayer.

MOst gracious God, and merciful Father, forasmuch as we are taught by thy
holy Word, Leuit. 26.
that thou will break the pride of our power, bring upon us burning Agues to
consume us, make our hearts heavy; And that thou will suffer us to sow our
Seed in vain, and break the staff of our Bread, when we despise thy sacred
Ordinances, and walk stubbornly against thee: in that thou have partly
visited, partly threatened us with thy dreadful punishments, thou do thereby
graciously admonish us of our manifold sins, and wilful transgressions
against thy most sacred Majesty. We have a long time securely stumbred in the
senselessenes of our iniquities, and it has pleased thy Gracious goodness by
these thy chastisements mercifully to awaken us. Wherefore we see the
grieuousnes of our impiety, and beholding it, our hearts are filled with
sorrow, and our eyes are watered with penitent tears. We do humbly acknowledge
and confess our great unthankfulness for the continual multiplying of thy
blessings upon us. For the more thou have heaped on us thy Mercies, the more
have we, wretched sinners, by our transgressions provoked thy Justice: and
therefore most justly have thou laid thy heavy hand upon us, in smiting some
of us with a lingering sickness, and by unseasonable wether menacing dearth,
and further scarcity. These extraordinary afflictions, are infallible signs
of thy wrath and anger kindled against us, yet because we know thee not only
to be a just, and righteous, but likewise a merciful God in thy dear Son
Jesus Christ; through his mediation, we presume to prostrate our selves before
thy Throne of grace, most humbly beseeching thy Fatherly goodness to wash away
the unclean pollutions of our sins with his precious blood, and to cast them
into the bottom of the Sea, that their loud cry may no longer pearce the
Heavens, and thence pluck down thine irefull indignation upon us: but we
being received into thy favor, and henceforth walking in piety, obedience,
temperance, sobriety, and bringing forth fruits worthy of amendment of life,
may to our comfort enjoy thy temporal blessings in this life, and in that
which is to come eternal glory, for Christ his sake our only Advocate and
Mediator. Amen.

Then read the Letanie, where, after the Prayer, Almighty and everlasting God,
which only workest great marueiles, etc. say this Prayer.
O Most Omnipotent Creator, who by thine infinite power have framed the whole
world, and all things therein contained, of nothing, and out of thine
unspeakable love toward man have placed glorious lights in the firmament to
shine upon the earth, and to be signs for Seasons, for Days, and for Years,
and have appointed the Heavens to shed down fruitful showers, and the earth to
bring forth every green and living thing in due season: for this thine
inestimable goodness we are incessantly bound to dedicate our selves, our
souls and bodies, yea, all our thoughts, and endeavors to be perpetual
sacrifices of thankfulness unto thy holy Name, and evermore to praise and
magnify the riches of thy mercy toward us. But we, like a disobedient, and
sinful people, have bin altogether unmindful of thy great clemency, and made
thy gracious blessings instruments of horrible ingratitude against thy divine
Majesty: abusing them to pride, wantonness, surfeiting, drunkenness, and all
kind of riot and excess; wherewith we most justly have provoked thy fearful
wrath, and indignation against us. And as we by the multitude of our sins
have frequently violated thy divine ordinances, and Statutes, so have thou of
late commanded the heavens, the earth, and the times and seasons depending on
them, to break and alter their course, so to punish us for these sins, with
an unusual disease, and with fear of future famine, if out of thy bottomless
mercy thou stretchest not out thy saving hand to stop the stream of thy fury,
like to be powered down upon us. We have sinned, we have sinned, O Lord, and in
the immoderate showers, unnatural seasons of the year, and long lingering
sickness continuing yet amongst us, We have felt the weight of thy heavy
displeasure. But now from the ground of our hearts, We grieve and are sorry, We
mourn, and lament for these our transgressions: Lord then let thy heavy
displeasure cease, and be no longer angry with us. We do unfeignedly repent us
of all our iniquities, and through the gracious assistance of thy holy spirit
do most seriously purpose to turn unto thee: Lord then turn unto us, and let
the light of thy countenance shine upon us, in vouchsafing unto us moderate
showers, healthful seasons, and the fruitful increase of the earth. Bless us
O Lord, that we may bless thee; give unto us strength, and health, that we may
praise thy saving health: grant unto us seasonable weather, and with it, thy
plenty and abundance, that so we may be taught to magnify the abundance of
thy mercies through all generations, to our everlasting salvation, and thy
endless honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

At Evening prayer, Read the 78. Psalm, in stead of the Psalms appointed for
the day.

For the first Lesson, read Deuteronomy. 28.

For the second Lesson, read the Epistle of S. Jude, or, 1. Cor. 10. unto the
end of the thirteenth verse.

Before the Collect, Lighten our darkness, etc. read this Prayer.

Eternal God, whose perfect holiness being every where present, cannot suffer
the wilful increase of wickedness and sin: and therefore by thy manifest and
visible judgments thou declarest unto grievous sinners, both the greatness of
thine indignation, and the weightinesse of their offenses: we miserable and
wretched sinners, being admonished by the apparent signs of thy displeasure
now upon us, into what danger we have brought our selves by sin, do here
humbly confess our multiplied transgressions against thy divine Majesty,
earnestly desiring thy singular goodness, to respect us with the eye of mercy,
and to grant unto us unfeigned repentance, that so the course of thy deserved
anger may be stayed against us. O Lord, we behold and acknowledge thy hand
pouring upon us this chastisement of immoderate rain and waters: and the long
continuance of this unseasonable weather, has wrought upon our consciences
(which are not so sensible as they should be) at length to be affrighted, and
to call upon thee. Save us therefore, O God, that we perish not: deliver us out
of the mire, that we sink not: preserve us, O Lord, for the waters are come
in, even unto the souls of many of us. Let not the water flood drown us,
neither let the deep swallow us up: and let not the pit shut her mouth upon
us. We confess, O God, that iniquity does abound, that our sundry pollutions
have cried even to the heavens for all thy storms and tempests to fall upon
us: but we beseech thee rather of thy infinite mercy to wash us in the merits
of thy Son Jesus Christ our Savior: for his sake accept our tears, our
sighs, and hearty sorrow for our sins, and by the assistance of thy gracious
spirit, make good our true purposes of amendment of life: Let thy blessed Name
rather be glorified in our salvation. Father of mercies, and God of al
consolation, look upon the sign of thy Covenant in the clouds, and as thou
sauedst thy people in the red sea; so we beseech thee to restrain thy showers,
and to deliver us from this plague of waters. Furthermore, O heavenly Father,
we do feel that wrath is already gone out from thee, that thou do threaten
us with scarcity, and dearth: by these intemperate ouerflowings to make our
fruitful land barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein: we
earnestly desire thee to forgive the ignorances of the people, that the
multitude of poor may not perish whom thou have created. Our manifold sins,
O Lord, do deserve, that thou should visit us with all thy rods: As thou
have scourged us heretofore with pestilence, and do now weaken us with a new
disease: so thou may more deservedly consume us with scarcity, and waste us
with death: but we fly unto the Sanctuary of thy loving kindness, and the
multitude of thy mercies toward us, which exceed the variety of our sins.
Remember thy wonted favors to this land, how long thou have given us moderate
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with joy and
gladness. Which blessings although we have abused like prodigal sons, by
riot, and intemperance, by forgetfulness and unthankfulness, yet for thy goodness
receive us when we turn unto thee by the intercession of thy only obedient
Son, and grant us the continuance of these temporal benefits, where of we
have necessity in this life, until we have passed to immortality, and
things eternal in the life to come, by the grace and mercy of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns, etc.

Or this. already the ordinary custom of the season, and by the ouerflowing of
rain and waters do threaten to wash away the strength and fatnes of the
earth; to send scarcity and want amongst us: We humbly beseech thee to turn
away this thy deserved displeasure from us, to consider our infirmities, and
upon our sorrow and repentance to alter the sentence of severity, if any be
gone out against us, and that for thy tender mercy in Christ Jesus, who lives
and reigns, etc.


