decorative border with (top center) royal coat of arms; (left side) Faith
bearing sword and shield; (right side) Humility holding lamb; and symbols of
the four evangelists: (top left) angel representing Matthew, (top right) eagle
representing John, (bottom left) winged lion representing Mark, (bottom right)
winged bull representing Luke HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE FIDES

HVMILITAS



CERTAIN Prayers collected out of a form of godly Meditations, set forth by
her Majesty's authority in the great Mortality, in the fifth year of her
Highness reign, and most necessary to be used at this time in the like
present visitation of Gods heavy hand for our manifold sins, and commended
unto the Ministers and people of London, by the Reverend Father in God, John
Bishop of London, etc. July. 1593.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

The Preface.
WE be taught by many and sundry examples of holy Scriptures, that upon
occasion of particular punishments, afflictions, and perils, which God of his
most just judgment has sometimes sent among his people, to show his wrath
against sin, and to call his people to repentance, and to the redress of
their lives, the godly have been provoked and stirred up to more feruencie and
diligence in prayer, fasting, and alms deeds, to a more deep consideration
of their consciences, to ponder their unthankfulness and forgetfulness of
Gods merciful benefits toward them, with craving of pardon for the time
past, and to ask his assistance for the time to come, to live more godly, and
so to be defended and delivered from all further perils and dangers. 2. Sam. 24
So king David in the time of plague and pestilence which ensued upon his vain
numbering of the people, prayed unto God with wonderful feruencie, confessing
his fault, desiring God to spare the people, and rather to turn his ire to
himward, who had chiefly offended in that transgression. 2. Chro. 2 2. Reg. 19
The like was done by the virtuous kings Iosaphat and Ezechias in their
distress of wars and foreine invasions. So did Judith and Hester fall to
humble prayers in like perils of their people. So did Daniel in his captivity,
Judith 9.2 Ester 14.1 Dan. 9 4.
and many other more in their troubles. Now therefore calling to mind, that
God has been provoked by us to visit us at this present with the plague and
other grievous diseases, and partly also with trouble of wars: It has been
thought meet to excite and stir up all godly people within this Realm, to
pray earnestly and heartily to God, to turn away his deserved wrath from us,
and to restore us as well to the health of our bodies by the wholesomnesse of
the air, as also to godly and profitable peace and quietness. And although it
is every Christian man's duty, of his own devotion to pray at all times: yet
for that the corrupt nature of man is so slothful and negligent in this his
duty, he has need by often and sundry means to be stirred up and put in
remembrance of his duty, For the effectual accomplishment whereof, it is
ordered and appointed, as follows.

First, that all Curates and Pastors, shall exhort their Parishioners to
endeavor themselves to come unto the Church, with so many of their families as
may be spared from their necessary business, (having yet a prudent respect in
such assemblies to keep the sick from the whole, in places where the plague
reigns) and they to resort, not only on Sundays and holy days: but also on
Wednesdayes and Fridayes, during the time of these present afflictions,
exhorting them, there reverently and godly to behave themselves, and with
penitent hearts to pray unto God to turn these plagues from us, which we
through our unthankfulness and sinful life, have deserved.

Secondly, that the said Curates shall then distinctly, and plainly read the
general Confession appointed in the book of Service, and the Absolution
following.

Then shall begin the Lords prayer. Our Father etc.

Then likewise shall follow. O Lord open thou our lips. etc.

Then shall be said this Psalm following. Psalm. 95. O come, let us sing unto
the Lord, etc.

Afterward, some three of these Psalms. Psalm. 6.39.51.90 91.94.130.

Then for the first Lesson one of these Chapters. 2. Samuel. 24. 2. Reg. 24.

Then Te Deum shall follow.

Then for the second Lesson one of these Chapters. Matthew. 6.24.

Then Benedictus, with the other accustomed prayers.

Then the Letanie. And after the end of these Collectes, O God merciful
Father, etc. We humbly beseech thee, etc. O Lord our heavenly Father,
almighty and everlasting God, etc. O almighty God, King of all Kings, etc.
Almighty God, which in thy wrath, etc. shall follow this Psalm: one verse
said by the Minister, and an other by the people.

The Psalm to be said in the Letanie: Whereof one verse to be said of the
Minister, and another by the people, Clarke or Clarks.
Psalm. 95.
O Come, let us humble our selves, and fall down before the Lord, with
reverence and fear.



Ose. 6.2.
Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smitten us,
and he shall heal us.

Acts. 3.
Let us repent, and turn from our wickedness: and our sins shall be forgiven us.

Iona. 3.
Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will pardon
us, and we shall not perish.

Psalm. 51.
For we knowledge our faults: and our sins be ever before us.

Lament. 3.
We have sore provoked thine anger, O Lord, thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy
heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us.



Esa. 64.
Thou have in thine indignation stricken us with grievous sickness, and by and
by we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

Judith. 8. Job 11. Sap. 11.
Indeed we acknowledge, that all punishments are less then our deseruings: but
yet of thy mercy Lord correct us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help: neither is thy
goodness abated, that thou will not hear.

Esa. 65.
Thou have promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us: whilst
we yet speak thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call upon thee
shall be despised.

Tob. 3. Job 5. Ose. 6.
For thou art the only Lord, who woundest, and do heal again, who killest,
and reuiuest, bring even to hell, and bring back again.

^^^l. 22.
Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them.



Psalm. 6.
O Lord, rebuke not us in thine indignation: neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

Psalm. 25.
O remember not the sins and offenses of our youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon us, O Lord, for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us for our bones
are vexed.

Baruc. 3. Iona. 2.
And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our souls, we
remember thee, and we cry unto thee: hear Lord, and have mercy.

Dan. 9.
For thine own sake, and for thy holy name sake, incline thine ear, and
hear, O merciful Lord.



Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness: and cleanse us from our sins.



Make us clean hearts, O God: and renew a right spirit within us.



Psalm. 79.
So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy Pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

After this Psalm, shall be said by the Curate or Minister openly and with an
high voice, one of these three prayers following. At which time, the people
shall devoutly give ear, and shall both with mind and speech to themselves,
assent to the same prayers humbly upon their knees.

A Prayer, containing also a Confession of sins. Which is to be said after
the Letany, as well upon Sundays, as Wednesdaies and Fridaies.
O Almighty, most just and merciful God, we here acknowledge our selves most
unworthy to lift up our eyes unto heaven, for our conscience does accuse us,
and our sins do reprove us. We know also that thou, Lord, being a just
judge, must needs punish the sins of them which transgress thy Law. And
when we consider and examine all our whole life, we find nothing in our
selves, that deserves any other thing but eternal damnation. But because
thou, O Lord, of thy unspeakable mercy, have commanded us in all our
necessities to call only upon thee, and have also promised, that thou will
hear our Prayers, not for any our desert (which is none) but for the merits
of thy Son our only Savior Jesus Christ, whom thou have ordained to be our
only Mediator and Intercessour. We lay away all confidence in man, and do
flee to the throne of thy only mercy, by the intercession of thy only Son
our Savior Jesus Christ. And first of all, we do most lament and bewail,
from the bottom of our hearts, our unkindness and unthankfulness toward
thee our Lord, considering that besides those thy benefits which we enjoy as
thy creatures, common with all mankind, thou have bestowed many and singular
special benefits upon us, which we are not able in heart to conceive, much
less in words worthily to express. Thou have called us to the knowledge of
thy Gospel. Thou have released us from the hard servitude of Satan. Thou
have delivered us from all horrible and execrable Idolatry, wherein we were
utterly drowned, and have brought us into the most clear and comfortable light
of thy blessed word, by the which we are taught how to serve and honor thee,
and how to live orderly with our neighbors in truth and verity. But we
most unmindful in times of prosperity, of these thy great benefits, have
neglected thy commandments, have abused the knowledge of thy Gospel, and have
followed our carnal liberty, and served our own lusts, and through our
sinful life, have not worshipped and honored thee as we ought to have done.
And now, O Lord, being even compelled with thy correction, we do most
humbly confess that we have sinned, and have most grievously offended thee by
many and sundry ways. And if thou, O Lord, would now being provoked with
our disobedience, so deal with us as thou might, and as we have deserved,
there remains nothing else to be looked for, but universal and continual
plagues in this world, and hereafter eternal death and damnation, both of our
bodies and of our souls. For if we should excuse our selves, our own
consciences would accuse us before thee, and our own disobedience and
wickedness would bear witness against us. Yea, even thy plagues and
punishments which thou do now lay upon us in sundry places, do teach us
to acknowledge our sins. For seeing, O Lord, that thou art just, yea even
justice it self, thou punishest no people without desert. Yea, even at this
present O Lord, we see thy hand terribly stretched out to plague us, and
punish us. But although thou should punish us more grievously then thou have
done, and for one plague send an hundredth, if thou should power upon us all
those thy testimonies of thy most just wrath, which in times passed thou
powredst on thy own chosen people of Israel: yet should thou do us no
wrong, neither could we deny but we had justly deserved the same. But yet, O
merciful Lord, thou art our God, and we nothing but dust and ashes: Thou art
our creator, and we the work of thy hands: Thou art our pastor, we are thy
flock: Thou art our redeemer, and we thy people redeemed: Thou art our
heavenly father, we are thy children, wherefore punish us not, O Lord, in
thine anger, but chasten us in thy mercy. Regard not the horror of our sins,
but the repentance thereof: Perfect that work which thou have begun in us,
that the whole world may know, that thou art our God and merciful deliverer.
Thy people of Israel often times offended thee, and thou most justly afflicted
them: but as often as they returned to thee, thou did receive them to mercy.
And though their sins were never so great, yet thou always turnedst away thy
wrath from them, and the punishment prepared for them, and that for thy
covenant sake, which thou made with thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Thou have made the same covenant with us (O heavenly Father) or rather a
covenant of more excellency and efficacy, and that namely through the
mediation of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Savior, with whose most precious
blood, it pleased thee that this covenant should be, as it were, written,
sealed, and confirmed. Wherefore, O heavenly Father, we now casting away all
confidence in our selves or any other creature, do flee to this most holy
covenant and Testament, wherein our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, once offered
himself a sacrifice for us on the cross, has reconciled us to thee forever.
Look therefore, O merciful God, not upon the sins which we continually
commit: but upon our mediator and peace maker Jesus Christ, that by his
intercession thy wrath may be pacified, and we again by thy fatherly
countenance relieved and comforted. Receive us also into thy heavenly defense,
and govern us by thy holy spirit, to frame in us a newenesse of life, therein
to laud and magnify thy blessed name for ever, and to live every of us
according to the several state of life whereunto thou Lord have ordained us
in godly fear and trembling before thee. And although we are unworthy (O
heavenly father) by means of our former foul life, to crave any thing of
thee: yet because thou have commanded us to pray for all men, we most humbly
here upon our knees beseech thee, save and defend thy holy Church, be
merciful, O Lord to all commonweals, Countries, Princes, and Magistrates,
and especially to this our Realm, and to our most gracious Queen and
governor Queen Elizabeth, increase the number of godly Ministers, indue them
with thy grace to be found faithful and prudent in their office, defend the
Queens Majesty's Council, and all that be in authority under her, or that
serve in any place by her commandment for this Realm. We commend also to thy
fatherly mercy, all those that be in poverty, exyle, imprisonment, sickness, or
any other kind of adversity, and namely those whom thy hand now has touched
with any contagious and dangerous sickness, which we beseech thee, O Lord,
of thy mercy (when thy blessed will is) to remove from us, and in the mean
time, grant us grace and true repentance, steadfast faith, and constant
patience, that whether we live or dye, we may always continue thine, and ever
praise thy holy name, and be brought to the fruition of thy Godhead. Grant us
these and all other our humble petitions (O merciful father) for thy dear
sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or else in the stead of the other, this prayer may be used, and so to use the
one one day, the other an other.
O Eternal and everliving God, most merciful Father, which of thy great long
suffering and patience, have hitherto suffered and borne with us most miserable
offenders, who have so long strayed out of thy way, and broken all thy laws
and commandments, and have, neither by thy manifold benefits bestowed upon
us unworthy and unthankful sinners, nor by the boyce of thy servants and
preachers, by continual threatninges out of thy holy word, hitherto ben moved,
either as thy children, of love to return unto thee our most gracious Father,
either for fear of thy judgments, as humble and lowely servants to turn
from our wickedness. And therefore, most righteous Judge, thy patience being
(as it were) overcome at the last, with our obstinate unrepentance, thou best
most justly executed those thy terrible threats now partly upon us, by plaging
us so (with most dreadful and deadly sickness) whereby great multitudes of us
are daily afflicted and consumed. We beseech thee, O merciful Father, that in
thy wrath thou will remember thy old great merices, and to correct us in thy
judgments, and not in thy just anger, lest we be all consumed and brought to
naught. Look not so much upon us and our deseruings, O most righteous judge,
to take just vengeance on our sins: but rather remember thy infinite mercies,
O most merciful Father, promised to us by thy dearly beloved Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, for whose sake, and in whose name, we do earnestly and
humbly crave mercy and forgiveness of our sins, and deliverance from this
horrible sickness, being thy just punishment and plague for the same. And as
thy holy word does testify, that thy people of all ages, being justly plaged
for their sins, and yet in their distress unfeignedly turning unto thee, and
suing for thy mercy, obtained the same: So like wise we most worthily now
afflicted with grievous and dreadful plagues for our iniquites, pray thee, O
merciful Father, to grant us thy heavenly grace, that we may like wife both
truly and unfeignedly repent, and obtain thy mercy, and deliverance from the
same, which we beseech thee, O Father of al mercies, and God of all
consolation, to grant us, for the same Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior,
Mediator and advocate. Amen.

This prayer may be said every third day.
IT had been the best for us, O most righteous Judge, and our most merciful
Father, that in our wealths and quietness, and in the midst of thy manifold
benefits continually bestowed upon us most unworthy sinners, we had of love
hearkened to thy voice, and turned unto thee our most loving and gracious
father: For in so doing, we had done the parts of good and obedient loving
children. It had also been well, if at thy dreadful threats out of thy holy
word continually pronounced unto us by thy servants our preachers, we had of
fear, as corrigible servants, turned from our wickedness. But alas we have
showed hitherto our selves toward thee, neither as loving children (O most
merciful father) neither as tolerable servants, O Lord most mighty. Wherefore
now we feel thy heavy wrath, O most righteous Judge, justly punishing us with
grievous and deadly sickness and plagues, we do now confess and acknowledge,
and to our most just punishment do find in deed, that to be most true, which
we have so often heard threatened to us out of thy holy scriptures, the word
of thy eternal verity: that thou art the same unchangeable God, of the same
justice that thou will, and of the same power that thou can punish the like
wickedness and obstinacy of us impenitent sinners in these days, as thou
have done in all ages heretofore. But the same thy holy Scriptures, the word of
thy truth do also testify, that thy strength is not shortened, but that thou
can, neither thy goodness abated, but that thou will, help those that in
their distress do flee unto thy mercies, and that thou art the same God of
all, rich in mercy toward all that call upon thy name, and that thou do
not intend to destroy us utterly, but fatherly to correct us, who have pity
upon us, even when thou do scourge us, as by thy said holy word, thy
gracious promises, and the examples of thy saints in thy holy Scriptures
expressed for our comfort, thou have assured us. Grant us, O most merciful
father, that we fall not into the uttermost of all mischiefs, to become worse
under thy scourge, but that this thy rod may by thy heavenly grace, speedily
work in us the fruit and effect of true repentance, unfeigned turning and
converting unto thee, and perfect amendment of our whole lives, that as we
through our impenitencie, do now most worthily feel thy justice punishing
us: so by this thy correction, we may also feel the sweet comfort of thy
mercies, graciously pardoning our sins, and pitifully releasing these
grievous punishments, and dreadful plagues. This we crave at thy hands (O
most merciful father) for thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Order for the Fast.
THe godly use of Fasting, in time of common calamity, as war, famine,
pestilence, and also when any weighty matter was in hand, for the Church and
common wealth, is evident in holy Scriptures. Wherefore it is necessary in so
contagious time of sickness, and troublous state of the Realm, (our sins
procuring justly the wrath of God) that following the godly examples of king
Iosaphat, 2. Chron. 20. Jonas 3.
and the King of Niniue, with others, fasting with prayer be commended to the
people by their preachers, exhorting their audience chiefly to these points.

1 That this fasting be every week upon the Wednesday. 2 All persons between
the age of 16. and 60. years, (sick folks, and harvest laborers, or the
like excepted) shall on that day eat but one competent and moderate meal:
abseruing sobriety of diet, without superfuitie of riotous fare, respecting
necessity, and not voluptuousnes. 3 The quantity being but sufficient, and
without delicacie, it is indifferent to eat flesh or fish. Let no public
order be contemned herein, nor dissimulation with God committed, pretending
like hypocrites godly abstinence, but doing nothing less. 4 The wealthier
sort, are to be moved to give of that they spare, and are besides able enough
to give, to relieve the poor, considering the misery and distress, of a
number of poor miserable souls, either staruing for lack of food, or being
sick with eating unseasonable meats. 5 This day the people are to be warned,
to forbear bodily working, and common buying, and sessing, and to be exercised
in holy prayer, devout study, reading the Scriptures, instructing their
children, reforming all their family: especially to take heed they spend it
not in plays, pastimes, idleness, haunting Tauernes, lascivious wantonness,
surfeiting, and drunkenness, for which sins (the proper sins of this
nation) the heavy displeasure, and wrath of God is time upon us. 6 Admonition
is here lastly to be given, that on the fasting day they have but one Sermon
at Morning Prayer, and the same not above an hour long, to avoid the
inconvenience that may grow by abuse of fasting: as son make it a faction
more then religion, and other with overmuch wearines and tediousness, keep
the people a whole day together, which in this time of contagion, is more
dangerous in so thick and close assemblies of the multitudes. God give us
grace to repent, and in his mercy turn away his punishments from us. Amen.

