The Articles of the charge of the VVardmote Enquest.
Peace.
Ye shall swear, that ye shall truly enquire, if the peace of the King our
Sovereign Lord be not kept as it ought to be, and in whose default, and by
whom it is broken or disturbed.

Frank pledge.
2 Also if any man be received within this ward, but if he be under free
pledge, that is to say, be sworn before the Alderman at his Court, or else
before the said Alderman between this and the Monday next after the Feast of
the Epiphany next coming.

Out-lawes, Traitors, Felons, etc.
3 Also if there dwell any man within the ward, that is outlawed, or indicted of
treason or felony, or be any receiver of Traitors or Felons.

Thames.
4 Also ye shall enquire and truly present all the offenses and defaults done
by any person or persons within the River of Thames, according to the intent
and purport of an Act made by our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth in
his high Court of Parliament, and also of diverse other things ordained by Act
of common Council of this City, for the redress and amendment of the said
River, which as now is in great decay and ruin, and will be in short time past
all remedy, if high and substantial provision, and help be not had with all
speed and diligence possible, as more plainly appears in the said Act of
Parliament, and the said Act of common Council of this City.

Congregations.
5 Also if any manner person make congregation, or be receiver or gatherer of
evil companies.

Ryotor, Barator.
6 Also if any man be a common riotor, or a barator walking by nightertaile
without light, against the rule and custom of this City.

Peace, hue and cry.
7 Also if there be any man within this ward, that will not help, aid, ne
succor the Constables, Bedle, and other ministers of this City in keeping of
the peace, and arrest the evil doers with rearing of hue and cry.

Hucksters, receivers of Apprentices, Artificers, etc.
8 Also if there be any Huckster of Ale or Beer, that commonly uses to
receive and Apprentices, servants artificers or laborers, that commonly use to
play at the dice, cards, or tables, contrary to the form of the Statute in
that case ordained and provided.

Inholder, Tauerner, Victualler.
9 Also if there be any Inholder, Tauerner, Brewer, Huckster, or other
Victualler, that hold open their houses after the hour limited by the Mayor.

Curfue.
10 Also, if any parish Clerk ring the bell, called the Curfue bell, after
Curfue rungen at the Churches of Bow, Barking Church, S. Brides and S. Giles
without Cripplegate.

Bawdes, maintainers of quarrels, etc.
11 Also, ye shall inquire if any putour that is to say, man-bawd or
woman-bawd, common hazerdours, contectour, maintainer of quarrels,
champertours, or embracers of Enquests, or other common misdoers, be dwelling
within this ward, and present their names.

Strumpet, Adulterer, witch, Scold.
12 Also, if any bawd, common strumpet, common adulterer, witch, or common
scold be dwelling within this ward.

Hot-house.
13 Also, if there be any house, wherein is kept and holden any hot-house, or
sweating-house, for ease and health of men, to the which be resorting or
conversant any strumpets, or women of evil name or fame; or if there be any
hot-house or sweating ordained for women, to the which is any common recourse
of young men, or of other persons of evil fame and suspect conditions.

14 Also, if there be any such persons, that keep or hold any such hot-houses,
either for men or women, and have found no surety to the Chamberlain for their
good and honest behavior, according to the Laws of this City, and lodge any
manner person by night, contrary to the ordinance thereof made, by the which he
or they shall forfeit twenty pounds to the Chamber, if they do the contrary.

Thames, ditches, streets, etc.
15 Also, if any manner of person, cast or lay dung, ordure, rubbish, seacole
dust, rushes, or any other thing noyant, in the River of Thames, Walbrooke,
Fleet, or other ditches of this City, or in the open streets, ways, or lanes
within this City.

Channel.
16 Also, if any person, after a great rain falls, or at any other time
sweep any dung, ordure, rubbish, rushes, seacole dust, or any other thing
noyant, down into the channel of any street or lane, whereby the common
course there is let, and the same things noyant driven thereby down into the
said water of Thames.

Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Duckes, etc.
17 Also, if any manner person nourish Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Duckes, or any Beasts
within this ward, to the grieuance and disease of their neighbors.

Usurer.
18 Also, if any Usurers or false Cheuesancers be dwelling within this ward.

Persons indicted in one Ward, flying into another.
19 Also, where before this time it is ordained and enacted, as hereafter
follows. Item, for to eschew the evils of misgouerned persons, that daily
when they be indicted in one ward, fly into another: It is ordained by the
Mayor and Aldermen, that as soon as a man or woman suspect, first do come to
dwell within any house, in any ward within the City, the Constables, Bedles,
or other officers of the same, shall be charged by their oaths at the general
Court, to enquire and epsy from whence they come. And if they find by their
own confession, or by the record of any of the Books of any Alderman of the
City, that they be indicted or cast of evil and noyous life, and will not
find surety for their good abearing and honest governance to the Alderman for
the time being, that then they shall not dwell there from thenceforth but shall
be warned to avoid within three or four days or more or less after, as it
shall be seeene to the Aldermen of the ward for the said time being; and that
the Landlord that lets the house, or his Attorney, shall be also warned to
make them to avoid out of his house aforesaid, within the time limited by the
Alderman. And if they be found there after the time, that then not only the
said dishonest persons shall have imprisonment of their bodies, after the
discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen; but also the said Landlords, letters of
the said houses, shall forfeit to the Guildhall, as much as they should have
had for ietting of the said house, or should be paid by the year, if the said
persons or other had dwelled in the said house.

Coloring foreign goods.
20 Also, if any Freeman against his oath made, conceal, cover, or color the
goods of Forreiners, by the which the King may in any wise lose, or the
Franchises of this City be imblemished.

Foreign buying and selling.
21 Also, if any Foreign buy or sell with any other Foreign within this
City, or Suburbs thereof, any goods or merchandises, the same goods or
merchandises be forthwith forfeit to the use of the Comminaltie of this City.

Freemen not resident.
22 Also, if every Freeman, which receives or takes the benefit, and
enjoys the Franchises of this City, be continually dwelling out of this
City, and has not, ne will not (after his oath made) be at scot and lot, nor
partner to the charges of this City, for the worship of the same City, when
he is duly required.

Orphans, Wards, Marriages.
23 Also, if any man conceal the goods of Orphans of this City, of whom the
ward and marriage of right belongs to the Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Officers.
24 And if any Officer by color of his office, do extortion to any man, or be
maintainer of quarrels against right, or take carriage, or arrest victual
unduly.

Boatmen. Ferriour.
25 Also, if any Boatman or Ferriour be dwelling in the ward, that takes more
for Boat-manage or Ferriage than is ordained.

Purprestures, Pent-house, Ietties, etc.
26 Also, it any man make Purprestures, that is to say, incroach or take of the
common ground of this City, by land or by water, as in walls, pales, stales
stoupes, grieces, or doors of cellars, or in any other like, within the ward,
or if any porch, penthouse, or ietty be too low, in letting of men that ride
beside, or carts that go thereforth.

Pent-houses, stalles, etc.
27 Also, that pentises and ietties be at the least of the height of nine
foot, and that the stales be not but of two foot and an half in breadth, and
to be flexible or moveable, that is to say, to hang by Iemewes or Garnets, so
that they may be taken up and let down.

Way, watercourse.
28 Also, if any common way, or common course of water be foreclosed or let,
that it may not have his course as it was wont, to the annoyance of the Ward
and by whom it is done.

Pauements.
29 Also, if any pauement be defective, or too high in one place, and too low
in another, to the disturbance of riders, and goers thereby, and carts that go
thereupon.

Regrators, Forestallers.
30 Also, if any Regrator or Forestaller of victual, or of any other
merchandises which should come to this City to be sold, be dwelling within
this ward. A Regrator is as much as to say, as he that buyeth up all the
victual or merchandises, or the most part thereof when it is come to the
City, or the Suburbs of the same, of a low price, and then afterward sells
it at his own pleasure, at a high and excessive price. A Forestaller is he
that goes out of the City, and meets with the victual or merchandise by
the way, coming to the City to be sold, and there buyeth it, both these be
called in the Law, Inimici publici patriae, which is to say, Open enemies to a
country.

Price of victual.
31 Also, if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Look, or
seller of victual, do sell victual at unreasonable prices.

Hay.
32 Also, if any Hostler sell hay, oats, or prouender at excessive prices,
taking greater gain thereby, than is reasonable and lawful.

Victuals unwholesome. Price.
33 Also, if any victualler sell any victuals not couenable, or unwholesome for
man's body, or else dearer than is proclaimed by the Mayor.

Measures unsealed.
34 Ye shall diligently make search and inquiry, whether there be any Vintner,
Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, or any other person or persons whatsoever within
your ward, that do use or keep in his or their house or houses, any Cans,
stone-pots, or other measures which be unsealed, and by law not allowed to sell
beer or ale thereby, and whether they do sell any of their best beer or ale,
above a penny a quart: or any small ale or beer, above a half penny a quart:
and whether any of them do sell by any measure not sealed. If there be any
such, you shall seize them, and send them to the Guildhall, to the
Chamberlaines office, and present their names and faults by Indenture, so often
as there shall be any occasion so to do.

Weights and Measures.
35 Ye shall also make search in the shops and houses of all the Chandlers and
of all others, which sell by weight or measure dwelling within your ward, and
see that their scales be not one heavier than the other, and that their weights
and measures, as well bushels as lesser measures, as well those that they sell
seacoles by (which ought to be heaped) that they be in breadth according to the
new standard, sealed as all others: and that all yards and else, that they be
their just lengths and sealed, that the poor and other his Majesty's subjects
be not deceived. And further if any do buy by one weight or measure, and sell
by others. And if in your search, you find any false Weights, Measures, or
Scales, ye shall seize them, and send them to the Guildhall to the
Chamberlain. And you shall also do the like if you shall find any that do
sell any thing by Venice weights, contrary to the law and his Majesty's
proclamations, present their names and faults.

Inholder, Browne-Baker.
36 Also, if any Inholder bake any bread to sell within his house, and if any
Baker of sour bread, bake white bread to sell, or mark not his bread or else
take more for the baking than three pence for a bushel.

House, Tyle.
37 Also, ye shall inquire, if any house be covered otherwise than with tyle,
stone, lead, for peril of fire.

Leper, Beggar.
38 Also, if any Leper, Faitour, or mighty beggar be dwelling within this ward.

Bakers, Brewers, Fire.
39 Also, if any Baker or Brewer bake or brew with straw, or any other thing
which is perilous for fire.

Painted visage.
40 Also, if any man go with painted visage.

Candlelight.
41 Also, if there be any man that hangs not out a Lantern with a candle
therein burning, after the usage, according to the commandment thereupon given.

42 Also, if any person bring, or cause to be brought to this City, or the
Liberties thereof, to be sold, or sell, offer or put to sale, any Tallwood,
Billets, Faggots, or other firewood, not being of the full assize which the
same ought to hold.

Wood, Country.
43 Also, if any Freeman of this City, use to resort into the countries near
to this City, and there to engrosse and buy up much Billet, Tallwood, Faggot,
Tosard, or other firewood, and convey the same by water unto this City, and
there lay it upon their wharfes and other places, and so keep it till they may
sell it at high and excessive prices, at their own wills.

44 Also, if any Woodmonger, or any other, sell any Billets or other firewood,
above the price set by the Lord Mayor.

Cheese, Butter.
45 Also, if any Citizen of this City by himself, or any other person for
him, or to his use, use to resort into the country, and there buy and engrosse
great quantity of cheese and butter, as well barrelled as otherwise, and after
convey it by water or otherwise to this City to be sold at dear and excessive
prices.

Freemen to ^ew their ^opics.
46 Also, for as much as it is thought, that diverse and many persons dwelling
within the Liberties of this City, daily occupy as Freemen, whereas indeed
they be none, nor never were admitted into the Liberties of this City, Ye
shall therefore require every such person dwelling within this ward, whom ye
shall suspect of the same, to show you the Copy of his Freedom, under the
seal of Office of the Chamberlain of the said City, and such as ye shall
find without their Copies, or deny to show their Copies, ye shall write and
present their names in your Indentures.

Melting tallow.
47 Also, you shall inquire and truly present all such persons as use melting
of tallow, contrary to an Act of common Council, in that case made and
provided.

Fire-presses.
48 Also, you shall truly present all persons which have or use any
Fire-presses within the said City, or Liberties of the same, for pressing or
dressing of nether stocks, woollen clothes, or other things.

49 Also, you shall inquire of all Armorers and other Artificers, using to
work in Metal, which have, or use any Reardorses, or any other places,
dangerous or perilous for fire.

Appraisers.
50 Also, if any have appraised any goods of any Freeman deceased, leaving
behind him any Orphan or Orphans, and the Appraisers not sworn before the Lord
Mayor, or the Aldermen of the ward.

Beam.
51 Also, if any Freeman buy any wares or merchandises vnweighed, which ought
to be weighed at the Kings Beam, of any stranger or foreine free of the
Liberties of this City, contrary to the Act of common Council in that case
made and provided.

Clothes.
52 Also, if any buy or sell any cloth or clothes in the house, shop,
warehouse, or other place of any Clothworker, or other person, against any
ordinance or custom of this City: or if any Cloth-worker or other do receive
or harbor any clothes before the same be brought to Blackwell-hall, contrary
to the ordinance made in that behalf.

Carmen.
53 Also, if any Carman take any money for carriage of any goods, wares, or
merchandises, above the rates ordained.

Building, divided houses. Inmates.
54 Also, if any make or cause to be made any new building or buildings, or
divide or cause to be divided any house or houses, or receive any Inmate or
Inmates, contrary to the Kings Majesty's Proclamation, or contrary to Law, or
any Statute of this Realm.

Hawkers.
55 Also, if any be dwelling within this ward, which do offer or put to sale
any wares or merchandises in the open streets or lanes of this City, or go
from house to house to sell the same, commonly called hawkers, contrary to the
Act made in that behalf.

Freedom.
56 Also, if any have couenously, fraudulently, or unduly obtained the
freedom of this City.

Collectors.
57 Also, if any Collector of Fifteenths or other duties for the public
service of the King or of this City, do retain in his hands any part of the
money collected to his own use.

Women receivers of servants.
58 Ye shall also inquire if there be dwelling within your ward any
woman-broker, such as resort to men's houses, demanding of their maid-seruants,
if they do like of their services: if not then they tell them they will help
them them to a better service, and so allure them to come from their Masters to
their houses, where they abide as boorders till they be provided for. In which
time it falls out, that by lewd young men that resort to those houses, they
be oftentimes made harlots to their utter undoing, and the great hurt of the
Commonwealth: wherefore if any such be, you shall present them, that order may
be taken for reformation.

Priuies.
59 Also, if any have or use any common Privy, having issue into any common
Sewer of the City.

Vagabonds.
60 And if any Constable, Beadle, or other Officer be negligent or remiss in
discharging his duty, touching the execution of the Statute made for
punishment of rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy beggars, or otherwise, and wherein
the default is.

Poor.
61 Also, if any to whom the execution of the Statute made for relief of the
poor does appertain, be remiss in discharging his duty touching the
execution of the same Statute, and wherein the default is.

Legacies.
62 Also, if any Executor or other person retain in his hands any Legacy,
sum of money, or other thing given to any charitable use.

Drunkard, Whoremonger, Sabbath, Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Secular priest,
Popish, Recusant, Conseners, etc.
63 Ye shall inquire whether there be within your ward, any common Drunkard,
Whoremonger, Blasphemer of Gods holy name prophaner of the Sabbath, Jesuit,
Seminary, or secular Priest, or any receiver, relieuer, or maintainer of any of
them, or any Popish Recusant, Cozener, or swaggering idle companion, such as
cannot give account how they live: if there be any such, you shall present
them, and the names of those that lodge them, or aid them.

64 Ye shall also inquire whether any person or persons do or shall say or
sing Mass within your ward, or be present at any Mass.

Mass, Roman catholic Religion.
65 Also, if any person or persons within your ward being evil affected, do
or shall extol the Roman Catholic Religion above the Religion professed and
established by the Kings Majesty's authority in England, or do, or shall
deprave the Religion now professed in this Realm by authority as above, which
may breed discord in the City, and dissension in the Commonwealth, ye shall
carefully present the same persons, and their offenses.

66 Also, if any person or persons that keeps horses in their houses, do lay
his or their stable dung, or such kind of stinking filth in any streets or
lanes of this City to the great annoyance of the people passing that way, and
do not lead his dung-cart at his Stable door, as he ought to do.

Assemble monthly.
67 You shall assemble your selves once every month, or oftener if need
require, so long as you shall continue of this Inquest, and present the
defaults which you shall find to be committed concerning any of the articles
of your charge, to the end due remedy may be speedily supplied, and the
offenders punished, as occasion shall require.

68 And in making your presentiments, your Clerk is carefully to write the
Christian name, surname, and Addition or calling of every offender, and the
name of the parish wherein the offense was committed, and some certain time
how long the offense has been continued; and in presenting any persons for
dividing houses or Inmates, to write the names and addition of the present
Landlord receiving the rents, and the names of the Tenants in possession; and
of the Inmate in any house; and also to write in the Margent on the side of
every presentment the name or names upon whose evidence you make such
presentment.

God save the King.
London printed by Robert Young, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


