I. L.

blazon of the City of London
By the Mayor.
A Proclamation for Reformation of abuses, in the Jail of Newgate.
WHereas of late, notorious Mutinies and Outrages have bin committed by the
Prisoners within the Jail of Newgate, which is conceived to grow through the
negligence of the Keepers, suffering their Prisoners to become drunk and
disordered, permitting them wine, Tobacco, excessive strong drink, gaming, and
resort of Women of lewd behavior. By reason of which liberty, dissolute and
lewd persons, who commit Thefts and Robberies, take a kind of comfort, and
gather heart in the said Jail, and are in some sort incited to commit
Fellonies, upon hope of the lewd Company, and such lewd Comforts as they find
in the said Jail. For Reformation whereof, and to prevent as well all manner
Oppression in the Gaolers, and licentiousness of Prisoners: and to the end
henceforth to take away all manner of hope in such as shall be thither sent for
offenses, that they shall not find such lewd and shameful comforts as they
have heretofore there found, and to the end, to contain the Prisoners within
a discipline, that Mutinies and Insolences may be prevented.

1. First, It is thought fit, ordered, and Commanded by the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen, That the Master of the same Jail, be attendant himself
upon the said Jail, and that the same be not Farmed out, directly, nor by any
manner cunning or indirect mean whatsoever.

2 Secondly, That the Jailer, Keepers, Servants, or under Officers, shall not
permit or suffer any Beer or Ale to be received or brought into the said
Jail or Prison, but only of the price of eight shillings the barrel, or of
four shillings the barrel, nor suffer the dissolute sort of Prisoners in the
Common jail, to have any wine at all to be brought unto them.

3 Thirdly, that there be a full Ale-quart of eight shillings Beer or Ale
sold for a penny, and so delivered to the Prisoners, and according to that
rate, pint or half pint: and the like measure of four shillings Beer or Ale
for a half penny: and that the Prisoners have Bread and all other Victuals
according to the assize, and at usual and common prizes, and that there be no
oppression or exaction for their beds or lodging.

4 Fourthly, that the Jailer, Keepers, Servants, or under Officers in the said
jail, shall not suffer the taking of Tobacco by the dissolute sort of
prisoners in the common jail: and to that end shall search and view all
whatsoever that shall be brought into the said prison for the use of any
prisoner there, that no Tobacco nor Tobacco-pipes, Candles, or other things to
fire their Tobacco be brought to them.

5 Fifthly, That the said Gaolers, keepers, servants, or under Officers, do
take such care, and use such diligence, that the men prisoners and women
prisoners be kept asunder, and not suffered to come together in any part of
the said prison, except it be at the time of divine Service, receiving of the
Sacrament, or hearing of Sermons.

6 Sixthly, that the said Jailer, keepers, servants, or under Officers, shall
not take any fee of any Prisoner committed for Felony, or suspicion of
Felony, nor of any person that shall have occasion to come or resort to them
or to any of them, to bring them meat, drink, or other needful provisions,
for, or in respect only of turning of the key, or opening the door for such
person bringing such provision to any prisoner.

7 Seventhly, That the said Jailer, keepers, Servants, or under Officers, shall
not suffer any woman to be with any man^ prisoner alone in the prison, but
only the Wife, Mother, Sister, or near kinswoman of such prisoner, and so
known to the keeper before she be admitted.

8 Eighthly, that the said jailer, keepers, servants, or under Officers, shall
take no Fees for, or in respect of release or ease of Irons, but such as at his
peril he may lawfully iustifye and auow.

9 Ninthly, that if any Prisoners mutiny, or be insolent, or shall harten or
give evil example to others, in stirring other prisoners in word or deed to
mutiny, that then such prisoner so offending, be laden with more Irons, and
that he be put into the Dungeon, or otherwise chastized in the discretion of
the Master keeper, so as the same chasticement tend not to the loss of use or
limb.

10 Tenthly, for avoiding quarrelles in the jail, that no prisoner be
permitted to play in the said jail, at Cards, Dice, or any other game
whatsoever.

11 Eleuenthly, Whereas there has been heretofore used a drunken manner of
Garnish in Wine or other strong drink, by all such prisoners as go to the
Masters side at their first commitment to Newgate: It is ordered and thought
fit that the same usage be utterly put down and disallowed, and to be
henceforth no more used.

12 Lastly, That the jailer nor any of the vnder-keepers do take above twelve
pence for any one times attendance with any Prisoner, when the same Prisoner is
by Commandment of any Justice of Peace to be brought before him.

The Jailer offending in any of the Premises, shall for the first offense
forfeyte and pay twenty pounds, and for the second offense forty pounds, and
for the third offense to lose his place, and to be for ever disabled to keep
that jail or any other jail, within the City of London, and the Liberties
thereof.

Dated at the Guildhall, the xxiij. day of September, in the year of our Lord
God, 1617.
Printed by William Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1617.


