Commune Concilium tentum die veneris primo die Iunij, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
octaui, etc. decimo octauo, in praesentia Iohannis Allen Maioris, Gulielmi
Butler militis, Iohannis Milborn militis, Johannes Mundy militis, Thomae Baldry
militis, Gulielmi Bailey militis, Thomae Semer militis, Iacobi Spencer militis,
Iohannis Rudstone, Radulphi Dodmer, Iohannis Brown, Nicholai Lambert, Stephani
Peacock, Iohannis Harding, Nicholai Iennings, Henrici Dacres, Iohannis Canulen,
and Christopheri Askew. Vic.
AT this Common Council, it is agreed, granted, ordained, and enacted, That if
hereafter any Freeman or Freewoman of this City, take any Apprentice, and
within the term of seven years, suffer the same Apprentice to go at his large
liberty and pleasure: and within or after the said term, agree with his
said Apprentice for a certain sum of money, or otherwise for his said
service, and within or after the end of the said term, the said Freeman
present the said Apprentice to the Chamberlain of the said City, and by
good deliberation, and upon his Oath made to the said City, the same Freeman
or Freewoman assures and affirms to the said Chamberlain, that the said
Apprentice has fully served his said term (as Apprentice:) or if any
Freeman or Freewoman of this City, take any Apprentice, which at the time of
the said taking has any wife, or if any Freeman or Freewoman of this City,
give any wages to his or her Apprentice, or suffer the same Apprentices to take
any part of their own getting or games. Or if any Freeman or Freewoman of
this City hereafter color any Forraines Goods, or from henceforth buy or
sell for any person or persons, or with or to any person or persons, being
Foreign or Forrainers, Clothes, Silks, Wines, Oils, or any other Goods or
Merchandise (whatsoever they be) w^ether he take any thing or things for his
Wages or Labor, or not. Or if any persons or persons being free of this City,
by any color, crafty, or deceitful mean or means from henceforth, do buy,
sell, or receive of any Apprentice within the same City, any Money, Goods,
Merchandise, or Wares, without the assent or License of his Master or
Maistresse. And upon examination duly proved before the Chamberlain of the
said City for the time being. And the same reported by the mouth of the said
Chamberlain, at a Court to be holden by the Mayor and the Aldermen of the same
City in their Council Chamber: That as well the said Master as the said
Apprentice shall for evermore be disfranchised.

God save the King.
Printed by William Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1617.


