A Prayer of thanksgiving, and for continuance of good success to her
Majesty's Forces.
O Lord God of Hosts, everlasting and most merciful Father, we thine unworthy
creatures do yield unto thy divine Majesty all possible praise and humble
thanks for thine infinite benefits, which thou have of long time plentifully
powered upon thine Handmaiden, and humble servant our Sovereign Lady the
Queen, and upon her whole Realm, and us her Subjects the people of this
Kingdom. And namely, O Lord, for that graciously respecting us in the merits
of thy dear Son our Savior, and by his intercession passing over and
forgiving our manifold sins, thou have this present Summer so favorably
conducted the Royal Navy and Army sent to the Seas by our Gracious Queen
(not for any other worldly respects, but only for defense of this Realm, and
us thy people, against the mighty preparations of our Enemies threatening our
ruin,) by safely directing them unto places appointed, and by strengthening
the Governors and Leaders of the same with counsel and resolution, and
blessing them with notable victories both by Sea and Land, whereby the
insolences and pride of our Enemies, which sought our conquest and subversion,
is by these late victories notably daunted, repulsed, and abased. Grant unto
us (most merciful Father) the grace, with due thankfulness to acknowledge thy
fatherly goodness extended upon us by the singular favor showed to thy
Servant and Minister our Sovereign Lady and Queen. And for thy holy Name
continue these thy wonderful blessings still upon us, to defend us against
our Enemies, and bless us with thy graceful hand to the endless praise of
thy holy Name, and to our lasting joy. And direct our Armies by thy providence
and favorable support, to finish these late victories to the honor of our
Sovereign, and safety of her Realm, that has most carefully made the same
able to ouermatch her Enemies: So as the Noble men, and all others serving in
the same Navy and Army under their charge may with much honor, triumph, and
safety return home to their Countries, and to give thee due thanks for thy
special favors merueilously showed unto them in preserving of them all this
Summer time from all contagion and mortality by sword or sickness,
notwithstanding their force and violence most manfully exercised against their
Enemies, to the vanquishing of great numbers both by Sea and Land, and to the
destruction of their most mighty Ships, that heretofore have attempted to
invade this Realm, and of their Fortes and Castles, and waste of their notable
substances of their riches, without hurting any person that did yield, or of
any women or children, or Religious persons, to whom all favor was showed that
they did require. All which prosperous successes we do most justly acknowledge
(O Lord) to have proceeded only from thy special favor, to whom with thy
Son and holy Ghost be all honor and praise. Amen.

Set forth by authority.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

Anno Domini. 1596.


