To the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House of
Parliament:
The humble Petition as well, of diverse Merchants and Citizens of London that
use buying and selling of Fustians made in England, as of the makers of the
same Fustians.
WHereas by the Statutes of this Realm, Broade-clothes and other Clothes made
of Wool and other kind of Cottons, Frizes and Rugges, are to be searched and
sealed by his Majesty's Alnager, yet in the 36. year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth a Patent was granted to Sr. George Delues and William Fitzwilliams as
Alnagers, for the sealing of diverse commodities, as Bays, Rash, Stamell,
Says, Worsteeds, Grogerams, Mockadoes, Frizadoes, Fustians of Naples,
Blankets, and all sorts of new Draperies, and new Stuffes made of Wool only,
or most part of Wool; and a Subsidy and Fee for the same for 21. years, upon
pretense being made of Wool, they were within the equity of the former
Statutes. And whereas about twenty years past diverse people in this Kingdom,
but chiefly in the County of Lancaster, have found out the trade of making of
other Fustians, made of a kind of Bombast or Down, being a fruit of the earth
growing upon little shrubs or bushes, brought into this Kingdom by the Turkey
Merchants, from Smyrna, Cyprus, Acra and Sydon; but commonly called Cotton
Wool; and also of Lynnen yarne most part brought out of Scotland, and other
some made in England, and no part of the same Fustians of any Wool at all, for
which said Bombast and yarne imported, his Majesty has a great yearly sum
of money for the Custom and Subsidy thereof.

There is at the least 40. thousand pieces of Fustian of this kind yearly made
in England, the Subsidy to his Majesty of the materials for making of every
piece coming to between 8. d. and 10. d. the piece; and thousands of poor
people set on working of these Fustians.

The right honorable Duke of Leneux in 11. of Iacobus, 1613. procured a Patent
from his Majesty, of Alnager of new Draperies for 60. years, upon pretense
that Wool was converted into other sorts of Commodities to the loss of
Customs and Subsidies for Wool transported beyond Seas; and therein is
inserted into his Patent, searching and sealing; and Subsidy for 80 several
Stuffes; and amongst the rest, these Fustians or other Stuffes of this kind of
Cotton Wool, and Subsidy and a fee for the same, and forfeiture of 20. s^.
for putting any to sale unsealed, the moiety of the same forfeiture to the said
Duke, and power thereby given to the Duke or his Deputies, to enter any man's
house to search for any such Stuffes, and seize them till the forfeiture be
paid; and if any resist such search, to forfeite 10 l. and power thereby given
to the Lord Treasurer or Chancellor of the Exchequor, to make new ordinances or
grant Commissions for the aid of the Duke and his officers in execution of
their office.

The Petitioners do conceive, (which they nevertheless leave to the
consideration of this honorable House,) that the said Patent concerning
Fustians made of such Bombast or Cotton Wool, and lynnen Yarne, to be void in
Law, there being no Wool used therein, and the King having Subsidy and
Custom for the Stuff whereof these fustians are made, and the patent a
greeuance and loss to them in their Trades, and by seasing their goods, and
exactions of such as pretend to be the Dukes deputies, of great sommes of money
for sealing the Fustians; or putting the petitioners to annual rents to be at
peace, and where they exact money they force the parties to give them a
general release; and others troubled by warrants from Justices of peace; and
namely in London, the deputy Alnager seized a Pack of Fustians of one George
Cornish, worth 50. l. and forced him to pay 40. s^. to the said deputy before
he could have again his goods, and give the deputy a general release.

A Pack of sustyans of Lawrence Brinsley seized as aforesaid, and he forced
to pay 20. s^.6. d. and give a release.

Robert Steuens, a Pack taken from him, and he forced to pay for the same 15.
s^.6. d. and give a release.

John Crow had 7. pieces seized, which cost him 22. s. to get again.

Robert Graye had a Pack taken from him, and redeemed by repleeuin

John Goffe had a Pack taken from him, for which he arrested the Alnager; and
spent 10. l. and thereby got his goods again after 6. months kept from him,
but could not bring him to trial.

John Brand of Buntingford being by the Dukes deputies many times called before
Justices of peace for refusing to give them their demands, was by them brought
into the Exchequor, and being a poor man, and unable to stand in Law, was
forced to agree with them, and give a fine and 4. s^. yearlie as a rent, and
now called the Dukes Tennant.

Many others are compelled, some to take from them a stamp to seal their own
Fustyans withal, and become their tennants at a yearly Rent, for they never
care for the sealing of the Fustyans so they may get money.

For all which causes the Peticioners humbly pray, the Patent may be brought
and seen in this honorable House, and the Petitioners relieved, as to this
honorable House shall seem good.


