To the Honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament, and to the
Committie for grieuances of the same House.
The humble Petition of the whole company of the poor Water-Tankerd-bearers
of the City of London, and the Suburbs thereof, they and their families being
4000 in number, living and relieved thereby. Robert Tardy Water-bearer in the
name and behalf of the rest follows this Petition.
AMong the great multitude of poor distressed people of this kingdom, with
joyful hearts and lifted up hands to heaven, we your petitioners, have just
cause to say. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that moved the heart of his
gracious Majesty, to call so Honorable an assembly in Parliament, which will
not suffer Gehazi, to take Tallents of Silver, nor change of rayments, but that
every one, may sit under his own Oliue-tree, and anoint himself with the fat
thereof. We poor miserable people laboring hardly for a poor living, under
great burdens, have the bread taken out of our childrens mouths, and our one,
both contrary to good laws established and all equity and good conscience.

For, most honorable assembly, to make this their grieuance plain, that they
are matters of truth, and no suggestions or inforcements. There was in the
Parliament, holden in the 35. year of King Henry the eighth, an Act made and
provided, concerning the repayring, making, and amending, of the Conduits, in
London, and that sweet wholesome running waters, and fresh springs, might be
conveyed by Conduits, and fountains, to the said Conduits in London, and
whereof the said City, had bin before time well furnished, and abundantly
served.

In the said Act there was a careful prouiso, that it should not be lawful,
for the said Lord Mayor nor commonaltie, nor to their successors, or ministers,
to take away any water, or spring now brought, or hereafter to be brought, or
conveyed, by Pypes or Trenches, to the mansion of any person or persons, nor
for any person or persons, by any way, deceit, mean, or any other crafty
conueiance, shall undermine, minish, withdraw, or abate any Spring, or springs,
found or hereafter to be found, now brought or conveyed, stopped, abated, or
otherwise altered, from his dew course, and conueyance to the Conduits in
London.

That the said water brought to the said City, by virtue of the said Act, is
the most wholesome, purest, and sweetest water, coming to the said City, is not
to be doubted or disputable; and sufficient store thereof, at the spring heads.
And yet notwithstanding the said former Act; most of the said water is taken,
and kept from the said Conduits in London, by many private branches and Cocks,
cut and taken out of the Pipes, which are laid to convey the same, to the said
Conduits; and laid into private houses and dwellings, both without and within
the City; whereby it is drawn out of the ways, and many times suffered to
run at waste, to the general grieuance of all good Citizens, and all others;
repayring to the same, having their meat dressed with other waters, neither so
pure nor wholesome, as the Conduit water is, as common experience teaches;
contrary to the true intent of the same statute.

There are, as was confessed by the Cities Plumber, one Mr Randoll, fifteen
branches or Cocks, laid into private houses, and drawn from the Conduits,
contrary to the prouiso in the same Act: and three branches or Cocks, laid by
himself without warrant, only for his own private gain; by what warrant the
other were granted to particular persons, and taken from the common Conduits,
we humbly desire that first the said Randoll, may be sent for and examined, and
afterward such other persons as we shall produce, besides many others, who may
privately take in water out of our maine pipes, and as yet unknown to the
Petitioners.

Secondly, the water granted unto Newgate, for use of that house only, is
carried forth daily by five men to many places, which Tankerd-bearers keep no
hours, but work continually, and so exhaust and draw away the water from the
other Conduits.

The Lady Swinnerton is allowed, but 2. gallons every hour, (an ill president,
and against the prouiso, of the said statute of 35. Henry. 8. but that branch
is so great, as it yields thirteen gallons and better every hour as it has
been tried, which many times runs at waste, if this one branch or Cock,
within this City does or may draw away above a thousand gallons extraordinarily
from the Conduits in a week, what wrong so many branches without the City,
where less care is had, is to be taken into your Honorable consideration.

Fourthly, the water that now serves Alderman-bury Conduit, does belong to the
pipes of Cheapside, and was lately cut out of the same, and that water which
should or would serve that Conduit of Alderman-bury, is wholly stopped or given to
private houses by the way.

Fifthly, Cornehill and Gracious-street men, complaining for want of water in
their Conduits, there was three hours in a day abated by the Chamberlain of
the City, at the request of the Plumber, from the Conduits (...) Cheapside,
thereby to furnish them with the more store, being ill served, by the same
pipes, but yet Cornehill and Gracious-street Conduits have never a whit more
water, nor the hours yet restored to the Conduits in Cheapside.

Sixthly, one of the maine and chiefest pipes runs under part of Saint
Martins Lane, and the Couen garden, in which places there are lately erected
many new buildings and dwellings of Brick; and it is supposed that digging
deeper for the foundations, and finding the Pipes, they may take some private
branches, out of their due course.

Your Petitioners do humbly desire, for that there is great defect of water,
in the said conduits: and that it is a general grieuance, to the whole City;
and that diverse complaints, have been made by your Petitioners for redress,
but no relief can be procured, and are utterly remediless, but by this
Honorable assembly, that we the Petitioners, may be permitted to prefer our
Bill into this Honorable house: For remedy of this grieuance, and as in duty
we are bounden; so we will daily pray, that God may bless all your counsels,
to the benefit of all succeeding ages.


