An Abstract of the grieuances of the poor Clerks of his Majesty's
Custom House London, by reason of Letters Pattents lately obtained for the
erecting of a new Office called the Office of Clerk of the Bills in all his
Majesty's Custome-houses of England, contained likewise in brief in a petition
by them exhibited unto this honorable Assembly: as also relating the grieuances
and inconveniences that do arise thereby to many Merchants and Tradesmen of the
City of London: as by certificates under the hands of near three hundred of
them (annexed to the said Petition) may appear: viz.
THat they have bin from their youths trained up to become Clerks in his
Majesty's said Custom House, there to write and keep the books and Records
of his Majesty's Customs and Revenues, and to make up and perfect the accounts
thereof to the Audit of his Majesty's Exchequer; by reason whereof they are
altogether unexperienced in any other profession or course of life.

That their pains, attendants and employments therein are great, daily and
almost continual, and yet for the same they have (for the most part) no more
but some 20. lib. some 10. lib. wages a year allowed them, and some have no
wages at all, but such vales for making or Searches, and other extraordinary
employment with their pen, as they by their industry could get: which vailes
do chiefly arise by writing out of the Custom books (which they did keep in
their several charges) Bills of entries, and notes of goods and merchandises
from time to time imported into, or exported out of this Realm, the which they
did give and deliver to Merchants and Shopkeepers of all trades, whereby they
might take notice where to find and provide themselves of such wares and
commodities as they did trade in. For which the Merchants and Shopkeepers did
give the said Clerks by way of gratuitie and benevolence (and no otherwise)
some 10. s. a year, some 13. s. 4 d. a year, some somewhat more or less:
which was worth amongst all the said poor Clerks 400. lib. per annum, or
thereabouts; and this was the chiefest means of maintenance of the said poor
Clerks, their wives, children and families.

That about the month of September 1619. Alexander Foster one of the Pages of
his Majesty's Bedchamber, and Richard Greame one of the Marquis of Buckingham
his servants (both of them having otherwise great means to live upon) did by
evil instigation, untrue pretenses, and false suggestions, beg and obtain from
the Kings Majesty by Letters pattents under the great Seal of England a grant
for the erecting of the said new Office for certain years in his Majesty's
said Custom House, for the delivering forth of the said Bills: and that none
should do the same but only they, their Officers and Substitutes.

Hence therefore arises the grieuances of the said poor Clerks: which
grieuances, together with the damage to the Merchants and Shopkeepers, do
consist in these particulars following.
1. That the said poor Clerks means to live upon (being many, and such as do
take great pains in their places to do his Majesty service) is unduly begged
from them, and conferred upon two persons that did never do his Majesty any
service in the Custom House.

2. That when the said poor Clerks did by petition become humble suppliants
unto the Kings Majesty for relief herein, and that stay might be made of the
putting in execution of the said Office, until the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury should certify his Majesty their opinions therein, which his
Majesty was pleased graciously to grant. Then Sir Raphe Freeman one of the
Masters of Requests (who sithence has either bought or does farm the same
Office) did cause your suppliants petition and reference thereupon to be
obscured, and some of the said poor Clerks were by Sir Robert Nanton cast
into prison in the Gate House at Westminister, and there kept until they had
found sureties to be come bound for them, that they should never violate or
impeach the said Pattent, by giving of notes or otherwise, although the same
were to their utter undoing; or to the like effect.

3. That by the proceedings aforesaid the Office was established to the said
Pattentees, and they do farm out the same for two hundred pounds a year, or
else have sold the same to such as do farm it out, and the said poor Clerks
quite debarred from giving forth of bills, and so their chiefest means to live
upon taken from them, and yet nevertheless they do perform the same service
and attendance as they did before.

4. That some of the said Clerks, which before the grant of the said Pattent
did live well, are not now able to maintain their families, but are like to be
chargeable to the Parish where they inhabit, as by certificate of the
Parishioners of Saint Mary Hills Parish may appear. It does also tend to the
general undoing of all the rest of the Clerks, for that they being herein
trained up from their youths, as aforesaid, shall be enforced for want of
maintenance to give over their places, although they know not how to employ
themselves in any other honest profession or course of life.

5. That the giving forth of the said Bills of entries and notes, have bin time
out of mind used by the said Clerks and their predecessors, and ever freely
permitted to them by the Officers of the said house, as a benefit peculiar to
them: and not a thing wherein the Kings Majesty is any manner of way
interessed, nor a fit subject to erect an Office upon, as may appear to be
true by a certificate unto his Majesty, under the hands of the most part of
the Officers of the Custom House.

6. That the said Pattentees are Gentlemen, and in office about his Majesty
and the Lord Marquis, and never any members of the Custom House, and therefore
unfit to be Officers there.

7. That what moneys the said Merchants and Shopkeepers did yearly give and
bestow upon the said poor Clerks for the said bills and notes, they did
receive the same thankfully as a benevolence. But on the contrary, the now
Pattentees and their Officers do impose a yearly rate or proportion upon the
said Merchants and Shopkeepers for the said bills; and if they will not give
them their demands, they will deliver them no bills, and so do exact and
require the same as a duty and fee: and besides, for want of skill, they do so
unseasonably deliver the said bills to them, that they do stand them but in
little stead, to the great damage and grieuance of the Merchant and
Shopkeeper, as by their certificates aforesaid may also appear.

8. That the premises considered, it is not his Majesty's gracious will and
pleasure to undo many his good subjects and servants for the benefit of few, or
that wrong may be done to any, to the pleasuring of particulars, as in this
example there is a president of both kinds.

9. That the said Pattent is a great hinderance in the well performing of his
Majesty's service in the Custom House, both in the keeping of his books and
otherwise: for when the said Clerks your suppliants are entering down the bills
of entries of merchandises into the said books, and perfecting the same for
his Majesty's good, even then the said Pattentees substitutes do demand and
will have the said books and bills to take out and recollect their bills for
their gain and profit.

10. That the said Pattent and Office thereupon erected, is in the nature of a
Monopoly, and Monopolies for the most part are obnoxious and ominous to the
Commons and Commonwealth.

Lastly, in the behalf of the said Pattent and Pattentees, there can no just
nor good defense be made, or matter of worth be alleged. Wherefore and in
tender consideration of the aforesaid premises, we the aforesaid poor Clerks
your humble suppliants, do humbly beseech you to be a means that our petition
and certificates being by the Subcommittee for grieuances committed into the
Bag in the house, may be called to be read, and that a day may be appointed for
the hearing of the cause, and the bringing in of the said Letters Pattents, as
in many like cases of grieuances precedent: and we shall daily pray for you in
particular, and for the whole body of this Assembly.


