To the Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, the Knights and Burgesses of
the Lower House of Parliament:
The humble Petition of the Artizan Cloth-workers of London.
HVmbly showing to this Honorable House, That whereas in forms times there
were many good Laws and Ordinances made for the dressing of Cloth in this
Land, namely in the 33th of Henry 8. it does appoint that all Clothes above
four pounds price should be dressed before they be transported; which Law is
not yet abrogated. And since in the 8th of Elizabeth: That the tenth white
should be rowed, barbed and shorn, before it be sent over: And all Clothes
died in the Wool should have their full Manufacture. Also since those said
Acts, it pleased his Majesty to make Proclamation, That all Cloth should be
dressed and died before it was transported; which was begun to be put in
execution: And had there not contentions arisen among the Merchants, we doubt
not, but it would have gone forwards, to the great benefit of the whole Land in
general. And when the Merchants Adventurers had procured the trade of White
Cloth again, they promised his Majesty that they would dress all the
Western Plonkets, which they transported: And that they would visit all their
Whites before they sent them away, by wetting two of the skore, and by new
foulding the rest; whereby we should have some employment. But now we have not
only lost the benefit of the former Statutes, for all Whites to be dressed and
died, and the two in the skore, but the Plonkets also; and for their Whites,
few are visited.

Wherefore we humbly beseech this Honorable House, that free leave may be
given to all men that will dress and dye Cloth, or set others on work in
dressing and dying of Cloth, or any other new Manufacture, made of Wool, or
part of Wool, or Cotton Wool: That they may have free liberty to export the
same beyond the Seas, there to sell them: But not to export any white Cloth,
but that to be left to the Merchants adventurers. The reason wherefore we
entreat for this, is not only for the supplying of our own necessities,
although they be very great (we being thousands) but that we are persuaded it
will be profitable to the whole Commonwealth, to his Majesty in Customs, to
the Wooll-growers in sales of their Wool, to the Clothier in sale of his Cloth
and stuffes of all sorts, and to innumerable poor people which are workers. If
therefore, it shall please this honorable House well to consider of the
premises, and so to grant our requests, not only we poor Petitioners, but
also (we are persuaded) many thousands more shall be bound to praise God for
you, and daily pray, etc.


