To the Honorable Assembly of the Commons house of PARLIAMENT, and to the
Committees for grieuances of the same HOUSE:
The Answer of the Master, Wardens and fellowship of Woodmongers, London, to
the Complaint of some few Wharfingers and others, whereof, some are foreign,
and some free of the same City.
THe government of Carres and Carremen within the City of London was
ancientlie time out of mind in the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London.

At a Court holden before the said Mayor and Aldermen xj. Octobris Anno 22.
Eliz. It was ordered that the government of the said Carres and Carremen should
from that time be in the Master and Wardens of the company of VVood-mongers
of the City of London.

After, his Majesty by his Letters patents dated the xxix. of August and in
the third year of his reign did incorporate the said Woodmongers and Carremen
by the name of the Master, Wardens and fellowship of woodmongers of London.

After the xxi. Of October in the said third year of his Majesty's reign the
government of all Carres and Carremen, within the said City was by Act of
Common Council confirmed unto the said Master Wardens and Fellow-shipp and
their Successors. They paying to Christ's Hospital for the relief of the poor
there 150li. Per annum, And it was by the same Act further enacted that from
thenceforth all persons using the trade of Carremen should be translated to the
Company of Woodmongers.

After the said Master Wardens and Fellowshipp did make diverse ordinances for
the government of the said Carres and Carremen which ordinances the xviii. of
May Anno, 5. Iacobi were confirmed by the late Lord Chauncellor Ellesmere, Sir
John Popham, Knight, then Chief Justice of the kings bench, and Sir Edward
Coke Knight then Chief Justice of the Common plees according to the statute of
19. Henry 7.

XXX. Nouembris Anno 6. Iacobi, it was ordered by the Lords of the Council
that all persons using the trade of Carres should be ordered and governed
according to the before recited Act of Common Council. And that the number of
Carrs within London should not exceed 400. And that none of them should be used
but by the license of the Company of VVoodmongers and Carremen.

XI. Octobris Anno 9. Iacobi, the before recited Charter and ordinances were
decreed in the Court of Star Chamber.

After diverse disordered persons not conforming themselves according to the
said ordinances the Lords of the Council were pleased to direct their
Honorable letters to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen requiring them to
call the said persons before them and to cause them presently without delay or
excuse to submit themselves to the said ordinances or else to commit them to
prison until they should so conform themselves.

The 20. of November Anno 16. Iacobi Regis, a second decree was made in the
starr-chamber, whereby the decree of the xi of October in the ix. year of his
Majesty's reign the order of the Lords 30. Nouembris Anno 6. Iacobi, the
letters of the Lords of the Council before mentioned the ordinances of the
said Company of VVoodmongers, the before mentioned Act of Common Council and
all other ordinances established for the government of the said Company of
VVood-mongers and Carremen were decreed to be after truly observed performed
and kept according to the purport and true meaning thereof.

After the xv. of October Anno 17. Iacobi, the said last mentioned decree was
in all the points aforesaid confirmed by a third decree in the said Court of
Starr-chamber and diverse persons that is to say Robert Wright Thomas Newton
Thomas Guy William Barwell Edward Hopkines and Robert Violet, And also Matthew
Kimpster and William Sligh should be restrained and prohibited to use or work
any Carre or Carres within the said City liberties and suburbs thereof
without allowance of the said VVood-mongers upon pain of punishment to be
inflicted upon them by the censure of the said Honorable court: And it was then
further decreed by the said Court that such persons as then did or should after
use Carres and were free of any other Companies in London then of the said
VVood-mongers should forthwith be translated over to the said company of
VVood-mongers in manner and form as by the said Act of Common Council is set
down and prescribed. And that such person or persons as did or should refuse
or neglect to be translated after request made unto them according to the said
Act should undergo and be subject to the Censure and punishment of the said
most Honorable Court of Starr-chamber for his or their contempt in that
behalf: And lastly it was ordered by the said high Court that the said Robert
Wright for his contempt should be committed to the prison of the Fleet there to
remain until he should conform himself and show obedience to the decrees
orders and ordinances established as aforesaid.

All which notwithstanding the said Robert Wright and the other persons before
mentioned and diverse others by their example do not only continue Contemners
of the said Act of Common Council ordinances and decrees but do also become
suitors to the high Court of Parliament to put in use diverse things contrary
to the said Act of Common Council ordinances and decrees.


