An abstract of the grieuances of the Master, Wardens and Commonaltie of the
Cutlers, Paynter-stainers, and Book-binders of the City of London, and
consequently of all England concerning the Pattent or Charter of sole making of
Gold and Silver Foliat and the Proclamation prohibiting the importation of any
into this Kingdom, contained likewise in brief in a Petition exhibited into
the Commons house of Parliament. viz.
THat Gold and Silver Foliat has for the most part been heretofore imported
into this kingdom from the part beyond the Seas, and so free for all men to
buy the same where they pleased.

About September 1619, certain persons skilled in the mystery of Gold beating,
being in all under thirty in number, and all or most of them incorporated into
some, of the Companies of the City of London, combyning and confederating
themselves together, did for their own private lucre and gain by the means
and furtherance of one Doctor Eglesham one of his Majesty's Physicians and Sir
Henry Bretton Knight, obtained from the Kings Majesty a Charter for a
Corporation unto themselves, for the sole making of Gold and Silver Foliat, and
a Proclamation Prohibiting the importation of any into this kingdom.

And moreover, that the said Company of Goldbeaters for procuring the said
Charter or Corporation, did promise and covenant to pay and allow out of their
said Corporation unto the said Doctor Eglesham 200 lib. per annum, during life,
and to Sir Henry Bretton 50 lib. per annum besides other yearlie charges
amounting unto in all 300 lib. per annum. or there abouts.

The grieuances therefore arising thereby do subsist of these particulars
following.
First that by this means, the Petitioners have ever since been enforced to
buy, and take the said Foliat of the new erected Corporation of Goldbeaters and
no where else.

That they are enforced to give higher rates and prices then heretofore they
were wont to pay, viz. they now exact and make your Suppliants the Cutlers pay
15 s. for so much Gold Foliat which before the erecting of the said Corporation
they paid but 12 s. and 30 s. for so much Silver Foliat that they did usually
buy for 20 s. and for your suppliants the Painters they make them pay 21 s. for
their Gold Foliat, for the which before they did pay but 18 s. and yet the sise
lesser, and 11 s. for the Silver Foliat, the which they bought for 7 s. 6 d.
and your Suppliants the Book Binders pay 9 s. for so much Gold Foliat as
heretofore they did usually buy for 8 s.

That there are but six of the said Gold beaters which they call Wardens, which
have all set gains thereof, and they confine the sail of the said Foliat to
one place which they call their Hall, whither they tie all the rest of the said
Goldbeaters to bring their Foliat, and constreynes the petitioners to come and
buy, yea they have so combyned and confederated themselves together, that they
have caused them selves to be bound to each other by obligations in great
sums of money, not to vent or sell any to your Suppliants at lower rates. And
moreover have caused the rest of them being the said Foliat makers, to take
several corporal oaths, not to sell any else where or to any of your
Suppliants.

That sinnce the obteyning of the said Corporation and proclamation, they made
the same more thinner and deceiptfuller then the same was made before, so as
the same does sooner decay and fade in wearing, to the great discredit of your
Suppliants, the workmen that use the same. And a damage and displeasing to the
Kings Majesty, the Nobility and Gentry, which needs or shall need the use
of guilding for adorning of their howses, Arms, Books, and other things.

Whereas one Spencer a Goldbeater a poor man using his trade in secret places
for fear of them for the getting of his living, The said Goldbeaters did chase
him from place to place, and at last came forceably upon him, took away his
tools, caused him to be arrested and cast in prison and there laid 4000 lib.
Action upon him, and when as they did perceive some of your Suppliants to
endeavor to releive him and help him out of Prison, The said company of
Goldbeaters together with one Norton the Clarke of their Hall did exhibit a
long bill of 46 sheets of paper into his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber in the
late Atturnney general his name for molestation sake only against some of
your Suppliants and their wives, and put them to almost 20 lib. costs to
answer the same, and withal gave out speeches that they would undo your
Suppliants.

The said Goldbeaters do spend and consume of the proper Coins or Bullion of
this kingdom, in making of the said Foliat 3 or 4 thousand lib per annum. by
estimation to the prejudice of the Common wealth in diminishing so much of his
Bullion which would be turned into Coin.

That if the said Charter and Proclammation were removed and taken away, there
would be sufficient quantities of Gold and Silver Foliat imported into this
Realm, from foreign parts for commodities sent from hence, to serve all his
Majesty Dominions for all kind of uses, for ornaments, without diminishing any
the Coins or Bullions of this Realm whatsoever, so as the Common wealth shall
not be in this kind damnified, nor the trade of so many thousands of poor
artificers of this kingdom that do get their livings thereby impaired.

Whereas the Goldbeaters do alledg that the Foliat heretofore imported out of
the Low Countries was base Gold, and made deceiptfully. Your Suppliaunts which
have used the same will maintain and aver, that the same was as good as any
they make now a days, and far better cheap.

Whereas your Suppliants have complained unto them for selling their said
stuff at such dear rates, and for making the same so thin, they have
answered that your Suppliaunts, were better be content, for if they did find
fault therewith, they should pay more for the same.

Whereas the said Goldbeaters did complain for want of means to live upon,
by their said trade, before the obtaining of the said Patent it is certainly
known that they do now allow and pay out of their said Corporation 300 lib. or
upwards per annum, to the said Doctor Eglesham, Sir Henry Bretton, the Clarke,
and Beadle of their Hall, and otherwise, all which is merely exacted and
raised out of the prices, and by the falsities of the said stuff, to the great
damage of your Suppliants, and his Majesty's subjects. And yet by reason
thereof the said workemens maintenance never a whit bettered.

And lastly the said Charter or Corporation is in the nature of a Monopoly,
and is obnoxious to the Common wealth, in consuming his Coin and Bullion and
enhauncing the price of the said Foliat as aforesaid, and do tend to the
undoing or hurt of many thousand of the poor Artificers in this land, of
Cutlers, Painters Stainers, and Booke-binders, and to all others using this art
of gilding, and is beneficial to none, but to the said Doctor Eglesham, Sir
Henry Breton, the six Wardens of the Goldbeaters and the said Norton their
Clarke for any thing your petitioners know, perceive or can discern.

Wherefore they humbly pray the same may be called in and dissolved.


