Nevves from Malta, written by a Gentleman of that Island, to a friend of his in
France.

Showing the desperate assault and surprising of tw^ Castles of the Turks, by
the Italians Forces, upon the eight day of September last past.

Translated according to the Italian Copy.

Thomas Creede's device TC

VIRESS^T VV^NERE VERITAS

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for John Hippon, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Watling-streete, adjoining to the Red Lion Gate. Anno. 1603.

To my very loving and much beloved Cousen, Signior M. P.
MY good Cousen, I know you expect from me somewhat touching the occurrents of
this place, the haste of this bearer makes me briefer then I would be, yet as
time would give me leave, I have written you the truth of a piece of service
lately done by our Cauelires and Soldiers, upon two Castles of the Turks, by
the help of a Greek: the manner whereof, and the mean whereby, I have truly,
though briefly set you down: in which I know you will rejoice with us in
Christ, under whose banner we fight, and to whom we give the glory of our
victories.

Malta the 9. of October. 1603. Your very loving Cousen, P. M.

News from Malta, written by a Gentleman of that Island, to a friend of his in
France.
IN the month of September. 1603. about the eight day, the great master of our
Island, seeing the necessity of Corn in this place, and determining by all
means he could to make provision for the supply of such want, had intelligence
of a Grecian (who for some private coffeehouse in his bosom concealed,
having stolen from the Turks came unto our Island) that there was in two
Castles of the said Turks great store of Corn, lately laid in; and very
shortly were two vessels more of great burden laden with corn expected to
come to them: all which if it would please our Governor to follow his advise,
he would not doubt to deliver into his hands; who noting all circumstances by
him delivered, and upon the nature of his coffeehouse, the rather giving
credit to his report, did forthwith man out four galleys with four hundredth
me^ o^ Arms, and two Galleons with two hundredth soldiers* in the G^diies,
were a hundredth Knights of great valor, and resolution: who having put to sea,
with a prosperous wind, fell within a few days upon the mouth of the Gulf,
which brought the^ under one of the Castles of the Turks called Panto, about
the twelfth hour of the night, where the Greek with a better in his hand
counterfaited for the purpose, being a shore with fifty of the Knights, and a
hundredth and fifty soldiers, was descried by a Scintinell, standing upon the
walls of the Castle: who cried out, Solinga, chi va la? who goes there? was
answered by the Greek, here is one come from ye Bassa to your Governor, who
has sent me unto him with this letter, and certain soldiers to do a
sodeine exploit of importance, so with a long spear gave him the letter: the
watch, not mistrusting the coming of any enemy, having drunk heard, and so
fallen a sleep, the Scintinell carries the letter unto the Governor, willing
him to stay, and he should presently have his answer: which Scintinell, was no
sooner gone off the walls, but they having set up their engines and ladders,
scaled the walls, entered the Castle, and having taken the ordinance, bent them
against the house of the Governor, who upon the shot of one Cannon, finding
himself betrayed, came forth and submitted himself with all his people into
the hands of our Caualierio, some few of the soldiers leaping over the
walls, fled away, in which time the other fifty Knights with a hundredth and
fifty soldiers going on shore under the other Castle, called Petractio,
causing the Galleons to discharge a Bullet or two upon the walls, the
soldiers seeing the fifty of the other from the other castle, and hearing them
cry, Treason treason, as men amazed, and strooken with a sudden fear, left
the castle, and made all the speed they could to be gone to a city distance
two miles or more from that place: so that our men entered the castle without
resistance: in which they found great store of corn, and other riches of good
value: in the other Castle likewise they took besides. Corn and other riches,
the Governor, his Lady, and their children, women of great beawty: all which,
they with four hundredth other soldiers, and other people, they brought home
and sold for slaves to their great commodity: they took further, a hundredth
great pieces of Artillery, of which were forty of Brass, full Cannons, and fit
for battry: in these Castles they stayed four days, expecting the coming of
the great ships with corn, in which time the Turks fallying out of the
City, made a brauado upon our people, who encountering with them, slew some
fifty of their vangard, and so drove them to retire: the next day following
they made away our two Galleons brought with corn and spoil, beside the four
hundredth slaves, which they sent home, before them, the galleies staying some
half a day or more after them, putting out to Sea, met with the two ships
laden with corn, whom they took, with forty pieces of Ordinances, ten of
them of brass, and four Cannons, in the ships they had a hundredth slaves,
other wealth more then corn was little in them, but the vessels were good and
of good burden: all which, with the loss but of one Caualierio, and ten
soldiers, our men with great Triumph brought home unto our ports, to the
great glory of God, and the comfort of all Christians. Had not the have of
this bearer hindered me, I would more at large have written unto you of other
points, as of the nature of the Greeks coffeehouse, his reward from our
Governor for his service, who has here a yearly pension, and has here set
down the end of his days among us: God increase us in these and other of
his blessings, and send us more such good intelligence, for our comforts, and
prosper us in all such and other enterprises, to his glory.

FINIS.
To the Right honorable and his singular good Lord Sir Henry Sidney Knight of
the most honorable Order of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and Marches
of the same.
ALthough there can be no ^reendship (right Honorable and my singular good
Lord) to speak properly where there is no equallitie between the pa ties, yet
may the simplest and the meanest love and honor the highest and gr^atest, yea
so much the more as their inequallitie is the greater. But that is not properly
called freendship but rather a dutiful love and is hard to be expressed and
showed for the inequality aforesaid. For F^eendship is between equals, or at
the least where the inequalliti^ is not so very great that the Offices and
duties of Freendship which are the bonds and sinews thereof can have no
entercours^. I speak this for my self that have long desired occasion to she^
my hearty goodwil and affection unto your Lordship which has been somewhat
hard for me to do for the cause abooue remembered. And therefore having gathered
this little conference: I ^ade bold to dedicate it unto my good Lord. A thing
meeter to b^ my gift then worthy to be presented unto your Honor or to go
further under the name of such a Patron. Howbeit, my trust is that your
Lordship of your accustomed clemency will accept a simple thing of him at whose
hands nothing at al was looked for, and will allow my good will toward the
reparation of such faults and Imperfections as are heerin.

So praying God to bless your Lordship and pr^sper you.

From London the twenty six of November. 1579. Your Lordships in all
humillitie. T. F.

TO THE GODLY and Gentle Reader.
THou have here Godly and gentle Reader the Conference between Sim Certain and
Pierce Plowman two great Clerks as thou may understand by their Discourse,
which I have gathered and reported as faithfully and as truly as my simple
memory could retain the same, and that with some travail which I occounted my
duty. First unto them and others by them heerin mentioned.

And secondly unto all and every good man and woman whose minds and hearts God
may stir up unto Godlynes and Virtue by their good ensample. Namely all such
as are Fathers and Masters of housholdes, but chiefly and principally of
common Innes and Tauerns whose good or evil example spreads far and wide and
I fear in these our days rather in corruption of life and manners: then in
edifiyng or increase of Virtue and Godlynes according to the saying of Jesus of
Sirach that it is as hard for a Merchant to be no liar and for a Tauerner or
Inholder to be no drunkerd which thing although he has said to be very hard:
yet (for the Inholder) that his rule admits exception, thou may here find
with out traueling to Rippon in Yorkshire to learn and so for a grote or
sixpence thou may know yt which cost me above five marks to learn besides
my trauail and time spent, which yet if it please thee to accept: I shall
account right well bestowed, which God grant, and that in all thy Iourneis thy
head ache not before thou alight in such an Hostry. Farwell.

Aut bibe aut abi.

The Printer to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, IF THOU find any Imperfection in this woork either for the
matter in substance or else for the division, the manner and form thereof I trust
thou will allow a r^asonable excuse as well unto the Author as unto m^e, between
whom thy blame is otherwise to be divided. Thou know that to write and
report a thing at the mouth of the Speaker asks a nimble hand and a great
memory, if a man had his Tools ready for the purpose which yet this Author had
not ready for nothing so like as any such matter, and therefore was forced to
put his braine-pan in trust withal, and to write it in his way homeward.

In doing whereof his care was greater to couch the matter truly in substance:
then to part or to divide or otherwise to digest the same. Which he referred
unto me, and which also I have done as ye shortness of the time gave me leave.
Both which excuses, if it please thee to admit: thou may in time to come
receive it in more perfection as well for his part being the matter in substance
whereof I dout not much has escaped him. and also for the division being mine.
Farewell.

W. M. in Commendation of the Author.
Leaving at large the Brunts of brinish flood,
The pitched Feelds and fables finely pend:
This Author here to do his Cuntry good,
One woork of worth his time and toil does spend.
The busy Brain with cankred Envy fraught,
That sues and strives for sturring of a straw:
May read heerin his lesson largely taught,
And by the same descrie him self a Daw.
The Counsailer, the spokesman, and the rest,
Who simple souls to needless lawing eg:
May learn heerby such dealings to defame:
As drive poor men their bread with tears to beg.
The prating Sot whose peremptory speech,
Is brayed forth all Lawyers to defame:
Not far from hence may find a cunning Leech,
To charm his tung and shroud it in with shame.
But in few words my meaning to imparte,
If you demand what mine opinion is:
He has done well, Gods blessing on his heart,
Who send me store of Books so good as this.
Coelum non Solum. W. M.

Anthony Monday to all courteous and freendly Readers in commendation of this
Woork.
AS Tully did of virtuous life define,
And Ovid paint the odd conceits of love:
And Maro squared in a direct line,
The hard assaults that valiant hearts did prove,
In bloody Battails for their fames behoue.
As fliering Fortune should them chance to p^y:
In vaunting verse as Maro tells the way.
But leaving now at large such fond delights,
Such Fables fond as prattling Poets use:
This Author here presents to your sights,
Such tales of truth as may you force to muse,
To judge aright the crime of each abuse.
As here twixt Sim and Pierce he does comp^und:
Such wise conceits as seldom has been found.
When you have read Judge then the Authors pains.
His tedious toil in wishing well to thee:
Thy freendly thanks, he craves no other gaine^,
Which unto him more welcome sure shall b^e,
Then riches store if thou could give it free.
Wherefore my Friends do this at my request
To hear and see and always say the best.
Honos alit Arts. A. M.

* Thomas Procter in report of the Authors good will.
AMong the worthy woorks,
whith learned Tully pend:
The care of Cuntrie and of Friends,
he greatly does commend.
Which lesson in my mind,
the Man which took in hand:
To pen this pleasant History,
did perfect understand.
For in the same he shows,
a love unto his Friends:
Beside a zealous mind of good,
that to his Cuntrie tends.
Of Lovers lives, of Wars,
ne yet of Wunders great:
He seems to publish unto us,
but simply does entreat.
Of silly Men, whose proof,
does such experience give:
As for Examples of our lives,
learnes each estate to live.
Wherein the Author sought,
such means to publish it:
As in my simple Judgment sure,
might seem to prove his wit.
But for the careful pains,
which he has spent heerin:
He only craves for recompense,
your favors good to win.
whereby you may him move,
to utter his good will:
when as occasion shall him serve,
in woorks of greater skill.
Nil Melius Art. T. P.

John Peeterhouse to the Reporter of this History.
THou that have reported this pleasant History,
Whereof thine eyes and ears are a witn^sse:
And have intreasured the memory,
Of Pierce and Simon for their woorthines,
Withouten hope of hire or recompense:
For thy long Journey, or for thy dis^ence.
Thou have acquit thy duty unto them,
In this behalf, and if I guess aright:
Thou have deserved well of other men,
Before whom thou have set a Candle light.
Of Nurture and of Education:
By men of base and mean condition.
Which some for that cause will esteem the less,
Having respect unto the circumstaunce:
The great apparaunce of vnliklynesse,
Waying all others in their own ballaunce.
As if that God could not reserve a few:
Such as him list his glory for to show.
For what though this age universally,
Seems given over to corruption:
Seemed it not so in the days of Elie,
When yet God had reserved many a one?
So has he now, that are not gone aside:
Nor sold them selves to Couetise and Pride.
As thou haste well showed in this History,
What by thine own proof and experience:
What by thine Host Simons authority,
Which (for mine own part) I do reverence,
And therefore (I say thank come to thy hand,
That haste it given us to understand.
And put us in hope that Charity,
Is not stark dead though she be wounded sore:
By Pride and Couetise her enemy,
And that our God yet keeps some in store.
That both in deed and word do seek his praise
God let them wax and give them happy days.
FINIS.
The Reporter to his Book.
My little Book where so thou chance to dwell,
God give thee favor in thy Readers sight:
Whom if thou please all, thou must quit thee well,
And better then I fear is in thy might.
For that does seldom chance to any one:
Better or wursse without exception.
If any man or woman challenge thee,
For any word or any argument:
Come not to seek thy defense at me,
For I am not thine Author Verament.
Get thee into the North to Rippon Town:
And there enquire for Pierce that worthy clown.
And eke for Simon Certain at the Sign
Of the Greek Omega there does he dwell:
where welcome thou shall be as I divine,
Ask them whether thou have reported well.
Their conference according to the truth:
If they say yea, of others have no rueth.
FINIS.
How the Author coming homeward out of Scotland through Yorkshire, chanced to
lodge in Rippon, At what sign, the name of the Host, the order and manner of
the House and famelye. And his entertaiment there. Chap. 1.
IN my last return from Edenborough in Scotland, coming homeward through
Yorkshire: I traueled somewhat out of ^he common high London way, of purpose t^
see the Cuntrie. And one day among others, toward even: I chanced to come to a
little through fare Town called Rippon, where at the ^ery entering into the
town I met a poor old Woman, of whom I asked if there were any good lodging
in the town. She answered me that there was good lodging at the sign of the
Greek Omega. The Greek Omega (quoth I) What do yo^ mean by that? Nothing said
she, but that there is good lodging and honest entertainment, which (I suppose)
is all tha^ you require. Then I asked her what was the good man's ^ame of the
house. His name (quoth she) is Simon Certain we call him commonly Sim Certain.
Sim Certain (quoth I^ surely these are very strange names, and so bidding her
fa^ewell: I departed into the town ward, much more desire is to be come to my
lodging, for the strangenes of the names, as well of the Sign: as also of the
Good man of the House. By that time I had entered a little way into the Town: I
was ware of a very fair Greek Omega hanging forth as a c^mmon Sign, even as
the old woman had told me before. And thither I went, and entering into the
house: I foun^ in the Hall the Good man, his two Sons, his Chamberl^in, and
his Hostler singing the Ciiij. Psalm of David very ^istinctly and orderly. The
Goodwife with her two Daugh^ers sat spinning at their Wheels a little
distaunce from them. All which things when I beheld: I thought with my se^fe
that these things were yet more strange to behold, the^ were either the Sign
or else the good man's name to hear. So I bad them God speed. The Host very
courteously arose, and bad me welcome, so did the wife also, and asked me
whether I meant to tarry all night. I answered yea. Then he asked me if I would
see my Chamber. No gentle Host (quoth I) I will not hinder so much your good
exercise, for I am sure I cannot be lodged amiss in this house. Not so sir
(quoth he) but ye shall have the best that we have and welcome. I gave him
hearty thanks. Then he enquired of me, of whence I was, where I had been, and
whether I was bound. I told him I was a Southern man borne and dwelling, and
that I had been at Edenborough in Scotland, and was thus far in my way
homeward. In good time sir (quoth he) and ye are heartily welcome into this
part of Yorkshire. I thank you gentle Host (quoth I.)

The coming thither of Pierce Plowman, being newly come from London. His
request to the Host to lend him five pound upon a paune. The refusal of the
Host, the question thereupon moved, being the matter of the conference. Chap.
2.
BY that time we had talked scant half an hour: there came in a Cuntrie man a
Neighbor, a jolly old fatherly man, bringing under his arm a fardell of
Books, as many as he might well hold underneath one of his arms, he gave us
the time of the day. What Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) welcome from
London Sir (quoth he to me) this Neighbor of mine is lately come from where
you are going God willing. Truly (qooth I) and this is happily met by grace of
God, and as I verily suppose near in the mid way between Edenborough and
London. With that Neighbor Simon quoth this Pierce Plow man (for that was his
name) I am come to desire your help. What is the matter Neighbor Pierce (quoth
our Host?) Neighbor (quoth he) to lend me five pound for half a year, for
truly (quoth he) I have spent all my money at London, and have not left my
self so much as to buy my seed Wheat, wherewith to sow my land this season. No
have neighbor Pierce (quoth he) that was very ill handled, ye sh^ould always
so use your matters that ye main stock be sau^d whole. Fie neighbor Simon
quoth he, speak no more of that for the reverence of God, for truly I am
ashamed of my self, but what remedy now save patience, and to learn to ^e
wiser heeafter. What means all these paper Books (quoth our Host. Mary
neighbor quoth Pierce they shall be s^retie unto you for the repaiment of your
five pound. With that they were unbound, and being opened and looked upon:
they were Bills, Answers, Replications, Reionders Coppie^ of Depositions, and
such like. Some out of one Court, some out of an other. When our Host had seen
them all: why Neighbor (quoth he) do you think to meet with any man that is
so mad to lend v. pence upon such trash? Trash Neighbor quoth Pierce they
stand me in above fifty pound. Peradventure so quoth our Host, but that
proves not that they a^e worth fifty points, saving unto him that were as
mad to ^uy them of you: as you bought them at their hands that s^lde them unto
you. But or you meet with any such chapman: I believe you will be weary of
keeping them. With that Pie^ce began to be half offended. Neighbor Pierce
quoth our Host, five pound is a small matter between us twain, you s^all have
it upon your word. But as for your Books: here d^elleth a Lady not far hence,
carry them to her, for they are f^r fet and deer bought, and such things men
say are good for Ladies.

Pierce finds it strange that men should pay so ^eer for things which in
their hands are so vile and little worth, as concerning their return. Chap. 3.
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) I can put up that mock at your hands, for I
know ye mean me no evil but good thereby, but verily me thinks it stands
hardly with their existimation that will be holden and termed woorshipfull yea
honorable, to take so extremly for things, whereof no better return is to be
made, yet must we pay them with great attendaunce, with cap in hand and all
reverence. Great reason quoth our Host, for they are woorshipfull, and right
worthy of all those duties. Then have I been in an error a long time (quoth
Pierce) for I have always hitherto thought that woorship and honor had stood
in giving: and not in taking, in helping, releeuing and doing good: and not in
their contraries, and this seems unto me both reasonable and also common
experience, for we honor God at whose hands we receive all goodness, and
therefore properly unto him is all honor and woorship due, and unto men but so
far forth as they approchen unto God in quality of virtue, justice, mercy and
other goodness, wherefore in all reason he ought to be most honorable and
woorshipfull that does the most good, and unto the greatest number, for
surely in my discretion, the woorship and the gain ought to be divided, and
he that gayneth, or is relieved, and is helped: ought to honor and woorship him
by whom he gayneth, is helped and relieved, for otherwise why does the Servant
woorship his Master and not e conuerso. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host, our
honorable and reverend forefathers with great wisdom and discretion, assessed
these Fees and charges, and that for the great zeal and love which they bare
unto Godliness and virtue, and to the persons quallified therewith.

With P that ierce clapped his hand upon the board. I make God a vow (quoth
he) whatsoever he was that first praised a sheet of paper with twelve lines
written therein at eight pence, nay at xij. pence, for I am sure I have CC. that
cost me after that rate, he was neither friend to godlynes ne virtue, to God,
neither to good man or woman. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host, this is but the
error of your Judgment, and that shall appear unto you so evidently, that
your self shall confess that these fees and charges which you ^hink so great
and so exccessiue had so great reason in their beginning as that greater had
never any civil ordinance or co^s^itution. Whether ye will regard the honor
and glory of G^d or the preservation of the commonwealth which chiefly
de^endeth thereupon. That seems wunderfull strange unto m^ (quoth Pierce) that
in such extreme taking and so small rendering there should lie hidden so great
mystery of good meaning and therefore gladly would I hear your reasons
thereupon. Very well Neighbor Pierce (quoth he) then I will take in hand to
prove it unto you, which I trust I shall do sufficiently if I can prove
these are no proper nor private gain or proffit, but a public and a common
treasure to the ease and releef of the whole commonwealth and of the best and
godli^st and Members of the same, yea verily (quoth Pierce) very well (quoth
our Host.)

Simon approoueth their great Fees and charges as things meant to be a reward
and nurishment of Knowledge, lear^ing and Virtue, and punishment of ungodliness
and vice, and therefore true and just. Chap. 4.
FIrst I think ye will grant (quoth h^e) that Maiestrates and Officers are
the Deputies and Liuetenaunts of GOD heerin Earth, high and honorable, for that
they are ^n very deed the hand and mouth of the Law, and in few and plain
words the speaking and woorking Law, for by them the law commands and
forbids So that their end and purpose is that God may be honored and
glorified, good and godly People cherished, shor^ly that peace and concord may
be maintained. I grant you all this (quoth Pierce) you will grant (quoth he)
that she way and mean to woork all these things is to punish and chastise the
wicked and the ungodly, and to give as little favor unto sin as is possible,
that is very true also (quoth Pie^ce) Ye will grant (quoth our Host) that
the ways and means to punish sins and wickedness are diverse, according to
the quality of the offense, as some by death, some by other punnishment of the
body greater or smaller. And that there is also a pecuniall punishment by the
pursse, as by fine and ransom, and such like. I grant you all this (quoth
Pierce). You will grant me also (quoth he) that all punishments are grievous
unto the sufferers thereof, neither are or ought to be pleasant unto the dooers
and executors. That is very true also quoth Pierce, except they be wicked
persons both the sufferer and the executor. Then quoth our Host, seeing all
punishments are fearful and grievous unto the sufferer thereof, and no
pleasure, but rather sorrow and greef of heart unto the executors thereof, such
and so must needs be the first causes and occasion thereof. That is very true
quoth Pierce. You know quoth our Host, that the causes and occasions of
punishment is sin, wickedness and misgouernment of life, for the word of God
tells us, that the reward of sin is death. All that is very true quoth
Pierce. Very well then quoth our Host, these Propositions which you have
granted: do suffice for the matter which I have taken in hand to prove,
which is, that these great Fees and charges were never meant, nor yet are
received or converted into private or proper use. I pray you Neighbor quoth
Pierce, let me hear how it is proved, for I promise you faithfully for any
thing I have yet heard: your proves are farther to fet.

You know quoth our Host, that the nature of the ungodly is to be quarelous
and contencious, and daily provoking one an other, and also to take no wrong
and do no right. That is very true quoth pierce. You know quoth our Host that
the common weapon wherewith they will be aue^ged upon each other is the Law,
which indeed is the Magistrate, as ye have already granted, so that upon the
matter: he is made the executor of their wilfunes and vengeance, which they
will needs do upon each other, which thing you have already confessed to be
grievous and unpleasant to every good man. Therefore has it ever been, and yet
is thought, and that very wisely and truly, that the likeliest way and mean
to dissuade their wilfulnes which no reason, love nor fear of GOD could
dissuade was to make their wilfulnes as dear and as heavy unto them as
reasonably might be done, to the and that they should not so lightly and for
every trifle vex and trouble both the Magistrate and one an other, which effect
although it failed to woork, and that their madness would not be res^rayned
thereby: that yet their ungodliness might return to the profit and relief of
others their neighbors and Brethern that were better affected, and so by one
self and same mean: the ^ngodly punished and fleeced, and the godly amended
and enriched herby, and that this was their meaning yt was the first assessors
thereof: common experience teaches us, for in needful and necessary actions,
as debt, detinew, and account and such like: the charges are so reasonable, as
that no man would in conscience give less.

The reason is, for that they are actions of common right, and such as must
needs day by day arise between a man and his Brother, neither do they
dishonest either of the ^arties which I dare not affirm upon actions upon
cases, neither did they so judge of them, as I verily believe, and therefore did
they set double and treble charges thereupon, for greater is the charges in a
brabble for a word spoken: then f^r three hundred pound of honest debt.

So that the Magistrate, who for such Alehouse ^ctions and brabbles: should
otherwise never be at rest, except he should deny them his help, which might be
slaunder^us and perilous to the whole estate.

The Magistrate I say of pure pity and compassi^n, was forced to set great
charges upon them, for the small favor that he bare unto them, and unto their
first causes and occasions.

The greatness of all which charges not withstand^ng, yet do we daily see how
the ungodly run together by hea^s like brute beasts, and yet I dare safely say,
that by the greatness of these charges, and the terror thereof: many a brabling
matter has been and is daily put up without any r^uenge sought thereof, and
many a one having pursued and ^ecouered in his action, yet have his charges so
gallded him: that he has been easier to deal with all his life after. And so
by this mean many a wilful body brought to know him self: and to honor God
thereby.

I cannot tell Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce, but I my self have had two or
three brabbles that have kept me doing these seven years, in which time I am
suer I have spent abooue fifty pound, beside my charges to and fro, loss of
time, and my hinderance at home. And what have ye gotten for all this quoth our
Host? These papers quoth he. Well worth fifty points quoth our host. I think
verily quoth our Host if any honest Neighbor had needed to have borrowed ten
pound thereof: you would not have it so ready to have pleasured him withal. If
I should say truly (quoth Pierce) I think the very same. What are you assessed
unto the poor in your Parish quoth our Host? A penny a week quoth Pierce, And
think you that enough quoth our Host? Yea verily quoth Pierce. Lo Sir quoth
our Host, whether comes this unto my saying and maintenance of these great
Fees and charges or not? Who can deny the excellency of this institution?
whereby the Couetuous and ungodly men are shot one against an other, and do
punish each other, and whereby also so plentiful provision is made for the godly
poor at their charges, and yet no thank to them therefore, and that those
things from the which they would depart unto any Honest or godly use or
purpose, with as good will as from their eyes to be plucked out of their heads,
or their tripes out of their bellyes, by this mean undesired of their own
accord, they bring it in by handfuls, and so as it has been said, plentiful
provision made for their godly Neighbors at their charges and yet no thank
unto them therefore.

Call you this a providing for the poor? Neighbor (quoth Pierce) I would I
had given you the best horse in my Plough to make this saying true, and I
swear to you (quoth he) prove it true: and you shall have him yet or this day
Seven night, for that would ease my heart if I might perceive that any godly
person has fared the better or were amended by any part of all my great
expenses. For then yet should I think that I have done some good with all the
loss of my money. Why Neighbor Pierce (quoth Simon) do you doubt that all
these sums or the greatest part thereof: comes not to the use of the common
wealth, and to the relief and sustenance of the godly poor, and other
easements of common things in maintenance of the common Wealt^? Nay Neighbor
Simon (quoth he) I doubt it not, for I am fully persuaded the contrary. Truly
Neighbor Pierce (quoth he) this is an uncharitable and a very erroneous
op^inion, and that I will prove unto you by reasons manifest and apparent, and
such as your self have already granted and c^nfessed. I pray you neighbor
Simon (quoth Pierce let me hea^e how.

Simon approoueth these fees and charges as publi^ue and not private, by
argument taken from effects unto their causes. Chap. 5.
Whosoever he be that Coueteth privately to gain and profit by any thing
(quoth our Host*) coueteth the thing whereby he gayneth and profits, this is
so true (quoth he) that I will not desire you to grant t unto me, for it is a
necessary argument from the effect unto the cause, and therefore if ye will
affirm that the Magistrate and officer coueteth these great fees and ^harges
and privately to thrive and wax rich thereby: you mus^ necessarily conclude,
that he favors all the first and mea^ causes thereof, which were a horrible
and a fearful conclusion, ^ yet as I have said follows necessarily upon ye
premises g^aunted and therefore is couetise so much more odious and detesta^le
in a Magistrate then in a common person, for couetise as he exceeds all other
vices simply considered: even so respecti^ely he exceeds him self, I say
respectively to wit, qualifie^ by the person in whom he dwells, for in a
private person: he is but a private sin, and extends unto his M. only, but in a
Magistrate he is a public and general corruption of al ye people, for there is
no covetous person being but a private man or woman yt wishes any other to be
such as they the^ selves are, the reason is, for that the Couetise of others:
is nothing whereby they should gain or be advanced, but rather lose thereby.

Therefore could they be content that there were few or no others such as they
are, whereby it apeereth that couetise in a private Person neither woorketh nor
wishes any general corruption and yet fulfilleth the talent and habit of his
subject and so much the more. The very same is to be said of all other vices in
all other persons without exception of degree, as Whoordome, Pride, Gluttony,
Drunkenness and all other excess in voluptuous pleasure, in all which things
what soever has or ever had the greatest felicity and enjoyed most thereof:
yet would they not that others did the like, or at the least no more then they
them selves must necessarily use for the accomplishment of their pleasures
which requires some company. The reason is already showed, to wit for the
other Folks pleasures are not their pleasures, neither do increase the same,
but rather their pains and misery.

For the hunger, scarcity and want of others gives a good taste and savor
unto the voluptuousnes and pleasures of the ungodly, and therefore could they be
very well content to enjoy their own wickedness the^ selves, for pleasure have
they none nor gain in the lewdnes or the misgouernau^ce of other. And if they
had: yet want they power to corrupt others thereby otherwise then by example
which can not do much in any one private man or woman, for that they have but
the leading of their own lives. But of Couetise in the Magistrate it is
otherwise, for he has the leading and the fourming of other men's lives and
therefore differs from the common and private person both concerning his will
and also concerning his ability and power to execute the same.

First concerning desire and will: he cannot wish that the common people
should be godly and virtuous, for neither stands his great gain, nor his
Ambition therein, for why they are two things incompacible and contrary.

Then concerning his power to execute his will and desire: it is so great and so
mighty that the old Proouers has no^ doubted to call the common People the
Image of their Magistrates and o^ficers for as certainly as this antecedent.

The man eats and drinks infers this co^sequent the man is a live: even
so certainly this proposition the Magistrates and officers are covetous
infers this conclusion.

The People are ungracious and ungodly. The ^eason is peremptory for the
Magistrate and Officer has the Bridle rain in his hand either to give liberty
unto vngodl^nes and dissolution of life: or else to refrain the same.

Now all men may daily see by proof that there is no wild Beast so very brute
and barbarous as man will war and he through liberty and that for the
excellency of h s nature abooue all other Creatures and his great vnderst^nding
in good and evil.

And therefore to admit in a Magistrate a coue^ise and a desire of private and
proper gain, Namely by fees and charges arising and growing is as already
confessed, th^se were to conclude an odious and detestable Consequence against
ye Magistrate and Officer of whom we are forbid: by God to speak or think
save all honor and reverence.

Wherefore I say it stands not with the reue^ence and honorable opinion that
we are bound to have of the Magistrate to say or to think that these great
gains and s^es do return to him in private and proper use: but rather t^
Judge and think that the Magistrate and Officer receives them ^s things
excommunicate and as a common Treasure dedic^ted unto godly uses and purposes
in ease and releef of the w^ole common wealth.

Would God this were true quoth Pierce, for I da^e lay my life (quoth he) that
if all the sums of money that ^re leudly and shamefully spent in one Term
about vain ^^tes and brabbles were reserved and accounted in the end of ^ Term:
they would amount to more then all the Collectio^ for the Poor through out all
the parishes in England for h^lf a year nevertheless many a o^^ thinks him
self sore ^harged, namely my self God forgive me.

Truly Neighbor (quoth our Host) I am of ^o other Opinion, neither do I
Judge that all these great Fees and Revenues are any other thing but a
Collection for the purposes and intents aforesaid, neither that the receivers
of the same do differ from those other Collectors in parish Churches saving in
the greatness of their receipt and also saving that they are not forced to crave
it at the parties hands and some time to convent him before a Iusticer of peace
for a grote or six pence as the others often times are. And also saving that for
their reverend and honorable estemation they are not accou^table. Saving unto
the Lord God the Author general and unto their own Consciences.

Pierce denies the reasons alleged as probable but not necessary. His reasons
therefore. Chap. 6.
Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce you have alleged many fair and coulorable
propositio^s and conclusions and have gone about me with this reason and with
that.

I am no School man, Neighbor quoth he, but yet some reason I have and some
experience I have seen, and some heed I have taken thereof, wherefore if you will
give me leave to answer you: you shall hear me as probably disprooue these
your allegations as you proved them, for I shall prove all your propositions
are probable and not necessary, neither do infer a necessary conclusion as
you have pretended. For the better doing whereof: first for orders sake, I will
rehearse your propositions, reasons and arguments, whereof the first is, that
the Magistrate and Officer is to be had in all honor and reverence because he
is the Law which is most honorable and reverend, this I confess as an
undoubted truth, namely for that the end as well of the one as of the other, is
that God may be honored and glorified, godly People cherished, and maintain
peace and concord strengthened and furthered, whereupon stands the prosperity
and the good estate of all Cuntries and common welths, their ways and means
you have alleged are these.

To punish and chastise the wicked and the ungodly, and to restrain their
liberty as much as is possible. Ye have further alleged that punishments are
diverse, some corporal, some pecuniall, and that all punishments are greeu^us
both unto the sufferers, and also unto the dooers thereof, but that I will not
grant ye without distinction.

Very true it is that all punishments without e^ception, are grievous unto the
sufferers thereof, but unto the executor thereof: they are not all so, namely
such as are pecu^iall and the gain thereof returning unto the executor. For
although that to beat, burn, hang or whip any creature of God, namely a
Christian man or woman: is an odious thing and wherein no good or Godly heart can
have pleasure: yet for advantage sake it is often otherwise, for otherwise
ther^ would not so many Oxen, Sheep and Calves be murthere^, and so few Hogs,
Dogs or Cats, their offenses being only their good flesh.

Wherefore, although that in all Godly reason ^our arguments have great
necessity: yet in human reason and experience it has but bare probability
and is no m^re. But as if for example you will say Women ought to be ^shamed to
be seen bibbing wine in common Tauernes, or to be seen at common lascivious and
bawdie Stage Plays: therefore they are ashamed thereof.

This is an argument gathered from posse to est^, to wit, from should or ought
to be, to is simply, and has not any necessity nor firmitie, and that shall
you see if you will go with me to London this next Term.

How be it, you seem to enforce your anteceden^, by the honorable existimation
wherein I am bound to have the Magistrate and Officer, and thereby you think that
of duty I ought to grant it you for the shameful consequenc^ which
necessarily ensues upon the denial thereof.

Truly that notwithstanding, me thinks all this but a very bare and naked
proof.

Simon maintains his assertion by authority of holy Scripture and diversity
taken between the reward of Virtue, Learning and Knowledge and the hire of
servile travail and labor. Cap. 7.
CAll you this a bare and naked proof Neighbor Pierce quoth our Host, if you
deny this proof (quoth he) you reuerse and overthrow all humain society
which is maintained and vpholden by giving unto God yt which is due unto God,
and unto man yt which is due unto man. But unto God what can we give save
honor, praise and glory, first and immediately unto him self, and secondly unto
his Deputies and Lieutenants, to wit, Magistrates and Officers whose calling
and appointing thereunto as it is of God: so must and ought we to think that it
is for their godlynes and virtues, for God him self has said them that honor
me I will honor, and they that dishonor me I will dishonor, wherefore our wise
and reverend Elders and Forefathers in their assessing these great fees and
charges: did mean to honor them whom God honored. And therefore unto their
callings appoi^ted they great and honorable revenues, knowing that their gain
is the punishment of vice and the reward of Virtue, and that the part and
portion of all the godly is therein, knowing also that there is not so great
Encouragement unto Virtue and Godlynes: as the liberal reward thereof, and
that all ungodliness and unthankfulness is measured by the greatness of thy
goodness and benefit received either at ye hands of God or man. Lastly knowing
that they might not prosecute but persecute the causes and occasions of these
gains as has already been proved, and therefore I say abooue all common reason
and discretion they assessed these Fees and revenues that the gains might be
great and yet the causes thereof few, quite contrary to all other estates and
faculties, for what other reason is there that one man shall labor sore a
whole day and at night shall receive twelve pence or eight pe^ce for his hire:
Another for half or a quarter of an hours easy trauail shall receive xx.
shillings or sometime more, what is the cause of this diversity? even this,
the one is a hire and a pric^ of a servile labor and travel, and is received
in proper and private use, the other is an honor done unto virtue, Godl^nes and
knowledge: which do receive nor hold, or account any so base things proper or
private, or can be so basely m^nded, as to joy therein, further then they may
glorify God the^by.

what other reason is there, that one man in the return of a Reame of paper,
shall gain xij. pence or xvi. pe^ce clear, and yet where he laid out ij.
pence: the other laid ou^ x. shillings. And after the same rate in Wax, that
one ^an shall sell more for vi. pence: then an other shall sell for viij pound,
which nevertheless bought as deer as he, within ^ij. pence at xx. shillings
waring, and both laid out more mon^y, and longer looked for the return thereof.
I say there is no reason other then is already made.

Pierce denies the calling to office, to be such as Simon has alleged. Cap.
8.
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) wh^ras you maintain your assersion by the
w^orthines of the Magistrate and Officer, and do insist thereupon, alleging
that they are ^alled by God, and that for their godliness an^ virtue. The first
part I greatly dout, for that many of them buy their offices, and pay very
deerly therf^re, yea some sell their very inheritaunces for that purpose, I
mean to buy offices, now did I never read that ever God received Money for an
office, how be it I refer my self heer^n to my Masters that are learned.

The next part that they are called for their V^rtue and Godliness, surely then
I verily suppose some of the^ are called for the things that never were in them
before, and then were the caller deceived, which God cannot be, e^cept you will
say that God of his mere goodness and mercy called them for the virtues and
godlynes which he means to call them unto, and in this order begins to
woork, I mean in bestowing upon the^ so liberally, and by that means to
charge them with his expectation, in respect of their great Tallent committed
unto them, which thing you seem to allege, as no small cause and consideration
of the high assessing of the fees and charges aforesaid, and that so great
mercies and graces bestowed upon them by God, and so liberal reward appointed
unto them by men: should suffice to make them godly and virtuous from thence
forth: what so ever they were or had been before. All which arguments,
although they be godly and probable: yet as I said before they stand doubtful,
for the old Proverb, Honors change manners. I believe the godly and the
learned do dout whether it be taken in the better part, or in the wursse, for
I am very sure, that many are wurse disposed, and much more ungodly in high and
honorable calling: then while they were in mean estate and degree.

Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) there is no rule so general, that it
admits not exception, albeit I dout not nor ever did, that honors change
manners, is and ever was meant in the better part. For the wiseman says. He
that is ungodly in wealth: how much more ungodly would he be in poverty? The
examples are many that do prove that honors change men to the better, namely
of Saul, of whom it is said that being called from a simple boy after his
Inauguration: he felt him self suddenly changed, and as the book says: he
felt a new heart in him.

The like example we have of many Kings and Prophets in the Scripture. But to
come nearer, both for the time and also the place, in our English History we
read of that noble King H. the fifth, who in his Fathers life was of evil
government, and kept company with riotors and unthrifts, so that there was
small hope of him, but after the death of H. ye fourth, when this yung man was
placed in his kingdom: he sent for all his old companions, who were not a
little glad thereof, but when they wear come into his presence: he sharply
rebuked them, and giving them small rewards, yet better then he thought them
worthy, he forbad them during their lives to come within xij. miles of the
Court, and that upon great penalty. All these examples do manifest^y prove
that liberal reward of virtue, and high and Honorable calling do increase
virtue in them in whom it is al^edy and causes them in whom it is not save
only in appara^nce, yet for pure shame to embrace it, seeing that otherwise h^t
coals are heaped upon their heads, through their shameless unthankfulness unto
them that have so thoroughly prouo^ed them with the greatness of their benefits.

And therefore against all these reasons and proof^, to say that the Magistrate
and Officer should privately C^uet and convert so great sums of treasure: it
were to shameful and slanderous, considered that they are the effect^ of so
evil causes as has already been showed And consid^red also the horrible and
wicked conclusion that would ensu^ thereupon, as also has already been proved.

Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) never tell me what might or does ensue
thereupon: but consider the tr^eth and the matter as it is in deed. And if these
great fees and charges do not come unto their receivers and takers in proper
and private: what mean they to make so great labo^r, suit, freendship and cost
to get those offices and callings. and how comes it to pass that by the
means of such off^ces: such as before were of small ability, come to
purcha^e a Barons living, yea twain or three. Shortly, that their care is
greater to hear and learn where any Land or Lordship is to be sold: then for
the Money whorwith to pur^hase the same.

Simon confirms his assertion touching the desire to bear office to be good,
by the Ettimologia ^n exposition of the word (Officium) Cap. 9.
Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) all these matters are easily divided, unto
the which thus I answer. To the first which is their great desire to be in
such Offices of receipt, I say you mis-iudge of their desire because you do not
understand the meaning of this word Office and do think him to be an
Englishman whereas in very deed his Father is an Italian, whose proper
signification and meaning you do not understand, for in our English tung
Office is no more to say nor nothing else but Service, so that whosoever
desires an Office he desires to do service or else a place wherein to do
service, now all men know that a private man is not able to compare with the
Magistrate or Officer in ability and power. Therefore to desire an Office is to
desire to be better abled, to express and declare the hart^e good will and
affection which he has to be serviceable unto God and his commonwealth, for
that in private estate his power answers not unto his good will therein, and
therefore the better man the more desirous to be in Office and in the more
Offices, for the greater is his power to show his good affection toward God
who is the Giver of all these things.

Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce, I connot tell what Cuntrie man's Office is,
neither do I greatly force whether his Father be an Italian, Spaniard or
Frenchman, but if he be the same in Latin that service is in English: I am suer
that both in Lattin, French, Spanish and English he stinketh when he is to
freely offered, and that (I am very sure) did Aesop mean in his Fable of the
Sow great with pig unto whom (says he) there came a Fox who alleging unto
her his great skill in the art of a Midwife profferd her his service toward her
deliverance, unto whom she answered, that the greatest and best service that
he could do unto her, was to keep him far enough from her, which she also
prayed him to do, whereby you may gather what the Authors opinion was upon this
voluntary offer of service and yet he does not allege that the Fox offered
any money, I suppose because he had no money to offer. But Simon Magus offered
money in ye Acts of ye Apostles, and what the holy Ghost thought thereof: ^ou
may there understand. Neighbor Pierce quoth our Hoas^ this is a cold reason
and no Argument, to say that a man's earnest desire to have an Office argues
his desire of priuat^ gain and proffit, and so for his great desire to do
good: conde^me him of evil without proof thereof. Neighbor Simon (quoth
Pierce) I do not so barely reason, neither so nakedly as you have alleged if
you did me right in repetition of m^ Argument, not intercepting the same nor
seuering the pa^ces thereof as you have done, and so have answered the first
p^rt by it self which is the weakest and have said nothing to the second part
which is their great purchase and the strength and effect of the first, for my
Argument taken wholly togithe^ is thus much to say, that their great desire to
have the Offices, and their great purchase of Lands and living following the
same: shows that from the beginning there was m^nt naught else but private
pouching, for ever the act that is last in exception: is the first in
Imagination in all men's doings this is most assured. Neighbor (quoth our
Host) th^s Argument of yours which you hold so forcible is of no fo^ce at all
whether the parties thereof be considered jointly or s^uerally neither does
this great desire to be in Office, neithe^ ye great purchase ensuing the same
in any wise disprooue my first Assertion and maintenance of this great
revenues, fees and charges as you suppose, construing and taking m^ saying to
near unto the letter. For whereas I have alle^ged the Magistrates and Officers
to be the Patrons and Fathers of the commonwealth, and these great revenues a
publi^ue treasure in their hands to the uses and intents abooue r^hersed: ye
allege against me their great purchase of Lo^dships, Lands and Livings as a
repugnancie and disprais^ thereof, which it is not but the greatest and
strongest confirma^ion thereof that I my self have alleged, for although I have
made them receivers: yet have I not charged them merely as Receivers, but as
baylifs and Gardens of trust whose authority extends to improoue for ye
benefit of their Cuntrie^. But a better Improouement can there not be made,
the^ by altring of money which is transitory: into land which is permanent,
namely being delivered unto them at their years of discretion upon the account
of their said Balifs or garde^s. And even as it fares between the Garden and
his pupil, ye Bailifs and him to whose use he is put in trust. So fares it
between these Magistrates and Officers and the commonwealth as touching these
receipts.

And therefore those purchases of lands and possessions the best and most
allowable discharge upon their account that can possible be made unto God, the
greatest and highest aduau^cement of his honor and glory, the greatest and
most assured comfort and stay of his godly people and servants unto who^e the
payment of the money from hand to hand had been but a temporal and a short
releef, for every man has not the government ne right use thereof, so slipper
is it and fugitive.

But these Lands in the hands of these Landlords are a stay perpetual and
permanent whereunto the godly and honest person t^ sure of preferment and that
for reason for why the Owners are such in whom is no acceptaunce of Woorship,
Freendship, or of the greater offer, neither of other thing then virtue and
godliness, and therefore their rent must needs be easy, for who should rate it
by out bidding when the ungodly is no chapman neither dare present him self in
the place for the godly person does it, no not unto the wicked, much less
unto his godly Brother or Neighbor. This is no small commendation of Virtue
and godliness and no small encouragement thereto, namely where a man may make as
suer and a more sure account of his Farm: then some other can make of their
inheritance and patrimony. which thing although it seem strange: yet is it
commonly verified in the Farmers of such Landlords. For we see to often that
diverse honest and godly Men leave their Inheritance unto ungodly and
unthrifty Children (who falling into the hands of th'executor) do little
while enjoy the same. The cause whereof is for that they came to their lands
before they came to their Wit, and being Owners wared thereby proud and in
flat being under no man's check and disdaining al men's counsel and so
forgetting God and them selves fall to folly and then (as the Prophet David
says) Their table is made a snare to take them and the things which should
have been for their pro^fit, are unto them an occasion of falling. So fearful
and dangerous is the singular and sole propriety of great Lands and
possessions, as that oftentimes it not only bereaueth the owners of their right
wit and Judgments: but also through their pride, unthriftiness and
prodigallitie it hazardeth the sincere administration and execution of laws
and Justice, p^ocuring partiality and favor to ungodliness and dissolute
living, whilste they (whose duty were to rebuke such persons and to restrain
their liberty) had rather enter into their ^arge revenues and possessions and
to take and use the oppo^tunitie of their wickedness and retchlesnes as the
meetest occasion heerto. But in these Farmers and in their posterit^e otherwise
it is and that for the reverend and honorable regard between them and their
Landlords at whose hands and during whose good will and pleasure they hold
their livings and whose great liberality and benignity charge them with no
small expectation as well of godly and honest con^ersation of life, as also of
hospitality and charitable deali^g with their Brethren and Neighbors being
by their mea^es very well enabled thereunto. These things (I say) are l^oked for
at their hands and that by them whose expectation they dare not nor cannot
without great shame falsify, which godlynes, thriftines and liberallitie in
them is of no small force to move others thereunto, and so mutual love and
charity cherished between every degree, and where these things are, God has
promised to bless that house, Town, City or Cuntry.

It can hardly be spoken and much hardlyer wri^ten how greatly and how mightily
this procures and ad^aunceth Learning, Godlynes and Virtue, how much it
fu^thereth the desire of contemplation and godly exercises of the mind,
against which there is no Impediment nor hinde^aunce so great as either the
destitution or want of a compete^t living and maintenance, or else the daily
fear to be supp^anted or disappointed thereof, and consequently the thoughts
and cares either to provide for a competent living or else to maintain and
defend the same against the daily Allarms and assaults of the Covetous and the
ungodly against which the benignity and goodness of Owners and Landlords is the
greatest yea the only protection. These are the effects and fruits of these
purchases alleged by you to be made by ye gains, fees and revenues aforesaid
which do far differ from the common purchasing of other private persons by
whom (through your Ignorance or else of malice) you do Judge and measure
these which are nothing like nor comparable, as the effects and fruits thereof
will evidently declare, namely in the purchase of the Merchant, the Chapman,
the Grasier, the clothier and such other like Artificer what soever, at ye
hands of all which persons no such thing is hoped or looked for. First for that
they do not sustain any such charge of expectation, neither is any reason
that they should, except a Shoemaker bying an Ox hide for three shillings and
four pe^ce, might sell shoes for twenty shillings a pair: for that would
alter the case. Therefore as his calling is base and mean: so is his judgment
as touching Virtue and ye Felicity and end of man's life, which he Judges to
consist in getting and having, for that he see'th men accounted and esteemed
thereafter, and other or farther Contemplation has he very little or none. So
that in his Oppinion he speedeth his matters wunderfull well if he return his
Chaffer to his gain, and the more and greater: so much the better, be it land
or lease of Farm or house, if he can sell it again for duble or treble that it
cost him or let it for three times the rent that he pays him self for it.
All this he accounts honest gain and very wisely handled, so that when he
has any thing to let or set, up goes the Drum and as welcome to him the Devil
of hell, yea Belzabub him self as the Godlyest person in England, yea as an
Angel of heaven, for godlynes, virtue or honesty is the last question that
he will ask, only Quid vultis mihi dare? Thus is the godly person sure to be
put back or else to take the thing to his utter detriment, so that upon the
matter no question or difference whether of them speed, for the evil man is
made a great deal wursse, namely for that the greatness of his rent stops
the mouth of him whose reduke he should most fear and whom he would and
should most reverence and regard, and therefore will he be as wicked and as
ungracious and corrupt as many others as he can and dare for fear of the
law^s. The godly person although he gladly would do good: yet wants he
power thereto being over set with the greatness o^ his re^t, so that in
conclusion whether the good or evil may speed: they are forced to deal hardly
with the world whereby a^iseth little or no amity, freendship or charitable
love, among men, but even all for the penny as among mere Straunge^s nor any
zeal unto God nor to do any good for his sake.

By all these arguments, it appears manifestly h^w much it were to be wished
and desired at the hands of Almighty God that only or chiefly such were
purchasers and La^d-lords whose very estates and callings and the manner of the
getting of their gains wherewith they purchase do change them with a reverend
and fatherly regard in letting and setting the same to the honor and glory of
God who has so mightily blessed them, yea so far abooue all that they ever
co^ld with out shame have wished or desired, so heaping hot coals upon their
heads in their unthankfulness and dealing ot^erwise, which (as I have already
said) is not or at the least no^ so greatly to be hoped or looked for at their
hands of bace an^ mean calling. And therefore Neighbor Pierce (quoth he)
admitting and confessing the greatness of their purchase: yet can ye not
conclude against me the proper or private rece t or employing of Charges, fees
and revenues aforesaid ne there will I grant it unto you for the slanderous and
shame full consequence which it infers necessarily as has alr^ady been duly
proved.

Pierce repeateth the Reasons and Arguments of Simon and confuteth them by
proof and expecience de^onstratiue, as from the cause to the effect and that
upon his own knowledge. Cap. 10.
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) ye have made as your self does suppose many
strong reasons and conclusio^s to aprooue ye first asessing and yt now
receiui^g of eight pence or twelve pence for a sheet of paper, and other
excessive and unreasonable Fees and charges of suits as not only tolerable,
just and reasonable: but also godly and most conducible unto the commonwealth,
and to the prosperous and good estaste thereof, namely for that these fees and
charges were meant and yet are the punishment of vice and the reward of godlynes
and virtue. And also that they were and yet are meant a public treasure in the
hands of the receivers thereof, to all godly uses, intents and purposes.

Whereunto I answered, alleging the great purchase of Lands and Lordships by
the receivers of the same as a thing repugnant and contrary to your Assertion,
whereunto you have replied that their great purchase is not only contrary to
your first Assertion: but a confirmation of the same.

For you say that their porchase of lands is a provision with out comparison
more assured and permanent then were or could have been the distribution of the
money or any part thereof from hand to hand, and also that the effects and
fruits thereof are more and greater and do stretch farther and more generally
and universally do procure the honor and glory of God, and the public wealth,
peace and quietness.

To prove that these things are so: you have alleged the honorable calling
of the Magistrate and Officer, and ye great expectation that he sustaineth
both before God and men, and also the reverend opinion that we are bound to
have of him. Ye have also alleged that the first causes of all these great
gains and proffits are such as of duty he is bound to persecute and not to
prosecute, namely for that they are ungodliness, wickedness and all kind of
vice, by the gain whereof (say you) no honest nor godly person can without great
shame thrive and wax rich, much less the Magistrate and Officer upon whose
great expectation heerin you do so greatly insist.

Truly Neighbor (quoth he) all these are goodly and also godly reasons and
do very well prove how things either have been or else how things ought to be.

But that they are so presently: these are either n^ proves at all or very
small and so your argument gathered and concluded from posse to esse as I have
said already, and as I will further prove by Arguments gathered from the cause
unto the effect and from the effect unto the cause eue^ the very same that you
have alleged, tying them together in the same manner and form as your self
have alleadge^ them.

First you say that the original cause of these great gains, Fees and revenues
was the hate that the first Assess^^s thereof bare unto ungodliness, wickedness
and all kind of vice, the favor and good affection which they bare unto
Virtue, and godlynes, and therein they meant the punishment of the one and the
preferment and advancement of the other, and so you conclude lewdnes,
unthriftiness and ungodliness to have been and yet still to be the first cause of
these great gains, Fees and revenues, and these great Fees and revenues their
effect, the effect of these fees, profits and revenues ^ee have alleged or
rather I my self have alleged, and ^ou have confessed and justified to be the
great perpuisition and purchase of Lordships, lands and possessions by the
Magistrates and Officers Receivers of the same.

The effect of their great purchase is by you ale^dged to be a provision, a
stay of living and patry money for the Godly and honest People of the commonwealth, and for their assurance, peace and quietness. The effect of so good a
p^ouision for the Godly: you have alleged to be the increase ^f them, and the
decrease of the wicked, unthrifty and ungodly, the effect of the increase of
godly people you have alleged to be mutual love and charity and all good
affection both ^owards God and also one to an other, the effect whereof you have
alleged to be the manifold blessings of God according to the saying of the
Prophet in the hundred three and thirty Psalm.

Thus have you argued from the first causes pr^ducing their effects, and from
those effects as from causes of their effects very orderly and very probably,
but not nec^ssarilye as I have already alleged, and as I doubt not hereafter
I shall prove unto you so directly and so evidently that you shall either
confess your own proves fallible and false: or else you must and shall say
that causes produce no effects or else clean contrary effects, which is to
reuerse and to overthrow the order of Nature and all the law and rule of
reason as to say there can be a Father or a mother without a Son or a
Daughter or that between a man or a woman there should be begotten a dog or a
cat. And for proof heerof I will aleage both reason as strong as you have
alleged any: and also mine own experience which I my self have deerly bought
and paid for. I pray you Neighbor let me here that (quoth our Host).

Pierce Plowmans first tale for that purpose where he shows how his Neighbor
and he went to the Tauern and to the daunsing School and what happened there.
Chap. 12.
AT my being in London this last term (quoth Pierce) it fortuned one
afternoon having little or nothing to do, as God knows what Idleness and
ungodliness comes of our idle waiti^g and attending upon our days of heari^g
as they term them, when in the mean time we run up and down in the streets,
and if happily we meet with any Friend or acquaintance: it is holden great
humanity to offer him the courtesy of London, which is as much to say to have
him to the Tauern and there to sit bibbing until neither of the^ can scant
find the way forth again. So as I was about to tell you, one day amongst all
others we met a company of Neighbors and Friends together in Poules, six in
number all Cuntrie-men and Neighbors, save one that was a Londoner a Neighbor
borne of ours, who was our Leader to many a good place dout you not, so on Gods
name needs we must to the Tauern, and so we went to the Tauern, there fast
by, whereby that time we came forth again: our heds were better laden with hear
then with Wit, so on Gods name when our heds were well fraughted: we must nee^s
go to see some pleasures of the City that were strange an^ novelty unto us
of the Cuntrie, and so on Gods name we ^ent into a dancing School not very
far thence, now was ^here one man of our Company that was as deaf as a door
^^ile.

When we wear come into the School: the Musitions were playing and one
dancing of a Galiard, an^ even at our entering he was beginning a trick as I
remem^er of sixteens or seuenteens, I do not very well remember bu^ wunderfully
he leaped, flung and took on, which the de^f man beholding, and not hearing
any noise of the Music^, thought verily that he had been stark mad and out of
his wit, and of pure pity and compassion ran to him and caught ^im in his
arms and held him hard and fast. The Dauncer ^ot knowing his good meaning and
taking it to the wurst, and having a Dagger drew it out and smot the man a
great bl^we upon the head, and brake his head very sore.

The man sore moved and grieved therewitha^l, and being a man of great
strength: threw him from hi^ with all his strength among the Musitio^s, and he
lighting upon one of the greatest and fairest Vialls, brake it all in pee^es.

Therwithal up start the Musitions for him and we for to help the other being
our Friends and Neighbors and then went out Daggers, up went Pantostes, all the
rest of the Instruments in the throng were all to trodden and ^roken, and but
that Neighbors hearing the noise and bu^^li^g came in and parted us: surely
some of us had been in great danger to have been slain.

I lost my Cloak and had my head broken and so h^d three of my Neighbors more,
and hardly the Musitions and their partakers went not scotfree. But shortly to
end a^^ come to my purpose: you shall hear what followed.

First and formoste we were all arrested and c^mmitted to Prison for a fraie
and bloodshed, where I think you may make no question if it cost us any thing
before w^^ gat out again. But having paid our Fees there, and thin^ing verily
that the wurst had been past: even at our comm^ng forth from thence we were
all newly arrested by latita^es and remained until we had put in Sureties to
appeer at the day of the return of the writ in the Kings bench. So we laid our
purses together and went to a woorshipful and learned Lawyer that had been of
our counsel aforetime, and showed him the declarations that were against us,
whereof the first was at the suit of the Owner of the school, wherein he
alleged that with force and arms we had entered into his house and beaten,
wounded and evil entreated his Servants, by reason whereof he had lost their
service by the space of eight days, to his hinderaunce and damage six pound,
and also then and their three Instruments of Music commonly called Vialls did
spoil and break to his loss and hinderaunce six pound.

Besides this, every of his Servants the parties the^ selves severally declared
against us all jointly of an assault and battery made upon them, and that we
had beaten, wounded and evil entreated them to their several damages
fortipence, the Dauncer himself declared severally against the deaf man for
assaults and battery, upon all which matters we prayed his counsel and advice,
his answer was shortly that in his opinion the law was against us in all and
every of our cases whereof he gave us the causes and reasons as I shall rehearse
unto you.

To the first point of the first declaration for forcible entry we prayed his
reason, how or by what reason our entry might be said forcible seeing the
doors were open, and if they had been shut our coming in was but to hear and
see, and our meaning not hurtful to any man. His answer thereunto was that a
man's meaning that comes into my house shall be co^strued and taken to have been
such from the beginning as is his act there done after he is entered, for yt
shall be taken for his meaning and the declaration thereof, namely where he
enters without special commandment or license of the party, and because (says
he) that after your entry into ye house ye did there commit a force and
unlawful act: therefore your first entry and coming into the house shall be
deemed and judged unlawful and forcible. Then we asked how or by what reason
our act could be said unlawful which was but yt taking of a man in his arms
of very good will to stay him thinking that he had been mad and out of his wit
and might have mischeiued him self. His answer thereunto was that therein the
act was not lawful nor iusticiable but a Trespassers although no farther h^rme
had ensued thereupon, which yet (by your confession) the^e did for to speak
generally: it is not lawful to embrace or ^rain any man against his will, for if
him list to take it to the burst (especially if there ensue any evil unto the
party ther^y) it shall not help the party to say that he meant him good or it
ye least no evil thereby, for although that in felony the intent do qualify
the fact it is not so in Trespassers wherefore your act was not lawful nor
Iusticiable except ye had been Officers or otherwise yt ye had come in and
found the^ doing some ^elonious or unlawful act, by means whereof ye had had
suffi^ient coullour to have laid your hands upon the^, for every man ^s an
Officer for peace sake and for the preservation thereof, and then (quoth he)
your case had been otherwise, unto this we ^nswered that our act in all reason
seemed more lawful and tolerable then theirs, for that in their exercise
there is little good purpose or none at all, nor better end or purpose then ^o
induce such evil and unhappy events and consequents as happened in this case of
ours, and that therefore their cause oug^t not to have favor against us as if
we had hindered or interrupted their honest or lawful exercise in any godliness
or in any thing tending unto virtue, to the glory of God, or to the proffit of
the common wealth. His answer unto that was that we are not to dispute of that
which the reverend and h^norable Magistrates have established yea and holden in
no small reputation, it falls for ye Magistrates, Rulers and Officers to
bear with them in all incidents and casualties otherwise should they dissalow
their own Acts and be contrary unto themselves, which were inconvenient. Then
we demaunde^ of him why for the first Vial that was broken: the Master
should not bring the action against the Dauncer who in ^ery deed was the
breaker thereof, and not the other man. His answer thereunto was that in very
deed we were both Tr^spassers unto him alike, and he at his liberty and
election to take his remedy against us both or against any of us for (quoth
he) although ye dauncer were ye material cause yet was ye other man yt
efficie^t cause thereof, as for proof, if a carter wilfully driu his ^art over a
man, woman or Child, both the Cart, the Horses, and the Carter are guilty of
the fact whereof the deaf man is not excuseable neither can plead not guilty to
the fact, because he was the first and cheef efficient cause, thereupon we
moved unto him this question, why the Musicians them selves should not be said
to be the first efficient cause seeing yt without their noise the Dauncer would
not so have fared nor taken on, neither the deaf man have taken him for a mad
man, as both you and we would have done if we had been in his case, and had
heard no more then he heard.

Unto that his answer was, that whatsoever it seemed unto him or unto us, it
is (quoth he) at your peril, and at all men's perils else that resort and hau^t
to such places to put on all our Senses, wits and understandings, and also to
desire God to give them wisdom and his grace to Judge wisely and well to digest
such things as they hear and see therein, and yt we be not snared in evil
through ignorant appetite of our senses unto our hinderaunces more then we our
selves are able of our selves to Judge or think, for (says he) seeing we are
not able, neither is our authority to blame or challenge the places, neither to
disalowe the things there professed, which were to derogate from the Magistrate.

Yet if we have so much grace of God as to the Magistrates unto our selves and
in such cases to blame and reprove our selves, and our own senses, and
inordinate desires, either in due time before we are fallen, or else in some
reasonable time, and with our reasonable loss and hinderaunce it may suffice
for answer unto us by them unto whom otherwise we must creep and pray our
redress neither able to crave it at their hands without an inconvenience
aforesaid, which is condemn and disalowe the things by them selves allowed and
established.

We asked him what reason there was that we should be charged in several
actions and unto several persons, for one trespass, as namely unto the
Master and also to the servants. His answer thereunto was that the Master
has a special interest in his servant for the proffit he is to receive by
his service for which service he is to recover and not for the hurt done unto
the person for the party him self recouereth for that. To be short, his
resolution was that for all our harms and loss that we had gotten: we were
so far from all hope of redress or amends, that we were in the w^rsse case
in our defense against the^ and very like to yield ame^d^ by judgment of law.
And thus you see (quoth Pierce) how po re guiltless and simple men in a far
honester cause are put to ye wurser end. Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) as
for ye, be as be may. But truly Neighbor you had but evil succe se in going
to see pleasure and to hear Music, and yet tr^st me if ye will, I suppose yt
you sped a great deal better th^n a number speed in such like places, who
think neuerthel^sse them selves to have sped there well, and come away righ^ well
contented, which in very deed is the only cause why i^ my fantasy they speed
wurse then you, for why you are hu^t and feel it, but they are hurt but have no
feeling thereof v^til their hurt be past all cure, for a man is never so
daunge^ously sick or sore as when he has lost the sense and feeling o^ the
sore or of the sickness. So fares it in such persons as these, for although
they feel no evil that they contract, and yet in such places, yet do they
carry thence with them the seeds and radical causes of great infortunes as the
woeful and ^amentable end of many a good man's Child has witness^d daily,
does and will. But truly Neighbor Pierce (quoth o^r Host) you are waxen more
then half a Lawyer by these means.

Nay soft (quoth Pierce) I have an other matter to tell you and that almost as
strange as this, and that chanced to my self in a mischaunce about a four
years past, I pray ye let us hear it quoth our Host, mary quoth Pierce, thus
it happened. A friend of mine would needs give me my dinner at an Ordinary table
where we fared very dai^tely, but I promise you for mine own part I have
though my self better at ease many a time and often with bread and cheese in
other Company. So Sir in the name of God when di^ner was done: in steed of
grace to ye dice they went on every side upon proper square tables fit I
warrant you for the purpo^^, and there to the hazard they go xx. s^. xl. s^. v.
l. vi. l. a cast, I stood by and beheld. Anon there came a stranger a plain
homely fellow of the Cuntrye much like my self and he seeing such sums of
money upon the board, and the dice trotting to and fro and that now one
snatched a heap and now an other snatched and heap, and therwithall such devout
swearing, he came to me and rounding me in the ear, asked me whose wear all
those heaps of money that were laid forth, mary (quoth I) his that can get
them, get them (quoth he) how? Marry (quoth I) by hazard, say you so (quoth
he) claim they no farther property in their money but by hazard whether
themselves shall have their money or an other man? no verily (quoth I) What are
those white things full of black spots that are so chased to and fro? Those
(quoth I) are called dice upon whom stands the hazard, and therwithal my
Friend and I having dined and dispatched: went our way forth toward the
Temple, and before we had gone so far as a man might shoot a Bird bolte: there
arose an outcry behind us, stop the thief, stop the thief, and therwithall I
looked behind me: and lo the fellow of whom I told you, came running with
both his hands full of money and after him ran the ruler of the Ordinary and
three or four of his servants as fast as ever they could run with hue and cry,
we turned not back neither made us to do therein. So they followed him until
they came as far as Saint Dunstones Church, and there the fellow being out
of breath, turned again and catching ye Master of the dicing house in his
arms: cried I have him I have him, this is the thief (quoth he) Now was the
throng so great yt a man could not know which was which until at the last the
Officers came and took them both and knowing the Master of the dicing house:
asked him what the matter was.

Mary (quoth he) this Villain Thief has robbed diverse Men of Woorship my
Guests of great sums of money and I have followed him for he fled upon the
felony. And there he had spied me in the Company and bad the^ lay hold upon
me for this knave (quoth he) gave him ye counsel and is as false a thief as
he. There was no more to say, I was laid hold upon and apprehended, and both
he and I carried before a Iusticer of peace the fellow and I, my friend would
not leave me but went with me to see and hear the end. So sir, when we were
come before the Iusticer: he laid sore to the Fellows charge that he had
broken his house forciblie and burglarlie and had felloniously robbed four
Gentlemen of wo^rship his Guests of diverse sums of money feloniously an^
against the Queens laws and peace. Sir (quoth the Ius^ice) what say thou
to this? Sir quoth the fellow I beseech y^u to stand my good Friend and
Master and let me have but law and reason at your hands, I trust it appears
unto your ^iscretion (quoth he) that this matter alleged against me ^s not
sufficient to put me to answer thereunto. First for the forcible entry into
his house and burglarye supposed: I say his house was open, and daily is and to
long has been and unto to many if it pleased God and the Maiestrates such as
your Woorship is, for I undertake he that has any thing to lose and cast
away: need neither break door nor wall t^ leave it behind him there, and so
much for my answer unto that part. As to the money supposed to be stolen: he
declares no certainty thereof, neither conueieth to him self any property
therein, and so no felony of ye thing whereto no man ^laimeth property, very
true it is (quoth he) that I came into his house and seeing a company standing
about a square Table and diverse great heaps of money laid forth thereupon: I
asked this honest man that was a stander by meaning (me) what was meant
thereby, and also by two white square things full of black spots that were
chased to and fro upon the b^^rd, he answered me that they were playing at
the dice, ^^r that is quoth he the name of those square bones, and said farther
that the name of their game was hazard. When I h^d heard him say so: I
considered with my self that there mig^t be good to be done for me among them,
for having well mar^ed their order: I found them the most indifferent People t^
gain by that ever I met withal in my life, for I perceived that he that laid
the money down: the rest meant that h^e should never take it up again, and for
his part he me^t as well unto them and that all this stood in the favor of
haz^rd, and so often time it chanced accordingly, to wit that the box being
the third person: caught a share and by no other ^or better title then me
thought my self to have, for me thoug^t I was as indifferent to every of them
as was the box or as any of them was to other, for I verily thought and yet do
that if neither of them ever fingered that laid down either had his desire
against other, moreover quoth he, when I beheld such lewd and shameful
mispending of ye time, such horrible swearing and blaspheming and knew not
where neither unto who^e to complain for reformation thereof and thought in
conscience I ought not to suffer it as far forth as it were in my might and I
saw no way so likely to redress it as to take away ye cause which I perceived
was the money. I thought that both by law and good conscience I might do it
and ought also, and in this deliberation I awaighted my time and snatched up all that I could lay hold upon and came my way, whereupon I pray your discretion
and whether this be felony wherein there is title or at ye least color of
title. A Sir quoth the Iusticer, you are acu^ning thief indeed, it is time to
look to such knaves as you are. Sir quoth the poor fellow, I beseech you be
good to me, I am a poor man and I trust, saving against them yt lost the money
the money is mine against all men and as unto them when they demand me: let me
answer. And as touching that honest man quoth heby me, I never dealt with him
nor never saw him before, to be short the Fellow was committed to Newgate, and
I was fain to find surety by recognisaunce to appeer at the next sessions
there to make answer to such matter as should then and there be laid to my
charge and that cost me five shillings and this was all that I got by having my
dinner given me.

And what said your Lawyer to you for this said our Host, what comfort does
he give you of a mendes against the party that thus misused you, truly (quoth
Pierce) he utterly discourageth me to stur or meddle farther therein, and all
upon the same reasons that he made before or else the very like in effect.
Truly Neighbor quoth our Host, that Lawyer was no Counceller neither for
your purpose and much less for his own. Why so Neighbor (quoth Pierce?)
marry quoth our Host, for there is no courage in him neither has he yt way to
help him self, and to keep you in doing, in yt he gives such counsel to peace
and quietness, unto such fellows as you yt would gladly cut him out woork if
hmself were not ^is own hindera^ce. Nay surely Neighbor quod Pierce, wha^
counsel soever he had given me therein, or what counsel he or any other of them
all shall hereafter give me in such matters: I am taught already though to my
cost, while I live to love peace and ensue it, and to love mine own house, my
honest lab^ur and travel and chiefly and above all other things to serve Go^
wherein I find the only stay and comfort of man's life to res^, and that when
all is sought and tried: there is none other ^^le ne leuel well and surely to
guide and order our affairs an^ doings.

The application of Pierces tale by the Host, tha the great charges of the Law
is profitable to the commonwelth, and a repressing of vice and sin. Cap 13.
AHa, very well said the^ (quoth our Host) I am glad yt yet at the last ye are
come to ye ^oi^t whereunto I have all this while labored to bring you which is
to confess yt these great and excessive charges and expenses have reformed ^
changed you from an ungodly and troubles^me man: to a Godly, wise and prudent
man, able to give co^nsell not only privately and to your own friends and
famely: but also to bear office and authority in your Parrish, ye i^ ye
whole Shire where we both dwell, so that I hope from henceforth we shall have
great store of you, and that of the greatness of such fees and charges of suits
in Law, and of the first Assessors and the now receivers thereof ye are utterly
concluded and estopped to speak or think save in all honor and reue^ence. Do
you think so Neighbor (quoth he?) Yea verily quoth he, for you have confessed
all this your reformation and a^endment to have commen thence, and look what
effect it hat^ wrought in you: ye are of charity bound to think that it has
wrought, woorketh and will woork in a number mo then you, and the money that you
have or rather think that have departe^ from: is in their hands who are
treasurers thereof, as I have aleaged toward the good and godly uses, intents
and purposes that may or shall arise hereafter in common benefit, to wit,
ser^ice of the whole commonwealth, wherein your part is as farr^ forth as
theirs. Do you call this a mending Neighbor Simon quoth Pierce? In very deed
quoth he, I must needs confess, that these great and excessive Charges and
large Expenses have rebuked me, have chasticed and amended me, but to say that
I think or judge it thank worthy unto them that have received my money: I say
the Devil kiss his arsse that so amendeth me or any friend of mine, for verily
such amending in my judgment, deserves as much and the very like thanks as did
the Wife, who gave her husband two strong poisons, meaning to speed him in
deed, but the poisons being of contrary natures: wrought one upon an other,
and destroyed either others force, whereby the man being hardly handled for a
season, yet being driven into a lask by their extremity: avoided them both
and with them much corruption, so that where before he was a very corrupt body:
he was by their clensings the better xx. years after. Thus she did him good by
accident, but far from her intent or purpose, and utterly against her will. And
surely they that take so excessiuely of me and of others our money, and by that
kind of punishment amend and refourme us: I hold them worthy as much thank
therefore as was this Wife at her husbands hand for his amendment which was
wrought by her mean. For I dare safely undertake, that for our affliction and
punishment, or for the dishonor of God and other ungodliness that depends
thereupon: they are as sorrowful as was the parish Clark of a Town that was sore
visited with the Plague, who said unto his wife upon a day. Wife (quoth he) if
there come two corpses to day: we will have a shoulder of Mutton and a quart of
Sack to supper, and if there come but one: we will have a shoulder of Mutton
and but a pint of Sack. Content husband (quoth she) And verily I think that as
heartily as this good man and his Wife prayed for their recovery that were
visited: so heartily pray these for peace, quietness and the honor and service of
God, and the Godly and charitable dealing and living of their Neighbors and
Brethren.

Pierce proves that the sufferaunce of wickedness and ungodliness increases
their gain who are and should be therebukers and punishers thereof, and that to
be the cause of great in justice and unrighteousness. Cap. 14.
Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) I pray you let me further understand what
ye do mean by this history, for it should seem that ye have alleged it
against me not with standing that it makes for me by ^he wunderfull effect
which you your self ^re forced to confess, that it has wrought upon you. I
kn^we what I have confessed Neighbor (quoth Pierce) and also in what manner I
have confessed it, far enough from your ^urpose or any confirmation thereof. And
where in maintenan^e of these great fees and revenues you have alleged that
the^ are public, and also how many and how good and godly are the'ffects and
fruits thereof: without proof made of them or o^ any one of them, either by your
own experience or by other necessary demonstration. There in proof of the
contrary t^ wit, that they are proper and private, and therefore excessiu^ and
unreasonable which is my assertion, I have brought you this proffe of mine own
experience, whereby I have s^fficiently showed that the first causes of all
these great gaine^ and profits are prosecuted as I have affirmed and not
per^ecuted as you pretend. For I have partly showed you here what leave and
liberty the common people namely youth have to follow their own lust and
desire, in all wantonness and d^ssolution of life. For further proof whereof: I
call to witness ^he Theaters, Curtines, Heauing houses, Rifling boothes,
Bowling alleyes and such places where the time is so s^amefully misspent, namely
the Sabbath days unto the great ^ishonor of God, and the corruption and utter
destruction of youth. All which (I say) are either the causes or the effec^s of
these great gains and revenues, or else both causes and effects
interchaungeably. For I dare undertake that if eit^er these gains and profits
were public as you pretend, or else if there were as great gain and proffit to
the Maiest^ates and Officers, in the godly lives and honest conversation of the
common people as there is in the contrary: these ha^bours of ungodliness and
misnurture, would have less favor and maintenance then they have, and
godliness, Sobriety and modesty of lives and manners: would be in greater
estimation then they are, and the honor and glory of God more advanced thereby.
But alas that the honor and glory of God and the vain glory, pomp and
majesty of man cannot stand together, and that one of the^ must needs fall in
the others exaltation, for certainly the more liberty unto wickedness and sin
and the more falling from God through the same: and the more humbly
complainings unto your good Lordships, and unto your good Woorships. The more
Recognances for the peace and good a bearing, as well by the Godly as by the
ungodly, the one inuading and the other defending: the more praying, paying,
waiting, attending, dowking, crowding, and courtesing, procuring of freendship
by means, bribing of his flatterer, and bribing of her flatterer, this drives
the great wealth and abundance into few men's hands. For where, the ungodly
through misgouerment is fallen into danger of the Law, what will he not give to
redeem his life or his infamye? yea even unto them who were the first causes
and occasions of his fall into such folly and mischaunce through liberty and
not restraint of the contempt of God, his Laws, and service, which he will not
fail to measure and fully to reward unto all libertines, contemners and
despisers of his majesty and will, given them over into a reprobate mind,
from vice to vice, until he has fully brought him to naught.

So dangerous and fearful a thing is liberty and not restraint of the
beginning of evil, which although they appeer not such at the first: yet when
they are come to their ripenes and have brought forth their increase, to wit,
Fellonyes, Thefts, Man slaughter, Murder and such like: there is not so
ignorant a person that will not say, the man or woman was never like to come to
better end, namely for his evil and dissolute life in the beginning.

This liberty is in the hands of Maiestrates and Officers to bid or to forbid,
even after as they will prefer the honor and glory of God, or else their own
wealth, pomp and vaineglory. And therefore how heartily were it to be desired at
the hands of GOD, that such as are Maiestrates and Officers: should not be
couetuous, or else such as are covetous should not be Magistrates, for heerof
Iethro did warn Moses in ye xviij. of Exodus, talking with him concerning the
election and choice of Maiestra^s and Officers, and bad him choose such as hated
couatise, and spoke of no other vice. The cause whe^of is apparent, to wit
least the wickedness and ungodliness of the people came to be valuable let and
set, rented and far^ed, bought and sold, for what other thing is valluing,
le^ting and setting, renting, buying and selling of offices whose value is more
or less according to the state of the people and their dishonouring of God
thereby. And where you maint^ine these great gains by their godly and worthy
effects, the f^rst whereof you allege to be their great purchase of lordships,
lands and possessions and the effect thereof you allege to be a provision and
patrimony for the good and godly, the ef^ect whereof ye say is the increase of
them, and the decrease of the contrary, the effect whereof you say is godliness,
unanimity, love, charetie and benignity one toward an other. And last of all
the effect thereof be the manifold graces and blessings of God promised by God
in the Psalms to the house, town City or Cuntry where these things are. From
the first cause to his effect I grant your argument, that these great gains
are cause of great purchase, but from ye purchase to his effects ye show not
how it is: but how it ought to be, for instead of the effects whereof you have
spoken, I see many gay houses ^ul of gay ch^^^is, costly banqueting houses,
Galleries, bowling All^is, strange toies of point devise and woorkmanship, but
with in I find no man dwelling save pride, who has ch^sed thence hospitality
and charity, and as for other preferment that the godly have at their hands in
any of their purchases: I see not but even who will give most, and can make
might^est friends, an^ who those are in our days: the ungodly, vnfai^hfull and
uncharitable dealing so universally do plainly decl^re.

The people so euel given both young and old, so ungodly in living so uncivil,
yea so rude and barbarous in manners, wherein me thinks they have prevailed
and increased more and more all after as these offices have waxen more gainful
and ye desire to have them greater. And therefore your distinction between their
purchase and the merchant, chapman, and ^ther to^^^^ persons what soever
(saving his probability) vain and rediculous to the purpose. Therefore
Neighbor Simon (quoth Pierce) your reasons are weak and to maintain the
greatness of their fees unable. Abide Neighbor Pierce quoth our Hoaste, give me
leave to answer unto these matters, and first because that in very deed
probable reason gives place to necessary proof and demonstration, wherein ^e
suppose that ye have you beyond me, because ye against my b^^e and naked
reasons as you term them, ye have alleged authority, and that of your own
experience. I will answer you with the like, and that of mine own experience
also, and more direct unto my matter then any of yours, which are indeed
indirect and stand in different, and I will pro^^ that the Magistrate and
Officer in the beginning was and yet is such a^ I have aleadged and also the
first assessing of the said fees and revenues, and their great vtillitie and
necessity, namely for the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid. For proof
whereof I will rehearse unto you a matter which I my self did both hear and see.

The Host maintains the contrary, and for disproofe thereof, and for the
proof of his assertion: alleges the purchase of a certain welthie Officer
toward the Law. Chap. 15.
ABout two years agon it was m^ fortune to be beyond London in Kent, at the
house of a worshipful Officer toward the Law, who not p^st a Month before my
coming thither: had purchased a Lordship, wherein were diverse good forme^, and
their leases too expire at Miche^^as th^n to come twelve Months* It came to
pass one day of my being there* thither came a rich man dwelling not far
thence, whose suit was to this Gentleman to take one of his said Farms in
^euertion, and coming to him thus he began. Sir quoth he, I understand ye have
bought such a Lordship, God ^^ne ye joy thereof. Very true it is (quoth he)
Sir quod this rich man, I p^ay you let me be your tenant of such a Farm,
giving more then any other man will give for a fine. The rent of the Farm was v.
l.

What will ye give me for a lease for xxj. years quoth this Gentleman? Sir
quoth he I will give ye an C.l. and unto our Mistress a Velvet gown, and xx.
Angels to buy her pines be sides. You have bidden like a Chapman said the
Gentleman, give me leave to be advised unto Monday next said he, and then I
shall give you an answer heerin, so causing him to tarry dinner he let him
depart, and this was upon a Thursday

The next day being Friday: this Gentleman sent for the Farmer of the same
piece of land, who came thither, and with him three hansome young men his
sons. So when he was by the Landlords commandment brought before him: he
asked him of what age he was. He answered lxxv. years. He asked him how long
he had dwelled in that Farm He answered that he had dwelt there all his life
for he was ^orne in it and his father before him. You know quoth the Gentleman
that I am now become your Landlord. I know i^ very well quoth he, and I beseech
you of your favor. What will you give for a new lease of xxi. years quoth the
Gentleman? for you know your old lease is near an end. Sir quoth the poor
man, let me give you reason, only that I may be ^ble to do my Prince and your
woorship service, and to relieve my poor neighbors as hitherto I have done,
and have be^n well able. Very well quoth the Gentleman, be here again upon
Monday next and then ye shall understand more. The poor man (his duty done)
departed. The next Monday being monday next before Bartholmew day: the poor
man was come again, and brought with him a couple of fat Capons, and about an
hour or twain after came this Churl very well mounted his Gelding not dear
of x.l. and behind him was trussed a fat Buck, which he presented unto the
Gentlemen by one of his servants. To be short: he was willed ^o come in to the
M. into a close little Parlor, whether were called also this old farmer and I
my self, whom it pleased hi^ to vouch safe all courtesy and humanity both in
this and also in other matters, so that only we four were there, saving a young
man attendant upon his person. This done: the Gentleman began friend quoth he,
what accusation do you bring against this poor man pointing him to the
Farmer. Sir quod. he none, I do not know the man. No quoth the Gentleman?
except ye can accuse him of euel: ye have already condemned your self thereof,
and would do me. Why so sir quoth he? Mary Sir quoth the Gentleman, for he
cannot be guiltless of evil: that seeks the destruction and death of a
guiltless man.

Sir quoth the fellow, ye charge me wrongfully, I never sought any man's death.
Sir quoth the Gentleman, he that seeks to take away the sustenaunce of a man's
life, that man say I, seeks his death, and that by so much a more cruel mean
as it is a more cruel and fearful death, to starve of hunger or cold: then
it is to be quickly and readily dispatched and murdered, and so soon rid out
of pain. Ye have quoth he, desired to take this poor man's farm from him,
being his only stay, and have so bidden for it: that I know he may not live
but in extreme misery if he take it at your hands. Sir quod. he, ye are the
first great purchaser yt ever I heard of this opinion. I have six Farms quoth
he, taken all after this manner at their hands that do think themselves both
wise and woorshipfull, yet was there never put unto me such a problem as this
by any of them, yet drink In C.^. a year by them above all charges. Friend
quoth the Gentleman, other men's doing are no president unto me, further then
they stand with my duty unto God, and with the discharging of my calling, for
he has bidden us by his prophet to stand up and enquire after the old ways,
and if they be good: then to go in them or else not, which being spoken
generally unto all estates: how much more unto them of my calling, and therefore
admitting that such hard and extreme dealing might stand with the duty of every
private person, either unto God or unto their Cuntry and commonwealth, or else
with their own assura^ce-which I utterly deny, yet could it not stand with my
duty, nor of any man of my calling. First for the private person, and to
reprove yt such extreme dealing stands not with his duty toward God, of his
^^mandements d^ manif^^ly proo^^ wherein he so straightly comma^^^eth unto us
^h^re is, love and benigniti^ one toward an other, without the which man dare
not ^ay ^ha^ he looueth God whom he never saw, neither th^^ he has any faith,
now what love or ^har^tie in there in him that lets unto his Neighbor a
lease of hunger, ^^nt and ^ll misery and calametie, and so ^hole ^^th yt ^^n,
which God forbad to do unto the Ox? The next to wit^ it stands no^ with his
duty to the commonwealth, the very word co^^^ welthe does sufficiently show,
for if a man live in the co^mon-welth he must have some of the joys and fruits
thereof, or else it is to him no commonwealth, namely traueling and labo^ring
sore therein, neither will he that a man bear^ any good w^l toward that commonwealth wherein the joys and sorrows wealth and we are so unequally divided and
this stands no^ with the assurance of the commonwealth, which increases by
the vni^ie, love and concord, and falls ^ decays by their ^on ^arye^.

These the two first being prove (...) rests (...) to p^ooue that such
extreme taking and exacting stands all with the assurance of the very party
himself every private man's c^se, and this seems stranger and harder to
prove: then the res^due has been, but it is not so, namely unto him that
goes with the Prophet David into the house of God and ther^ ^nqui^eth thereof,
for there he shall plainly understand that all is ^ot clearly gotten that is
put into the pursse, for I my self have known a number quoth he, that have
raised iiij. times double ye revenues that their ancesters lived welthily and
woorshipful upon, yea and before their death would fain have sold land if they
had had any.

The cause whereof is for that God who is not p^esent nor called to council in
such extreme taking: will never be present nor give counsel or advise in the
bestowing, (...) spending of the same, either to his honor and glory: or else to
their own benefit, but gives them over to delight in vile and vain
pleasures, and to be gainful and ben^ficiall unto the Ministers of
voluptuousnes and sensuality and flatter^rs, whose freendship ends when the
tap lea^^th running, and when strange and ^^^uelous unto you* I will tell you
another matter which is an true as this and of mine own experience also. I pray
you let me hear Neighbor ^uoth Pierce.

An other tale by the Host of a young Gentleman that had morgaged his Land,
coming to an other great Officer of the Law to whom he offered to sell his
land of whom he had great comfort. Chap. 16.
IT fortuned an other time I was in Kent also at the house of an other great
and rich Officer toward the Laws, where I had occasion to soiourne certain
days, during which time there come thither a young ge^tleman to offer his Land
to sell, and made an offer thereof, unto this man in my presence, unto whom this
Woorshipfull Lawyer spoke in this manner.

Wherefore will you fell your Lands (quoth he) being an ancient possession: and
a fair living? Sir (quoth this young man) I am fallen into great det coming to
my Lands before I was wise, and have morgaged any Land for two hundred pound,
which except I come within these ten days: I utterly lose any Land.

You have brought your self into great extremity (quoth this Gentleman) how be
it, to ^el your Land: me think a very ^ar^ remedy thereof, and great pity if
any other way mighty taken, for (...) that ^^lleth away his Land: felleth away
his best and most assured Fr^^^d. Besides that to sell away namely his ^^cient
Patremony and which he never ^ought ^is both shameful and slanderous as to
have disherited and de^^^y^^ his name, house and family, which is an odious
thing ^t be thing which the good Nabothe the Israelite denied thereunto the King
of Israel, for when Achab demanded of him his Vineyard for as much as it was
worth, God forbid (...) the poor (...) that I should sell thee my Fathers
Inheritance, ^eeing yet but a poor ^iniard: yet did hi^ de^^^^d it is the
(...) may read in the old Testament how greatly God himself favored the
ma^ntenance and preservation of Inheritance and possession in their Tribes,
houses, names and families. For he commanded by Moses expressly if any man
sold his Inheritance being Land or house: it should return unto him again in
the year of Iubile which was every fifty years. Also that Women unto whom
Lands and Inheritance were deuolute in default of heirs males should not
marry into any other Tril e. Wherefore (quod he) I wish you to have a great
regard in departing from your Inheritance so great a blessing of God for it
is a great infamy and reproach to be said, an unthrift an^ ye first decaier of
a house and family whether it were greater or smaller.

Alas sir (quoth this young man) I am in greater distress, ye know these
Merchaunts of London are hard dealers with whom there is no mercy but for
ready pain^ent, well quoth the Gentleman, I will do thus much for you, I my
self will lend you an hundredth pound which you shall repay by forty pound a
year, and that I suppose you may ^asely do ordering your self wisely, take
that quoth he and off^r it to the Merchau^t if happily he may be entreated to
give you a year or twain for the rest upon reasonable consideration, ye young
man gave him hearty thanks, ye money was fetched down, counted and delivered and
th'assura^ce made accordingly, which being done ye yongma^ took his leave and
heartily desired me (although ameer stranger unto him, (yet because I was
present and a witness of so great courtesy and humanity) to go with him to
London unto this Merchants house, which I also was cont^nt to do, and having
dispatched the occasion of my there being, and having likewise taken my leave:
to London we came and to the Merchants house we went, when we came before
this Merchant the young Gentleman began to entreat him as fear as he could and
telling him of this good and godly Lawyer and of his great compassion, his good
council and persuasion: desired him to accept this C.l. in part of payment,
and to give him a year or twain for payment of the re t. This Merchant having
heard all the matter: now GOD forbid (quoth he) that ever a Lawyer should heap
coals upon Merchants head, or that a Merchant should not be as willing and as
ready to do a godly deed as a Lawyer, having received at the hands of God the
like ability thereto. And therwithall having received the C.l. he took his
own bond for the rest to be paid by x.l. a year, his first pay to begin after
the Gentleman's C.l. full paid, and delivered unto him all his Indentures and
other assurances of the Morgage, and making us great cheer he let us depart.
Now when I would have taken my leave of this young Gentleman: I could by no
means forbid him to bring me on my way hitherward, as far as Ware xx. miles
on this side London, where he paid all my charges for that night, and the next
day we took leave each of other and departed either of us toward his own.
Thus ye see how frutful was the good and gracious deed of one man, and how it
provoked the zeal of an other to do the like.

A A A A A A A Amen (quoth Pierce.) Well quoth our Host, because you do so
hardly receive my proofs: I will bring you more store of them, and such as I
am ready to verifye against whomsoever will deny their truth.

An other tale of the Host of a woorshipfull Lawyer that made leases to all
his tenaunts of the Farms they held for Li. years after a strange sort and
also very wisely. Chap. 17.
I Was (quoth he) in Buckingham Shire not very long sithence, at the house of
a rich Officer toward the Law whom I could name if need required, who during
the time of my being there, made unto all his Tenants leases of their farms,
whereof I my self am witness, present at their Sealing and deliuerye, The leases
are for li. years from the day of the date thereof, the rent reserved as
follows. Yielding and paying unto the said Leassor and his heirs yearly
during so many of the said li. years as th'inheritaunce shall remain in him
or them, not sold, exchaunged, morgaged, forfaited, leased in reuertion or
otherwise estraunged v.l. current money of England, and yielding and paying
from and immediately after any such act done by him or them or any of them v.
s^. yearly of like cu^rant money, and so after the rate of other rents were
they greater or smaller. Provided always, that the tenant shall not sell, set
nor let their said Farm or any percel thereof, without the assent and license
of the said Leassor or his heirs, of which reservation I asked him a reason,
whereunto hi^ answer was this. See (quoth he) how hard a matter it i^ for young
Gentlemen unto whom it falls by the grace and gift of God to be Landlorde and
owners, wisely to order and gou^rn either their possessions, lands and revenues
or themselves. I know also (quoth he) that in the wisdom, prudency an^ good
government of such, stands the happy and prospere us estate of a commonwealth; and her misery in the contrary, and therefore in my judgment ought all
men generally to wish, yea and to endeavor that the greatest lands and
posses^ions may be in their hands who both can and will order and dispose the
same to the honor and glory of God and to the p^ofit of the commonwealth,
wherein me thinks saving reformation, the to often and to common translation
of possession is not the least matter nor last to be considered, as well for
the causes thereof which are evil ^ as also for the effects thereof which are
wurse. The causes that make men to sell their patrimonyes and to spoil their
inheritance, who knows not to be these, riot, gain, whordome, delight in all
ungodly pleasures and pastime of sensuality, shortly the not fearing of God,
nor serving him, and the not caring to know his will and commandments, nor to
live thereafter, these are the causes. The effects are these, first the spoil
of the land and the making it barren and bare of all the commodities thereof,
secondly the dislodging and disapointing of the honest Farmers and good house
keepers, for their sakes that will do more then they, without any other
respect, and those are commonly the wicked and ungodly, and from thence arises
infini^ suits and controversies, maintenaunces, champerties and such like.

This causes lands often to change their tenaunts and inhabitants, and by
that means breacheth and dissolueth one of the greatest and surest bonds of
love and freendship that is or ever was, namely, coeducation, conversation and
acquaintance, which hatcheth, nourishes and confirms love and freendship,
not only between men: but even between the brute and unreasonable beasts, who
having been fostered long together in one place, will not only love and
defend one an other: but also even the very place wherein they were bred and
nourished, and they will very hardly be sundred or driven there from. And this
is the very law of kind, which can not effectually woork among neighbors, of
whom some are daily or yearly flitting and giving place unto new, namely such
as will bid more the which commonly are the wurser sort as has been already
alleged. These are two effects.

The third is the sincerity of Justice and also of dicipline both which it
greatly hazardeth, namely for ye buyers and sellers are Corelatiues, and that
the one cannot be without the other, and for that also the causes of selling
and spoiling of patrimonies are such as I have already declared. These things
are right perilous in a commonwealth, and yet do almost necessarily follow
the too often and common translation of possession and inheritance, namely
where it is by penny purchase, against the which nevertheless it is marvelous
hard to foresee and to provide, I mean for heirs and inheritours of
Lordships, Lands and possessions to continue in the same, being things that so
many desire to have, yea oftentimes such as have in their hands the bridle of
liberty, or restraint of good and evil, and of the lives and manners of men,
for what is there in all this earth so much desired as houses, lands,
Lordships and possessions, and to command over people? What else is the end of
all so many and great travels, watch, study so many and so great hazards by
Sea and land, so many shifts, sleights, deceits and oppressions, of all which
this world has been, is and ever will be full, against all which who so will
hold a thing of so great value: he must be well provided and of great defense,
and has need to have in him self the strength, wisdom, council and judgment
of many, and so much the rather by how much his possession is ye greater, and
that for two causes. First for that in his e^rour of life fall and
misgouernment: lies the fall, ruin and decay of a number, what of his own
blood, what of his tenaunts, faithful friends and servants. Secondly for that
his estate is subject unto many enemies, of whom the greatest and most
dangerous is the flatterer the old enemy of all mankind, as the story of our
Father Adam and mother Eve and the Serpent does well declare. This moved Juno
as O^id fableth to commit Io her Cow unto Argus to keep, which Argus had an
hundred eyes in his head, and therefore much adooe had Mercury to deceive him
withal his sweet songs and Music, for when he had brought on of his eyes a
sleep, ^ea diverse of them, yet waked diverse other and stood upon t^eir ward,
and whether his face or his back were toward Io yet he always beheld her.

A reason why Coppyholdes, Customs and Corporations, were first ordained, and
how that Pride and Flattery are the cheef causes that many a young Gentleman
comes to sell his Lands. Chap. 1^.
ANd surely in mine oppinion this moved the wise and honorable fathers and
Maiestrates of old time to incorporat so great livings and possessions, and
also to erect and establish in Lo^dships so many copy holds and custummar^
tenures as the most sovereign remedy against pride and surcuydrie, which
commonly accompanies the private, singular and sole propriety in land,
possession, office or any other thing whatsoever, and also a way and mean to
furni^h the commonwealth with many both able to deserve well and to do good
also glad and willing thereto, unto the which p^ide is either the only let and
impediment: or else of all other the greatest as he upon whom flattery
attends, yea and in such sort that he leads him by the nose up and down
the house, making him to believe of himself any thing, causing him also to
delight no while in any one thing, whether it be apparel or the fashion
thereof, place, person, diet, friend, servant, Tenant or other thing what
soever, and this as daily experience teaches, is the high and ready way to ye
Usurers house and from thence to the Extorcioner, who dwells hard by, of
which twain by that time he has taken forth his lesson kindly: I dare be
his surety he will not be hasty to do good to any good body, neither if he
would shall he have wherewith all, for either shall he have no lands left him at
all: or if he have any, he shall be glad to let them deerer then that any
honest man shall do good thereon, so that in conclusion, both the Landlord and
the tenant shall be miserable.

The cause heerof is Pride most and cheeftly, as I have said, and oftentimes
youth, good nature, or peradventure excess of Pleasure and Sensual delights,
where through young Gentlemen are often snared through evil company, being
overtaken sometime by giving their word, sometime through a bribe of a little
present money, sometime by one deceit, sometime by an other, wherein men are
soon pampred, namely such as are of small experience and judgment, and know
not the false lures of the wicked and ungodly, against all which these
Corporations and customs are of great force and a great defense, for in both
these cases: hardly can they be assaulted, much less invaded by any of the
enemies aforesaid.

First for that a corporation is never under age, as for example, Mayor and
Comminaltie, Deane, and Chapter, Wardens and Fellows and such like, whose
succession is by election, their propriety is joint and in common, neither can
one do any thing without the rest, and therefore to flatter any one of them
vain, and to flatter them all very hard namely men's Natures, Wit, Judgments
and Affections being diverse, and every man willing to maintain and prefer his
own opinion or his friends. Pride atteinteth them not, for who is proud, or at
the least so proud of any thing, wherein a number has to command as much as
he, and without whom he can do nothing, then being armed against Pride the
Father of necessity and need: they are ^etter freely to afforde their good
word or deed, and therefore in vain were it to bribe them.

But admit that any of them would be bribed, it were also in vain and would
procure the evil will of all the rest with out bribing them all which were
heavy and hard to do.

So that in any competicion made unto such persons against any old Friend,
Tenant, Officer or servant: it is very hard to prevail except it be through
his own great misbehauiour. And where it is between mere Sraung^rs one of
them against an other, there the best and most worthy is sure to speed, for
certainly and infallible there is nothing in all this world so amiable, so
beloved and favored as honesty, virtue and godliness are. Where private
flattery or briberie stand not in their light, as in the case of private
Owners and proprietaries: I have alleged that it both may and often does.
And thus much of the Corporations and of their effects. Now to speak of the
customs of Manours the very same or like in effect may be said, for the
Inheritour of customary Land although he be seized thereof to him and to his
heirs yet can he not sell it without license of the Lord and that solemnly
granted by his Steward in open Court and there entered, nay he cannot set or
let the same or ^therwise impair the wood or other commodities thereof without
license aforesaid.

So great an entresse and commandment has the Lord therein and yet not to the
hinderaunce or prejudice of ye Inheritance but e contra, namely that the
selling, setting or other government of such a royal possession as land ^s:
should stand in ye Judgment and discretion of diverse, and those of ye ripest
and best advised, and not to be sold, wasted or spoiled through ye
intemperaunce of one foolish or ungodly man or woman either formed or
necessity or otherwise for flatery or other fo^d or foolish affection
whatsoever, wherein the Lord and his learned Stuard and the homagers of the Court
are Judges.

In all which case it may evidently appeer how great a care those honorable
and reverend Forefathers had to enact and establish the great possessions in
the hands of such as were not like to misregarde so great and high a blessing
of GOD, the effects and fruits whereof have been many and great as from time to
time proof has verified and yet does, for it has always been accounted and
yet is a right happy thing to be tenant or Farmer to a Corporation or enjoy any
commodity under them. For woorshipful and honorable have always been their
dealing in ordering and government of their Lands, livings, and possessions.
and of their Tenaunts and Farmers of the same. But chiefly and abooue all
others to be Tenant unto the Prince, who indeed is a Corporation, for from the
Prince, there can pass nothing but by writing under seal, neither does or
can without the consent of diverse of the most honorable and best advised. These
(quoth he) are the causes and the reasons that have moved me to make these
leases, and therein these reseruations which unto you do seem so very strange.
For I suppose this to be a strong mean to unite the Landlord and his tenant
together, and to counterballaunce the one of them against the other in form
of a corporation, or else as near unto the Nature thereof as I could devise. For
by this means, if my heirs or any of them chance at any time hereafter to
prove unthrifty: his unthriftiness shall not be so gainful unto any man yt in
hope to purchase his lands would therefore strengthen his hands therein and by
these means I have left them more Friends and fewer Flatterers. For he that shall
buy his lands without the consent of the Farmer: he shall for the time make as
good a purchase as does he that purchases of a Woman her Husbands lands
while he is yet alive, or he that goes to the Poultrie and buying there a
Capon for two shillings puts him into his bag, and when he comes home he
finds there nothing but a Capons leg, for in this case of mine: the buyer
buyeth less then the Seller sells by xix. parts, which me think should keep
them from argument upon the price whilst either of them would fain make the
best bargain for him self, as the manner of all chapmen is. And for which reason
Jesus Sirach says of them, that sin sticks between the bier and the seller
as fast as does a nail stick between two sto^es in a wall.

This way have I brought to be stronger and better assured then any entaile
general or special both which private couetise has found a way to destroy to
the disheris^n of many a good kindred and to the great decay of virtue and
godlynes, and heerin (quoth he) I have done my heirs n^ wrong, for upon this
rent I have lived content and do, and if they prove honest and virtuous: so
may they do, and then I have left them enough. and if they prove otherwise:
then hau^ I left to much and yet to little to serve them also.

Moreover (quoth he) I have heerby provided against the malice of such
tenaunts as abuse the liberality of good Land lords fetting and letting over
unto the third and fourth hand racking and enhaunsing the things unto excessive
and unreasonable rents, and such as the Landlord him self would never have done
for pure shame and pity, which nevertheless being raised to his hand by
others: is a perilous president unto him at his return unto the possession
thereof.

Thus you have heard (quoth our Host) what a godly and Fatherly care this good
and virtuous Maiestra^e had to prefer the honor and glory of God and also
the ^ommon wealth of his Cuntry and People, whereby it may appear how heartily
to be desired is the purchase of such P^rsonnes whose riches is the Treasury
and Storehouse of the commonwealth, as well for the sustenaunce of the sam^
concerning worldly and bodily provision of transitory things: as also for the
furtherance and increase of Virtue, godliness and Piety, Love and Concord.

Ho (quoth Pierce) lay a straw there for Gods sak^, marry Sir here is stuff
indeed (quoth he) here has been a ^ong discourse indeed, and even as true as
all the rest, with that I enterrupted their talk and spoke unto him.

The Author interrupteth Pierce maintaining Simons Assertion showing that of
late in his sight he knew a Lawyer gave x.li. to the building of a Bridge.
Chap. 19.
FAther Pierce (quoth I) these matters are not so strange nor so incredible as
you ween, for proof whereof I will (if it please you to give me leave) to
rehearse a thing which I my self did se and that no longer a go then Easter
Term last. It fortuned that I went into a Lawyers Chamber in Sergeants Inn
with a Friend of mine who was Plaintiff in a repleuin in Bedford shire, and
being come into his Lawyers Chamber and having stayed there a while about our
business: there came in an ancient Gentleman of the Cuntry, whom I know very
well by sight and have done long, whom when the Master had espied coming up
even at the top of the stairs, he spoke to him as follows. I know wherefore
you come, go down again to my man and bid him come up to me, which the
Gentleman bid, his servant being come: he took forth of his Cubbord (which
was under the square table that stood before him) a bag wherein was ten pound
and delivering it unto his man bad him go down and pay it unto the Gentleman,
and if any of the gold lack weight change it for him. The servant went down
and did accordingly, I thought verily it had been the rent of some house or
land that he had holden of him. But even while I was in this thought: the
Gentleman coming up again gave him humble and hearty thanks and that in the
name and behalf of a whole Cuntrie yea of diverse Shires. Whereupon I taking
occasion to enquire farther of the matter: understood that he gave that ten
pound freely toward the erecting and building of a bridge, and that such
charitable deeds as this are no new things unto him. I sooner will believe this
(quoth Pierce) having of a man learned in the Laws and whom Virtue and
Learning have prefferred, then of the others that Fishen for Offices with the
golden hook and never wist what Learning meant.

Simons return to his matter again declares of an other rich Officer in the
Law who had two Farmers, one rich and the other poor and how he dealt with
them. Chap. 20.
WIth that our Host took hold again, saying yt he had yet one other matter
to tell and therewith he would conclude. I was an other time (quoth he) at the
house of an other rich Officer toward the Law, who d^elleth in Kent also and
is a man of great w^lth, and one time of my being at his house as (I thank
hi^) I have been very many times. There were two of his Tenaunts come to take
new leases of their Farms the land^ being of equal rent and value, but yet
the Farmers not equal in wealth: the one having been blessed (as it should seem)
about the other for the one of them was very welthie and vpheld h^s Tenament in
very good repair and offered the Lord at the first word forty pound for a
fine for one and twenty years The other was poor and yet his tenament in
decay, neither was he able to give five pounds for a fine, whereof the Landlord
having challenged him and warning him to look to it thereafter: willed the other
to lay down his forty pounds, which he did without delay. The Gentleman when
he had counted it: put it into a bag and freely gave it unto the poor man
with these words (one of you bear an others burd^n) wherewith the other was so
far from being ill content that he humbly praised God, and gave the
Gentleman right hearty thanks therefore: and so he sent them away both very
well contented. Since which time I here of the poor man that he is grown to
great wealth and of such benigniti^ and hospitality as are not many Owners or
Landlords dwelling near him. Thus (quoth our Host) I have confirmed my first
Assertion and have sufficiently avoided your reasons and examples alleged in
disproof of the same, and these have I done by Example and demonstrations does
more in number then yours are: and also more evident, apt and prop^r unto ye
purpose. That is not so Neighbor (quoth pierce) for admitting that your
Examples were all or any of them true, which for the most part I will not
grant, yet are they particular and cannot make any general Conclusion,
besides yt you tender me an issue upon two affirmatiues which is against the
grounds of law as I have learned by mine own experience deerly bought. For I
have alleged against you the penerall Corruption of lives and manners being
the effect of liberty unto excess and dissolution which I also have alleged
and proved to be an effect of private desire to pouch to purchase and to wax
rich, from al which causes and effects conuertly my Argument is necessary and
infallible and therefore being alleged affirmatively it demands a direct
and general trauerse to the effects, which effects being not disprooued: the
causes thereof cannot be denied, against all which matters you have answered in
the affirmative also, alleging the examples of some good men, which whether
they be true or not, I do not greatly force without a general denial of that
which I have alleged, although that for every example alleged you had
brought fifteen, and so is my first Assertion maintained and stands fast, and
yours utterly disprooued.

The Conclusion of the Conference, and the preparation to the Questions being
the second Book. Chap. 21.
BY this time it was waxe^ even dark night and our Host speaking unto Pierce
said unto him Neighbor Pierce (quoth he) we have reasoned so very long to
and fro that the night is stolen upon us, and the purpose of your coming
hither utterly forgoten through our earnest disputation in these matters.

Truly Neighbor (quod Pierce) I cannot think this time ill spent, I would I
had never spent time wursse if it had pleased God, and therefore quoth he, if it
please you ^o lend me this v.l. I will be gone home, for I know the way at
midnight. Neighbor Pierce (quoth our Host) your v.l. is ready, and ye shall
have it with you but not to nigh^, for hence shall ye not depart before to
morrow God willing, and namely for this strangers sake, whom I will desire yo^
to accompany for this night, for in his Cuntry I have re^eiued many fold
humanity, as partly ye have heard, and therefore I gladly would do him some
here to my power, and therefore this night or a convenient part thereof we will
in^euour our selves to spend together in honest mirth and exercises. And
therwithall I spoke, and giving our Host hearty ^hanks: desired Pierce that it
might so be. Who at my reque^t did soon condescend, and was very well contented
therwith^ll.

Then quoth I, seeing that we have so well spent the fore part of the night
wherein I my self have done nothing but harkened: let us agree upon some mean
to pass the time with all after supper until bed time, no wursse then we have
done the time before.

Now verily Gentleman (quoth our Host) and that is very well spoken, I be
shrewe him that disagreeeth thereunto, if it be my self. Amen quoth Pierce
Plowman if it ^e I. Very well then quoth I, this is my order if it may please
you. After Supper every man shall put his question and ^el his tale in order,
and by course whereunto each of the others shall speak to wit unto the question
shall give an answer of ^issolution of the saying and unto the tale shall show
their good or il likeing, and he that tells the best and wisest tale to wit
of highest and best sentence and puts the sharpest and ^isest question most
tending to virtue and edifying of the ^earers or gives the wisest and best
solution: he shall have his breakfast here to morrow at the charges of the
other twain. Content withal my heart quoth our Host. Content qu^th Pierce
Plowman. But to whose Judgment shall we stand heerin quod he? Truly quod I,
even to the ^oome of our Hostess fit please her to take it upon her, whereupon
she being calle^ very wilingly undertook it, so was the matter fully agree^d
and on hands given there upon. And then was the fable covered for supper and
(our Host having him sell first given thanks to God) to supper we went where
we fared right well and were merry, and when we had supped: the Cloth being
removed, and thanks likewise given. After we had sitten still and reposed our
selves a little while ^ my self began as follows.

The end of the first Book.
The Second Book, declaring the Questions and Answers between the Author, the
Host, and Pierce Plowman.
1 THe first Question put by me, whether it be more proper to virtue and
godlynes to give or to lend, or to pay that a man owes.

Pierce Plowman answered, that of those three to give was the best, to lend was
the next, and as for paying that which a man owes: he held it a duty, and in
doing of duty there stands no Godlynes, neither lies there any thank
therein, and that (he said) appears by Christ his own words who says,
that when we have done that which was our duty: we are unprofitable servants,
neither has paying, of debts any express testimony of Godlynes or virtue, in
the Scriptures of God, or by common experience among men, whereas giving has a
name of virtue, namely of liberallitie whereof the Prophet David speaks thus.
He has dispersed and given unto the poor, and his righteousness remains for
ever. Again oof lending he says. The righteous is merciful and lends, and
will guide his words with discresion. To be short, liberality (which
extends both unto giving and also lending) is a property of God, who both
gives and lends unto us his daily gifts and blessings, but borowe he cannot
neither pay his debt. And so shortly paying of debt in his opinion no virtue ne
property of Godliness, for that it is a thing which God him self cannot do,
and so the first twain, virtues and the third no virtue, but a duty.

Our Host maintained the contrary, and that to pay a man's debt is the most
excellent quality and virtue of the three, and most peculier and proper unto
the children o^ God, and that the other twain are no virtues, neither d^serue
that name, save so far forth as they are included within this, and for proof
thereof thus he reasons. Whatsoever ^s or may be cause of evil: that same
thing may it self be said to be evil. What soever act corrupts or
dishonesteth the dooer or the sufferer thereof, or else both: that act is or may
b^ evil, contrariwise, whatsoever act does not neither cann^t corrupt or
dishonest the dooer nor the sufferer thereof nor an^ other person; that act
says he neither is evil, neither by any means can be made or called evil.
Lending says he often tim^s corrupts and dishonesteth the dooer thereof, namely
for Vsurye, selling the deerer for day given, both these are lendin^s in their
kinds, and yet not any properties of Godliness no^ virtue.

But to speak of the best lending and that which is ^imply without any of the
regards aforesaid, yet means the lender to have his things again, and
therefore what godlyn^s is there says Christ if you bid them to dinner yt can
bid yo^ again, what great godlynes have you showed therein, and ^o much of
lending. Gifts are given oft-times to corrupt and so pervert Justice, and
thereby both the dooer and sufferer dis^onested. Gifts are given by the covetous
in hope to receiu^ greater. Gifts are given by flatterers and Clawbacks, nam^ly
superfluous and excessive feasts and banquets unto P^inces and great estates,
to the end under their authority to ^ide upon the poor and godly people, and
to devour and spoil the labors of all others of the common and meaner sorry,
to the great oppression of virtue and godlynes, and to the ^reat increase of al
wickedness and ungodliness. Gifts are g^uen in simulation of frendshipp when
nothing is so little m^nt, and so wickedness utterly concluded thereby: In giving
is ^stentation and vain glory, and these two are the fathers and mother of
flattery. For where Thraso is Gnatho will be als^, giving unto one friend and
not unto the rest, if a man have; many* procures their hatred and envy
against both the giver and the receiver. Shortly it stands together to be a
large giver: and yet a most wicked and ungodly person, and t^erof are great
examples namely of Cateline, of whom Salust writes that he was prodigal of
his own, and desirous of other men's. And of Silla that cruel Tirant he
reports this, he would give no man more frankly, lend he would also very
liberally, but what soever he could borowe: he would never pay again. Now unto
the third part, to wit paying a man's debt, and which (says he) I call the
most high and soueraign virtue, and the most proper unto Godliness, and that
for these causes. First it neither corrupts nor dish nesteth the dooer nor
the sufferer thereof, for I am sure al men will confess that a man may honestly
pay that which he owes, and he unto whom he ought it, may honessly crave the
same.

Paying of def corrupts no Justice neither I suppose can be proved ever to
have done in paying of bet there is no ostentation of vain glory, for it is
not the deed of a proud mind, whose property is not to acknowledge any good
turn for that might charge him with duty of acquitall whereon the proud and
ungodly differ chiefly from virtuous and godly, for the proud may not seem to
have needed any man's good turn neither to have used their help, both which
things in paying their det they should implicatiuely confess to have done, and
therefore are they ashamed to repay what so they can borrow for the Conclusion
aforesaid. And that stands well with the saying of Jesus of Sirack who says
that what so the ungodly can borrowe: he accounts it as if he had found it,
whereof the reason is this, although pure need and necessity constrain them often
to use this word (lend) yet they use him for a cloak of dissimulation as the
effect shows, for this is evident that there are but four ways of
attainment or getting of whatsoever thing, for it is either given us, lent us,
or else we take it perforce, or else we found it.

So that whatsoever is lent unto such people either it is given or lent, or
taken by force or else found.

Given you will say it is not, nor so meant by you, and you shall find the same
by him that took it at your hands, for he will never give you thanks therefore,
neither see you but against his heart.

Borrowed it was not upon his behalf, and conseq^ently not upon yours, howsoever
you meant in departing the^with for except there be a borower: there can be no
lender, for they are corelatiue and none can be without other, no more then
there can be a Father without a Child, then if the o^e did not borrowe: the
other did not lend, he borrowed not, f^r you shall find that with his good
will he never meant to pay it again. (...) your lent it not.

Hi^ took not from you perforce for your self deliuer^d it, so thou if you
neither gave it, lent it, neither left by f^rce, then there remains but a
fourth, which is that you lost it (...) he has found it, according to the
saying of Jesus of Sirack, for what soever a man finds he took it from n^
man neither is he bound to thank any man therefore, and tha^ this is the manner
of the ungodly: the Prophet David be^areth witness where he says The ungodly
boroweth and ^ayeth not again, but the righteous is merciful and liberal,
Thus it appears (quoth our Host) that who so truly paieth ^is o^t he can
not therein be called an evil person or be said to have (...) sted neither him
self or any other ^odie, and therein far excels this quallitie both the
other.

But now it rests me to prove (quoth he) that this word (to pay a man's
det) does include both the rest so far says as they may or can be called
virtues or proper^ies of godliness which I will prove in this order.

First say, that whatsoever we have here in this ^orld: we have it at the
bountiful and merciful hands of our God as lent and which he may at his
pleasure take from us, as also we daily see him do. Then if we have nothing
but that we have received: (as Saint Paul says) we must needs c^nfesse we
are ^^^^tted unto him therefore. How then can ^e pay unto him our det for he
receives no money we cannon feast him, for he neither eats Bulls flesh nor
drinks the blood of Goats. It rests then that we give unto them that are
(...) his Bayliffes and ^^ereiuers for that intent a^^ purpose, and unto them
in whose persoune^s he has ^ga^^d him self ^^to (...) to wit unto his poor
and godly Saints a^^ servant that are here upon the Earth among us, unto
whom whatsoever we give he has promised to accept it, as given unto him as
a payment of so much det, a testimony not of our merit: but of our woorking
faith in his grace and mercy, and in this only sense and meaning, giving and
lending are virtues and proper unto the Children of God.

2. THe next Question put by our Host, w^^ whether is the harder matter to
make a Lord or a Gentleman.

Pierce answered, yt in all common reason and also by experience the harder
thing: the harder is the d^^ing thereof, ^ Lord ((...) he) is a greater degree
then a Gentleman, and therefore harder to be made then a Gentleman.

I Answered that I thought and knew the contrary by experience, For I knew
(quoth I) where a Churl by hi^ purchase of Manor is become Lord of a number
better men then himself, and so is he a Lord and yet no Gentlemen.

3. THe next Question of Pierce Plowman was why p^oremen are not called to
office of estate and government in common welths but evermore the rich and
welthy.

Our Host answered, because quoth he, the poor would to be rich and so are
not content with their present estate, but to desire alteration and change and
all such persons are more meet to be commanded then to command in a common
wealth. But of the rich and welthie it is clean otherwise, for they are already
that which the poor have desire to be, and therefore content, and consequently
Friends and furtherers of peace and unity which is never nor never will be
where they have authority in their hands that are not content with their own
present state, and so great hazard of the common peace lies therein.

4 THe next Question by me^^ that is the reason that the Sons and Children of
great purchasers, namely (...) and and Merchants, are common ^^ such he ri^^^
and ^^^melesse unthrifts.

PIerce answerered that he knew no reason therein but he thought it a very
secret Judgment of God upon the parents that have eaten four Grapes and set
their Childr^ns ^^^ch ^^^^edge.

Our Host said it argued great equity and consience in t^eir Children in that
they meant to buy wit, and to pay as ^eer therefore as their fathers and friends
had sold theirs.

5 The next Question by our Host, what was first the reason of giving and
wearing of mourning gowns and garments for such as are deceased.

PIerce answered he thought it was in favor of our i^bicilitie and weakness,
and for that reason: are not so p^one and ready to weep so sore, namely rich
widows who cannot weep so redily as a dog can make water, and therefore it was
thought expedient that such mourning were, and that ^uch ^^ co^ld not mourn
for other business: they might be al^ow^d unto the^^ soon honest and coulorable
means to m^urn by attorney, as we see yt in matters of law he that for ^ther
necessary business cannot attend upon his causes: is received by his Attorney,
and of these great heirs, executor^ and rich widows that are otherwise
necessarily occupied and have no leisure to weep: it was thought in like manner.
Also (...) thought profitable for the parties themselves for that it is an
honest mean of publicatio^ as well of the widowh^^d as also of her great heuines,
therefore whereby the more Counselers may resort unto her, for in strange places
a wido^e is known from other by her weeping and sorrow.

6 THe next Question by pierce what differs a cou^tous person from a Niggard.
Our Host answered a ni^gard is afraid to want him self, and therefore
husbandeth and spares, and often lives besides his own. But the couet^us is
curse afraid least others should not want and therfo^e kee^eth and engrosseth
all to defraude the hungry soul ^ and (...) the poor want bread.

7 THe next Question by me why such fol^e as delight in rich and costly
apparel, and also in deli^^t and dainty neats and drinks, do not eat and
drink in the open streets as they do wear their apparel. Pierce answered,
because that for their delicate fare: no body would honor or reverence the^
except they gave them part with them, which because they purpose not to do:
therefore they hold it best to eat it wtin doors and in secret, but in their
brave apparel there lies some honor at the least as they suppose, because
they see many yt meet them strike their sails thereat although as great and the
like reason in the one as in the other.

8. THe next Question by our Host why the best and daintiest meats and drinks
and such as breed and make the mosts and best nurishment in the body, do not
also breed the best manner but rather the contrary.

I Answered, because that commonly folk take to much of them, and have so
great felicity therein, the rather that the ministers of voluptuousnes and
sensuality may thrive, but the cheifest and best reason seems to be this
that me^ may know that Godliness and virtue are not tied unto meat and drink,
neither do consist therein, as Christ has said. The kingdom of heaven is
neither meat nor drink, and to move us therefore to eat and drink to live, and
not to live to eat and drink.

9. THe next Question by me, what possession is the best and surest, and least
subject unto rauin and violence.

Our Host answered the best things and the wurst for virtue which is the best
possession, a man may carry far enough without being robbed thereof, and or
that either man or woman offer to take it from him, and as it is of the best:
so is it of the wurst, for once (quoth he) I lost a Glove which was taken up
and brought after me.

10 THe next Question by our Host, whether beauty and honesty may dwell
together in one house, and be tenaunts both unto one Landlord or not.

PIerce said, he knew no cause to the contrary, except the Landlord (quoth he)
to be a Purchaser of Land, or a great builder or both, then Beauty must have a
License of the Justice to keep a Seller or a bowling alley or an in ^rdinary
table or else all three, and then honesty must take a house farther of.

11. THe next Question by Pierce, what is the reason that some Women do so
curse and lay forth their hairs.

THe answer by our Host, for that to be berdl^sse is in a man monstrous, and
to be bauld headed in a woman as in a tree never to have leaves, or ground
grass, and therefore least for want of showing their hairs they might
peradventure be suspected to be monsters: they make themse^ues very mosters in
deed.

Dum vitant stulti vicua in contrarium currum. 12. THe next Question by our
Host, what is the end and purpose of so stately and sumptuous buildin^s of
houses and so many Chimneyes therein now a days.

THe answer by Pierce physic and natural, that against all sicknesses,
namely Ethics and ptisicks, all things de^^bting the senses are wholesome, and
also al things ^rouoking and causing appetite. These delight the senses, namel^
the eyes, these sharpen the appetite, for they argue hunger and scarsitie
within, neither is the smell of meat and drink h^rtfull to weak stomachs, the
Kitchen and the Buttrye being not so apparent, and even at the first entry as
in the old buildings but rather far of, and hard to find, and with some
labor and exercise except to him that knows which way they are His reason
oeconomicall politik, that it is a good ^efence against the haunt of Beggars,
for there is no begge^ that has either experience or wit that will go thither
for^m alms, and so money and charges saved thereby.

13. THe next Question by me, wherein differed flatterers from Crows and Ravens.

PIerce answered, they differ in this, that Crow^s and Ravens will pick out a
man's eyes when he is de^d but flatterers will eat him while he is yet alive.

(...) this place, there fell a brabble between two rich men concerning
trepasses by words and speeches, whereupon one of them sued the other and had
demanded by action M. l' damages. I can not tell how, at length they were both
content to put the routter unto two men of worship their neighbors, and became
bound in great sins either to other to stand to their awards and order
therein. The plaintiff for their better instructed delivered unto tharbitrators a
copy of his declaration and of ye whole issue, wherein the party Defendant to
some of the matter had pleaded not guilty: and other some had justified,
whereupon th'arbitrators having duly considered, and heard the in allegations^
for f^rther pro^f of both their matters, ordered as foleweth, that the party
defendant being guilty of diverse misbehauiours by the Plaintiff against him
alleged: should therefore pay two hundred fifty pound unto the common tresure
of five Parishes next adioining, to be there employed and bestowed at the
discretion of the most honest and best at the said Parishes and unto the
party plaintiff for all his cost (...) this awarde being showed and read unto
the parties they were both highly displeased thereat.

The plaintiff for that the Arbitrators had given that unto Strangers (says
he) which should have been his and so have exceeded the limits of their
authority and the tenor of his submission. The defendant thought him grieved
with the greatness of the sum and so both the parties highly displeased.

The Arbitrators maintained their awarde and order to be both just and
reasonable. First for the Defendaunt, they said they were of duty bond to
punish him upon good and due proofs made by his Adversary of his the ungodly
behavior, where nevertheless they had qualified his punishment and the
demand by his Adversary. As touching the plaintiff and the sum which he
demanded by the name and ^earin of amends: their answer was that they meant it
such to wit an amends and that not only unto one of them but to them both for
they hoped that the Defendaunt by that time he has paid the two hundred and
fifty pounds will be better hereafter as concerning the like ^ffr^ce and so he
has his amends, but what or how you would have been amended by the r^ceit of
so much money paid unto you: if it might have appeer^d unto us: we verily
would have adjudged it unto you, but that could we never perceive nor be
persuaded to believe, for w^ never heard that honor, virtue, godlynes and the
existimation therein are or ever were valued or valuable by money ^aking, but
rather in departing there from, for as the last doo^h show a noble, gentle and
a godly heart and mind: so does the first argue the most vile abject and
basest minded person that ever can be and one in whom is utterly misprison of
all virtue as well witnesses S. Peter unto Simon Magus, w^erfore (said they) we
thought that in this distributio^ which we mean to be your act: you have unto
the world sufficiently di^prooued whatsoever evil your Adversary has purposed
to bring upon you as touching your existimation or good name and have showed
your self in very deed such a man as in the preamble of your declaration you
gladly would be taken to be, and such as if you be not already: we verily think
that the rec^it of all this and ten times as much more will never make ^ou, and
therefore can be called no mends unto you in the tak^ng: but rather in the
honest distributing thereof, which we hold a just and reasonable Judgment in
all actions of such nat^re.

With that the two parties drew forth either others obligation, and cancelled
them both, and took hands and ^eparted home great Friends spite of the
Arbitrators and o^ their awarde, and so ij. Churles were made friends.

THis tale being ended, Pierce Plowman would ^eeds acquit with an other tale
not unlike. It chaunce^ one day (quoth he) while I was in my Councellers
Cham^er in the Inner Temple: there came a woman dwelling about the Strand, and
prayed his council, and what action s^e might bring against an other woman a
neighbor of hers, that had said to her in open presence of diverse of her
neighb^urs, that she had already twice escaped the Gallows. M^ Lawyer asked of
her if she had never in her life passed by a pair of Gallows. She answered
yes. So have I done (quoth h^^) I thank my God, and that some time when there
have been a dozen hanged, and so I think have you (quoth he). True it is Sir
quoth she. Then quoth he, ye cannot recover for those words, for they bear
good couller of justification, and also show that ye have had better fortune
then possible many a better man's Child, and so have I my self also. With this
answer the good woman held her self well apaid, and went her way content.

THen began my tale. There is dwelling in Holbourne (quoth I) and that not very
far from the place where I do lie, a certain man whom I have noted this long
time to be a man of strange affection, for being a man of great wealth and
therefore the meeter for company, yet if any friend or neighbor require him to
go with them to the Tauern, to the Ale house, to the Theater, to ye Curtain as
they term it, or to Paris garden or any such place of expense: he utterly
refuses, and after their return that willed his company: his manner is to go
unto some one of them, desiring him to tell him truly what he has spent since
his going forth, which having learned at him whether it be a grote or
sixpence, more or less, he goes straight unto a Cofer that he has standing
secretly in his Chamber, which has a Til, in the which Til there is a little
clift, at the which clift he puts in as much money as the party said yt had
spent, and this til, he never opens until the end of the year, so often
times he finds there in forty shillings, often times three or four pound or
more and this he takes and bestows upon his poor neighbors, and upon other
godly business imployeth it.

And upon the lid of his Chest is written in great Romain letters, take from
thy kind, and give to the blind.

This tale being ended, the night some what far rumor Hostess warned us
thereof and that it was high time to go to bed, which we were all contented to
do saving Pierce Plowman, who had yet one other tale to tell, and prayed us to
give him the hearing, which we granted him, and then he began.

There is here about (quoth Pierce) a Gentleman that has enlarged his rent but
not his land (where in many are very expert at this day) and once upon a time
of my being in his house there came in a poor tenant of his, one that ha^
been long tenant both to his father and others his Aunc^stors, which poor man
pitifully said unto him as follows

Alas Sir (quoth he) in your Fathers and graundf^thers days I lived well and
kept at the least twenty Kine ^esides Oxen and horses, and now through your
hard dealing with me I am not able to keep twain.

Well quoth the Gentleman thou lie, for I have b^^n better to thee: then ever
my Father or Grandfather wa^, for where by thine own confession in their time
thou di^st keep but twenty Kine: now thou may keep two hundre^ at the least,
for now (quoth he) through my freendship thou may be the common Neat heard,
and keep all the beasts in the town.

And thus our tales being all ended: we required ^he sentence of our Hostess
therein, she said that truly in ^er opinion the Stranger (meaning me) had
told the best ^ale and whereby she had gotten most Example of edifica^ion and
knowledge, whereby to help and instruct both her self and others, and giving
me great and hearty thanks therefore: she gave Judgment that I should break
my fast the next day at the charges of her Husband and Pierce Plowman, she
said farther that to that man of whom I told the tale: she was Detter, if
she knew how to do him good.

So here we ended, and went to bed, and the ^ext day Pierce Plowman was up
very early, and called me up and our Host, (as since I have learned his
manner is always to do) gathered us all together with the residue of h^s
householde, mainy, Children and Servants.

And he him self red unto us a Chapter of the new Testament, and then we
altogether sung the fifteen Psalm of David, and that done to breakfast went,
and after break^ast: I my self would needs pay the whole charges thereof, and
bid, (notwithstanding the awarde of our Hostess and their great instance to
the contrary.)

And when I would depart: my Host and Pie^ce Plowman would (whether I would
or no) bring me on my way to Doncaster, and did, and there caused me to have
great entertainment without a penny charges for one whole day, and then we took
either leave of other, and departed each of us toward his own.

After which departure, upon the way as I traueled: I remembered ye Prophet
David who says. I was glad when it was said unto me, we shall go into the
house of the Lord, which I suppose be never meant by a common Inn or hosterie,
where nevertheless I may safely say I found it. And therefore full true it is
ye Ovid says, there is oftentimes a good fish in a water where a man would
little think. We boast much of civility and nurture in the South parts of
this land, namely in London, and dispraise and despise the North as rude and
uncivil, but surely for mine own part (that am a Southernman and borne in
Kent) to speak indifferently for any thing that ever I have found in all my
travel in both the parts: I cannot see nor know why the Northern People should
not rather pity us then envy us concerning either Godlynes, Virtue or good
manners, for here I have spoken of the basest kind of People, whereby it may
partly approve what hope there is of the Gentlemen, merchants and them of the
good Towns and Cities, for whose sakes and generally for all others I
undertook to gather and to report this little Conference, and with Gods help
and favor have done it as near accordant to the truth as I could, neither
adding thereto nor taking there from, the desire whereof caused me to take the
lesser Iournies homewarde and to write it by parcells at my Innes least I might
have forgotten it.

And heerin I protest, that I have neither flattered nor belyed any man, for my
meaning is truth and the commendation thereof, and therein is no flattery, for
surely if I have flattered any body: it is mine own self in yt, that where
before I was persuaded that pride had utterly corrupted this whole commonwealth
and had clean over spread it with his generation of all ungodliness and wickedness
whereof all times and ages do agree him to be the father: sithence this Journey
I begin to hope yt God will have mercy upon us, and has and that he has
reserved unto him self a remnaunt as he did in the time of Elias, for whose
sakes he will spare the ^est as he offered unto Abraham touching Sodom and
Gomo^ra.

Therefore the intent of this my collection thus ^ppearing: I refer my self to
the judgment of them to whos^ hands it shall hereafter come, desiring their
good word in recompense thereof, and also of my long and weary Journey whereof
this labor was mine only reward.

Beseeching Almighty God of his great mercy and clemency to grant unto the
same no wursse effect then ^ have meant therein, and that by the Appostles
council, we may consider that we are but strangers and pilgrims here i^
earth, and that there after we may order our lives and con^ersation longing
for our own Cuntrie, content to suffer, and to for bear and glad to hear or
see the thing that may ^ee for our edifying, learning and knowledge to be the
^eeter and better welcome into our Cuntrie which is the Heavenly Jerusalem
whether God for Christ's sake bring us all Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo.
Foelix qui potuit Rerum cognoscere causa Who will arise with me against the
wicked or who will take my part against the evil dooers
THE APOLOGY AND Conclusion of the Author.
THus ended is this short Collection,
Rude and imperfect for his want of ski^*
Who should have given it perfection,
and would, if his might had been to his will
Or else if time had thereunto suffised:
To have perused it and recognized.
But for as much as I did fail of both,
To wit, of Learning and also of time:
And to let dye such matter I was loathe,
Though I he could it duly enlumine.
Yet for my God and for my Cuntries sake:
Me thought of force I must it undertake.
And namely for the worthy Shire of Kent,
Famous of old time for humanity:
As is to find in writing ancient,
Besides what daily proof does testify.
Since I was borne in her me thought of right:
I ought to bring this matter into light.
So strongly rules love the heart of man,
Namely that love which is so natural:
To do his Cuntry good in what he can
That his good heart is to be borne withal.
For God requesteth of a man but will:
Although he want wherewith it to fulfill.
(...)
