1570.

THE BOOK OF ORDINANCES Belonging to the Company of TYLERS and BRICK-LAYERS
Incorporated within the City of London: Which Ordinances have been Perused,
Allowed, Ratified, and Confirmed by the Right Honorable, Sir Nicholas Bacon
Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; William Marquess of
Winchester, Lord High Treasurer of England, and Sir Robert Catlyn Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, By their writing under their Hands and Seals,
bearing date the Fourteenth day of July, in the thirteenth Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lady QUEEN ELIZABETH.

London, Printed, etc.

FIRST it is Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful To search and try Earth,
to the Master and Wardens of the Fellowship of Tylers and Brick-layers of
London, or to two of them, or to two other honest men of the said Art, by the
same Master and Wardens to be appointed twice every year, or oftener if they
shall think it good, to enter into all and every place and places where any
earth or clay shall be dug, within fifteen Miles compass of the same City of
London, to make any Tyle or Brick of, or where any Sand, Chalk, or other stone
shall be dug or broken, to be occupied with or about the laying of Brick or
Tyle, or for the making of Lyme; And to view, search, and understand by their
knowledge and discretions, whether the said earth or clay be good and lawful
stuff, and well seasoned and tempered to make brick and tyle of, or no; and
whether the Stone, Chalk, and Sand be meet and convenient to be Stone and Chalk
occupied in the same Art, for the making of Lyme, or to be tempered with Lyme,
And whether every Brick meant Brick,
and intended to be uttered or put to sale, be of the length of nine inches,
and in breadth four inches and one quarter, and two inches and one quarter in
thickness, as they ought to be; And whether every plain Tyle do contain Plain
Tyle,
in length ten inches and a half, and in breadth six inches and a quarter of an
inch, and in thickness half an inch and a quarter, as it ought to be; And
whether every Paving-tyle Paving-tyle,
be of good, sufficient, lawful, and merchantable stuff; And whether every
rough Tyle do contain in Rough Tyle,
length thirteen inches, and in thickness one inch, with convenient depth
accordingly, as they ought to do; And whether every Corner-tyle and Cover tyle
does contain Corner-tyle, Cover-tyle.
in length ten inches and a half, with convenient thickness and depth
accordingly, as they ought to do. And if the said Master and Wardens, or two of
them, do find any such default with any the Stuff aforesaid, meant to be put
to sale, as is aforesaid; Or that any manner of person or persons shall bring,
or cause to be brought any kind of Tyle, Brick, or Lyme made of insufficient
stuff, or not of the said assizes; or any Sand not being lawful, meet,
convenient, or not sufficient, to be sold, and not occupied in Sand.
the same Art, within the City of London, the Suburbs thereof, or within
fifteen miles compass of the same City, Then it shall be to the said Master and
Wardens then for Penalty to the offenders.
the time being, and to their Successors, or to two of them, to break in pieces
the said Brick and Tyle so insufficiently The ill Tyles and Brick to break in
pieces, and also to fine and amerce every owner and maker within one month, in
their Court.
or ill made, as is aforesaid, or wanting the thickness, breadth, or length
aforesaid; and further to fine and amerce every of the owners and makers of the
said Brick, Tyle, Lyme, or Sand, in the Court of the said Master and Wardens
within one month after, to be kept according to the discretions of the said
Master and Wardens.

Item, That the said Master and Wardens, or two of them, shall and may search
and try every Cart that shall Search for Carts.
come to the City of London, or the Liberties or Suburbs of the same, or
fifteen miles compass, with Tyle or Sand to be sold, whether the Tyle cart do
contain one thousand tyle to be carried therein at the least; And whether the
said Sand-cart do contain fully the quantity of eighteen bushels at the least,
and shall seal the same, or cause to be sealed the same Cart with the Seal or
Mark of the City Power to fine and amerce the owners or sellers in their Court,
according to the quantity of the offense.
of London; And if they find any such default, then it shall be lawful to the
said Master and Wardens, and their Successors for the time being, to fine and
amerce the owners or sellers of the said Tyle or Sand, in the Court of the said
Master and Wardens within one month after such default to be found, according
to the quantity of their said offense or offenses, as by the said Master and
Wardens shall be thought meet and convenient; And the same Fine and Amerciament
to be levied and employed to the use of the Master, Wardens, and Fellowship of
the Company aforesaid.

Item, That it shall be lawful to the Master and Wardens Search for Lyme sacks
and Lyme.
of the said Fellowship, or two of them for the time being, as often, and when
they shall think good, to search and try all and every sack or other thing,
wherein any Lyme is, or shall be brought to the City of London to be sold,
whether the same Lyme be well and sufficiently burned; And whether every such
sack being knit, do contain of Lyme after it is burnt, half a bushel by full
measure, and if they find any such default, then to fine and Power to fine and
amerce.
amerce the owners or sellers of the said Lyme in the Court aforesaid, as is
aforesaid, and the same Fine and Amerciament to be levied and employed by the
said Master and Wardens, to the use of the said Master, Wardens, and
Fellowship of the Company aforesaid.

Also, That no manner person or persons occupying Working with ill Brick or
Tyle.
or exercising the Art of Tylers or Brick-layers within the City of London, the
Suburbs thereof, or fifteen miles compass of the same, shall from and after the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next coming, lay or cause to be laid upon
any House, Pent-house, or other Room covered with tyle, or any Brick-wall,
within the same City, or the Suburbs thereof, or within fifteen miles distant
from the same City, any Crasyer, or Samuel Tyle or Brick, or any other Tyle or
Brick, then such Tyle or Brick as shall be sufficiently and workmanly made, and
wrought of good and lawful stuff, well annelled and burned, and of the assizes
before expressed, upon pain of forfeiture for every time Forfeiture of the
Brick and Tyle by seizure
so doing, the said brick and tyle to the said Master and Wardens, and their
Successors, which they shall take and seize to their best use and commodity.

And, That no manner of person or persons using the For Lathing.
said Art or Mystery, shall lathe asunder above the scantling of seven inches,
laying one filling Lath in the midst any manner of House, Pent-house or other
Shed, within the same City, or fifteen miles compass of the same, with any
other Lath then good, sufficient, and lawful heart lath, upon pain of
forfeiture for every such offense, twenty shillings, the same to be levied and
employed to the use of 20 s. the Forfeiture.
the said Master, Wardens and Fellowship, as is aforesaid.

And, That the said Master and Wardens of the said To search for workmanship.
Art or Mystery of Tylers and Bricklayers, or two of them for the time being,
shall have full power and authority to search and oversee, whether that all
manner of Reparations and works of tyling and brick-laying within the said
City, and the suburbs thereof, and within fifteen miles distant from the same
City, be well, sufficiently, and workmanly made and laid, and all such
Reparations and works of tyling and brick-laying, as they find not well, or
insufficient, or not workmanly made, within the same City and the suburbs of
the same, or within fifteen miles distant from the same, by any occupying the
same Art or Mystery, to cause and compel every such person and persons as took
upon him or them the making thereof, the same reparations and works
sufficiently and substantially to amend; And over that, to cause the same
person for his misdoing, to pay six shillings and eight pence, to be levied and
employed Forfeiture 6 2. 8 d.
in form aforesaid, to the uses aforesaid.

Also, That it shall be lawful to the said Master and Search for workmanship by
forreins.
Wardens of the said Art, or two of them for the time being, at all times from
henceforth, at their wills and pleasures, to search, try, and view whether that
all manner of reparations and works of tyling and brick-laying done by foreign
of the said Art or Mystery, in any place or places within fifteen miles distant
of the same City, be sufficiently and workmanly made, and all such reparations
and works of tyling and brick-laying, as they find insufficient and not
workmanly made and wrought, within the same space of fifteen miles, then to
present every such default and person so offending, unto the Justices of the
Queens The Fine to be taxed by the Justices of the Kings Bench.
Bench, at the next Term after that such Fines may be taxed and set upon such
offender, as may be for the profit of the builder, and commodity of the
Commonwealth; the one half of all such Fines shall be to the only use and
behoof of the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, and the other half to
be employed to the Master, Wardens, and Fellowship of the Company aforesaid.

Also, That every person being free of the said Art or Obedience, and not
coming to the Hall.
Mystery of Tylers and Brick-layers, shall be obedient to the Master and
Wardens of the said Art and Mystery, for the time being, and shall come to
every Assembly of the said Master, Wardens and Fellowship of the same Craft,
when they shall be warned by the Beadle of the same Fellowship, either for the
Election of any Master or Wardens of the same Art or Mystery, or for the
worship of the City of London, to attend and wait upon the Mayor and Sheriffs
of the City for the time being, at their going to Westminster, or at any other
time, or when they shall be called for any other cause or matter, as the
Freemen of all other Companies in London do (except they have a good,
reasonable, and sufficient excuse) upon pain of forfeiture for every time
making default 12 pence, the same to be employed to the use of the Masters,
Wardens, and Fellowship of the art or mystery of Tylers and Bricklayers, as is
aforesaid.

Also, That every person of the said craft of Tylers and Presenting and binding
Apprentices.
Bricklayers, being free of the same craft, and also all forreins, occupying
the same craft, and inhabiting within 15 miles of the same city of London, that
shall hereafter take any apprentice or servant, shall present and show the same
apprentice or servant, with his indenture of apprentice-hood, or covenant
Indenture, which herafter shall be made by the Clerk of the said Company, unto
the Wardens of the said craft for the time being, within a quarter of a year,
next after the date of the same Indenture, or covenant Indenture, to the intent
that they may understand under what form the same apprentice or servant is 10
s. Fine for this.
bound.

And, That no manner of person or persons, being free Prentice for seven years,
and no less.
of the said Art or Mystery, take any apprentice for any less term then for
seven years, according to the custom of London, upon pain to pay forty
shillings as often times as he does the contrary in any of the same points, in
this article specified, to be levied and employed in manner and form aforesaid.

Also, That no person of the said craft from henceforth For undecent words.
revile or rebuke the Master or Wardens of the said Craft for the time being,
or any of them, or rayl or slander any of them, or any other person of the same
craft, or any Officer or Clerk belonging to the same craft, with unfitting or
undecent words or language, in open audience of people, or in any other place
or places secretly, upon pain to pay six shillings eight pence, as often as he
so does, to Six shillings eight pence.
be levied and employed to the use of the said Master, Wardens, and
Fellowship, in manner and form before rehearsed.

Item, It is Ordained, That from henceforth no person Admitting of Apprentices
to able men.
of the said Craft take any Apprentice to him to be bound by Indenture, before
the Wardens and Assistants of the said Fellowship for the time being, have
first known, approved and admitted the said Master or person so to have or take
such an Apprentice, to be able as well in cunning, sufficient to, and for the
instruction of his said Apprentice in the said Faculty, as in substance and
otherwise for the keeping and sustaining of the said Apprentice in all things
necessary and convenient to the same, upon pain of forfeiture of forty
shillings for every Apprentice taken contrary to this said Ordinance, to be
employed to the use of the same Master, Wardens and Fellowship, as is
aforesaid.

Also it is Ordained, That no person of the said Craft, No person to keep but
one Apprentice, except he have been younger Warden.
being a Freeman of the said City, and one of the Clothing or Livery, except he
has been first younger Warden, shall from henceforth have, take, and keep in
his service at once, any more Apprentices then one, to the intent that the same
Apprentice may be the better applied, learned and occupied in his said Faculty.
And if any person of the said craft being of the Clothing, and has not been
younger Warden, do contrary to this Ordinance, he shall forfeit for every time
so doing, Forty shillings, to be employed as is aforesaid.

Also it is Ordained, That if any person of the said Supplanting.
craft from henceforth, by any sinister labor, mean, or procurement shall, or
do supplant, undermine, or put out any other person of the said craft from any
work by any such person first taken in hand (except that the first workman be
fully paid off, and for his wages, and also discharged of the same work by the
Master and Ruler of the same that shall set him on work, or by his or their
deputy) that then the person so doing shall forfeit for every time so doing,
forty shillings, to be applied as is last aforesaid.

It is Ordained and Established, That none of the said None to take any but as
Apprentice.
Craft being a Freeman, from this day forward, shall take no servant by
covenant for two or three years, more or less, and set them to their crafts;
but shall only take them as their Apprentice for seven years or more, after
the custom of the City of London, upon pain of forfeiture of forty shillings,
to be levied and employed to the use as is aforesaid.

Also it is Ordained by these Presents, That no Freeman None to have any
Apprentice, except he has been out of his years four years.
of the said Company, being of the Yeomanry, and out of the Clothing, shall
take or have to him any Apprentice or servant, before the said Freeman or
Master have been first out of his years by the space of four full years, from
the day of the making free of the said Freeman or Master, to be accounted, and
then to take one and no more, at, by, and with the discretions of the Master,
Wardens, and Assistants of the same Company, until he comes to be of the
Livery or Clothing; And that the said Freeman shall pay and bear scot and lot,
and all other charges, as a Freeman of the City of London ought, and is bound
to do, upon pain of Forty shillings, to be employed to the use of the
Commonalty of the said Company.

Also it is Ordained, That every Freeman taking any Enrolement of Apprentices.
Apprentice, shall cause the same Apprentice to be Enrolled in the Chamber of
London, according to the custom of the same City within one year after the date
thereof, upon pain of forfeiture of six shillings eight pence, to be employed
to the use of the Master, Wardens and Company of the Fellowship aforesaid.

Also, That it shall be lawful for the Master and A Beadle.
Wardens aforesaid, to have a Beadle to be attendant upon them to warn the
Company, to come to their Hall or other place, where any Assembly shall be for
any matter touching the said Fellowship, or otherwise.

And, Also to have a Clerk to make their Indentures A Clark.
of apprentice-hood, and Leases and Conveyances of their Lands, and to be with
them at every Court day, and to Register what is done, every of the said Court
days.

And, That it shall be lawful to the said Master To distrain for the penalties.
and Wardens, and their Successors, to distrain for any of the penalties
before-expressed, in any of the houses of the said offenders, as well free as
foreign, and to detain the distress so taken, until such time as the same
offender shall have paid unto the said Master and Wardens, such pains and
penalties as so shall be set upon him for this offense.

And if any matter of variance rise between any of To appease controversies.
the said Fellowship, for any wrong or matter personal, then the Master and
Wardens of the said Fellowship, upon complaint to any of them made, shall have
full power and authority by these presents, to call both the said parties
before them, and to hear and determine the same matter, if they can.

Also, That it shall be lawful for the Master and To keep Courts
Wardens of the said Fellowship for the time being, to call to them the most
part of such as have been Wardens of the said Company of Assistants, and to
keep their Courts at such times, and as often as to them shall be thought good,
and by the consent of the most part of them, to take order for such as are
offenders, and by their discretions to make good and reasonable Laws and
Constitutions for the correction and better rule and government of the Freemen
of the said Fellowship.

It is also Ordained, That from henceforth the Reading the Ordinances.
Wardens of the said Craft of Tylers and Bricklayers, shall yearly, that is to
say, three or four times of the year, cause all the Ordinances made above for
the good rule and government of the said Art, openly to be read in their
Common Hall, when they then and there shall assemble, to the intent that none
of the said craft shall excuse him by any ignorance or lack of knowledge of the
same.

It is Ordered, That none of this Company shall Task-work.
take any manner of task-work in London, or the Suburbs thereof, of any Mason,
Carpenter, Plaisterer, or other workman that takes any work belonging to this
Company, by task, but work with him by Day-work, without license of the Master,
Wardens and Assistants, or the more part of them, upon pain of forty shillings.

It is Ordered, That if any of this Company do sell Selling Apprentices.
or do away, or make over his Apprentice to any, either free of this Company,
or to any other, or to any foreign, without the consent of the Master, Wardens,
and Assistants of this Company, or the more part of them, that then every
person so setting over his Apprentice, and he of this Company that takes such
Apprentice without the same consent, shall forfeit and pay to this Company five
pounds, and from thenceforth such persons so offending, shall from thenceforth
be barred to take any Apprentice until the years of him so set over, be expired.

It is Ordered, That if any person or persons of this Arresting.
Company, shall at any time hereafter sue, arrest, or imprison, by any ways or
means, any other of the same Company, without the license or consent of the
Master, Wardens and Assistants, or the more part of them, that every such
person so offending, shall forfeit to the use of this Company, six shillings
eight pence.

Also it is Ordered, That none of this Company Apprentices for eight years.
shall take any Apprentice for any less term then for eight years, and none to
be bound under the same term, and during the same term to have no other,
otherwise then the Ordinances does allow.

The OATH of the Wardens.
YE shall swear to be true to our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, her Heirs
and Successors, Kings and Queens of this Realm, and that ye shall well and
truly order and govern all the Fellowship of the Art or Mystery of Tylers and
Bricklayers, whereof ye are chosen Master and Wardens for this present year;
And the good Rules and Ordinances made for the preservation of the same, or
that hereafter shall be made, ye shall keep, and see to be kept to the best of
your powers; All Defaults committed to the contrary, whereof you shall have
understanding, either by your own knowledge or else by information of other, ye
shall duly, and according to justice, see to be punished and corrected, sparing
no man for love, nor grieving any man for hate, otherwise then you ought to do
of right. And ye shall truly account and answer all such Money and Goods as
has, or shall come into your hands to the use of the same Company. Ye shall
also well, truly, and honestly behave your self in all things that belong to
your Offices, while ye be Master and Wardens, to the utmost of your powers,
cunning and knowledge. So God you help, etc.

ALso it is Ordered, That every one of this Company, Chamflets.
as well of the Livery as of the Yeomanry, that makes any Chimney or Chimneys,
shall cut and hew the Chamflets two inches and a half square, and also well,
workmanly, and cleanly joint and finish all such work as they shall take in
hand, upon pain of mending the same work, and to pay for a Fine six shillings
eight pence.

The OATH of the Master and Wardens.
YE shall Swear to be true to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, Kings of this Realm; And that ye shall well and truly order
and govern all the Fellowship of the Art or Mystery of Tylers and Brick-layers,
whereof ye are Master and Wardens for this present year; And the good Rules and
Ordinances made for the preservation of the same, or that hereafter shall be
made, ye shall keep, and see to be kept to the best of your powers; All
Defaults committed to the contrary, whereof you shall have understanding,
either by your own knowledge, or else by information of other, ye shall duly,
and according to justice, see to be punished and corrected, sparing no man for
love, nor grieving any man for hate, otherwise then you ought to do of right.
And ye shall truly account and answer all such Money and Goods as has, or
shall come into your hands to the use of the same Company. Ye shall also well,
truly, and honestly behave your self in all things that belong to your Offices,
while ye be Master and Wardens, to the utmost of your powers, cunning and
knowledge. So God you help, etc.

THE OATH OF THE FREEMEN.
YOU shall Swear, That you do testify and declare in your Conscience, that the
Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or Causes, as Temporal, And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
these His Majesty's Realms.

And therefore ye shall utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities; and shall promise, that
from henceforth ye shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness,
His Heirs and lawful Successors, and to your power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminences, and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or united or annexed
to the Imperial Crown of these Realms.

You shall swear also to be true and faithful to this Craft of Tylers and
Bricklayers of the City of London, keeping as much as in your power is, love
and charity amongst them, not moving or stirring any occasion of strife or
debate, through which the said Craft or Mystery, or any person of the same,
might be hindered or hurt.

Also ye shall in all lawful things be obedient always unto the Master and
Wardens of the said Craft for the time being.

And all the lawful Rules, Statutes, and Ordinances made and ordained, or
hereafter to be made and ordained, for the weal of the said Craft, well and
truly ye shall maintain and support, to the best of your power.

Also ye shall duly and truly pay, or do to be paid, the Quarteridges and all
other Duties yearly, belonging to the said Fellowship.

And be contributory to all manner of lawful and reasonable charges belonging,
and necessarily appertaining, as other Brethren do, to the best of your power.

Also ye shall obey all manner of lawful Summons done in the said Master and
Wardens names, by their Officer therefore assigned.

You shall not discover the lawful Counsel of this mystery that you shall have
knowledge of, which should be kept secret within your selves.

These points, and all other good Rules and Ordinances made, and to be made,
you shall obey, keep, and maintain to your power, as near as God shall give you
grace. So help you God, etc.

25. Die Julii. 1586.
IT is Ordered and Agreed this present day, by the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of this Company, That if any of this Company being warned to the
Burial of any person or persons of this Company, or if his or their wife, do
miss, and come not to such place, and hour, as he shall be warned to attend at
every such Burial, Every person so missing, to pay Twelve pence, except he or
they have a lawful excuse.

The OATH of the Wardens.
YE shall Swear to be true to our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, Her Heirs
and Successors, Kings and Queens of this Realm; And that ye shall well and
truly order and govern all the Fellowship of the Art or Mystery of Tylers and
Brick-layers, whereof ye be chosen Wardens for one year.

And the good Rules and Ordinances made for the preservation of the same, or
that hereafter shall be made, ye shall keep, and see to be kept to the best of
your powers. And all Defaults committed to the contrary, whereof you shall have
understanding, either by your own knowledge, or else by information of other,
ye shall duly, and according to justice and equity, see to be punished and
corrected, sparing no man for love, nor grieving any man for hate, otherwise
then you ought to do of right. And ye shall truly account and answer all such
Money and Goods as has, or shall come into your hands to the use of the same
Company. Ye shall also well, truly, and honestly behave your self in all things
that belong to your Offices, while ye be Wardens, to the utmost of your powers
and cunning. So God you help, etc.

Ordinances made by the whole Company, tempore Simon Credense, Magister.
IT is also Ordained, That none of the said Company shall work with any
Carpenter, Mason, Plaisterer, or other workman not of this Company, that takes
any thing by Task, belonging to this Science, nor work, or do any of the said
work so taken by any of them, without the license of the said Master and
Wardens, upon pain of forfeiture of forty shillings for every time so doing.

It is also Ordered, That none of the said Company shall sell, or otherwise do
away his Apprentice to any, but only to one of this Company, and that with the
license of the Master and Wardens, upon pain of forfeiture of forty shillings
for every time so doing.

Tempore Rogeri Gathorn, William Emerton, and Tho. Webster.
It is also Ordered, That if any of the Company do miss, and come not to such
place, and hour, as they shall be warned, to any Offering of any Brother of the
Company, then to pay twelve pence.
FINIS.

