To the Right Honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
The Reasons moving the Hot-pressers to draw themselves into an orderly form
of government under his Majesty's gracious protection.
FIrst, the extreme multitude of Suites by ordinary Informers: For that
every Term some of us were served with Writs of Information, both out of the
Cheecker, Common Pleas and Crown Office, so that some times it cost us three
or four pounds a Term; and oftentimes more.

Again, for that some Informers of the City, or Officers of the City,
oftentimes meet with some of our Merchants Goods, as they carried them home,
seized them to his Majesty's use, and take them from our Servants: oftentimes
eight or ten pounds worth at one instant and more, besides many other troubles
that we by them were put to.

Then the City being exstreamely bent against us, upon their Acts of Common
Council, which were against the use of the Hot-presses in London, and the
Liberties thereof, in respect of the danger of Fire by them. The first Act to
pay five pounds for every Month it was used. The second Act, to pay five
pounds for every time it was used within London or the Liberties thereof.

Upon these Acts we were exstreamely troubled and vexed, not only by the Lord
Mayor of the City, but also by the Informers belonging to the Chamber of
London: And being therein overthrown in trial of Law in the City, were
enforced some of us to pay the uttermost penny we were condemned in. And not
only so, but were much more vexed and troubled, by binding us over to answer
the same at the Sessions of Peace at the Guild Hall, to our great charge and
exspences.

These were some part of the causes that moved us to seek for relief, under
his Majesty's gracious protection for our settled Government, and redress in
our Trade, with many other grieuances as follows.

FOr that diverse men of several Trades, have unconscionably entered into the
Trade of Pressing, within these four years or there about, and some within
less then two years, by some sinister means have intised our Servants and
Iourneymen: whereby they have gotten some skill and exsperience, by which
sinister means, they have robbed us of our Profession, to the utter undoing of
us our Wives and Families for ever, being at the least in number (in and about
the City) three hundred Persons: And not only so, but when they had gotten
some experience from our Servants: They unconscionably turned them out of
doors, to let them shift for them selves, which tends not only to their
undoing, but also to ours. For they using many Trades, and engrossing diverse
Commodities to themselves, have gotten also the chiefest part of the Work
within the City of London and Liberties thereof into their hands, to the utter
ruin and undoing of a number of poor people, their Wives and Families.

The principal of these Enterlopers, be Packers, Rich-men and of good estates,
which takes upon them the benefit of many Trades. First, in the dressing of
Clothes, taking upon them to Dress and Sheare them Merchant like, as they
ought to do: But they carry them Rooffe in the Woole to the Dyers without
Dressing, and after Dying, dry them, and so Press them: All which defects,
the Hot-presse couers in their private Houses, to the great disgrace of
Clothing and Pressing, and has been a great hinderance to his Majesty in his
Customs.

They also make benefit by Dying as will appear. They keep and make benefit
by Hot-presses. They be Factors, and so reap benefit,

And some of these Packers be Merchants also.

Others there be, that have unconscionably intruded themselves into the Art of
Pressing, as follows.
Some Mercers. Some Goldsmiths. Some Stocking-sellers. Some Grossers. Some
Vintners. Some Brokers. Some Shoomakers. Some Ioyners.
All these having other Trades, have Enterloped into the Art and mystery of
Hot-pressing: having gotten as abouesaid by sinister means, an in-sight and
knowledge of the Art of Prossing, within these four years, or there abouts,
the most part of them less then within these two or three years.

More humbly shows, that a Stranger in London (by name Burgman) within these
three years or there about, having gotten exsperience by these Enterloping
Pressors, is of late departed to Amsterdam in Holland, and there have gotten to
himself a Preuiledge by Pattent: That no man shall use the Art of Pressing
there, but he and his Assigns for seven years, and has to that end put in
use twenty Hot-presses, prohibiting thereby all such Perpetuanies, or any
other commodities, Pressed in the Hot-presse here in England, transported thither
by way of Merchandise: Seizing and Forfeiting them, the one half thereof to
the States of the Country, and one other part to the poor, and the third part
to the Seizure and himself.

Thus our Trade or Mystery of Hot-pressing, whereon our living wholly
depends, having no other Trade or means: is by these Enterlopers utterly
taken from us, so that a great number of us, our Wives and Children are like to
perish. Wherefore we humbly crave this Honorable Assembly of high Court of
Parliament, to commisserate our lamentable estates, by taking such good Order
therein, as by your good Honors shall be thought fittest, both for redress in
the former abuses, and for your Petitioners relief.

The Reasons which caused us to have a settled Government, according to his
Majesty's directions, be these as follows.
FIrst, that there were gross abuses daily used and practiced, by some
Enterlopers and others: tending not only to the hurt of the Merchant, but the
discredit and overthrow of Clothing in foreign parts; the ruin and undoing of
a Commonwealth. Oftentimes abusing the Merchants goods, by cutting of Remnants
of Perpetuanies, some times two yards, sometimes more, sometime less: Others by
Burning, Scorching, taking away the Color clean. And being thus
unconscionably done and abused, they make them up in Tillets and Pack them
away: which tends to the great abuse and scandal of this our Kingdom.

These things being well wayed and considered of us, caused us to seek the
means, to redress these soul abuses, which we presently put in use, settling
our selves in one place, by a special direction from his Majesty, to the Lord
Mayor of London, and being there settled, we forthwith made choice of four men
weekly to view, and look over every man's work, to be well and workman-like
done, and warrantable according to an article of his Majesty's privy Seal.
And in this good course we went cheerfully on, with much good comfort to our
selves and to the Merchant, until these troublesome Enterlopers, repining at
his Majesty's good and orderly Government: Vexing and troubling us contrary
to his Majesty's Grant. Wherefore for redress, we humbly submit our selves, to
this Honorable Assembly of this high Court of Parliament: And your Petitioners,
with their Wives and Families will ever pray, etc.


