AN EMBASSAGE OF TWO Indian Kings sent unto the High and Mighty Prince
Maurice Prince of Orange, who by the same desire that their Sons, whom they
also have sent unto him, might be brought up in Christian Religion.

Printed s'Grauen-Haghe. 1621.

The Superscription.
The High and mighty Prince Maurice by the grace of God Prince of Orange, Earl
of Nassau, Catzenelleboghen, Vianden, Dietz, Moers, etc. Governor and Captain
general of the Netherland united Provinces, Admiral of the Zea, etc. Resident
in Grauen-Haghen.

The names of two Kings children, and three Princes children, East Indians
brought hither into the Country.
Don Andreas de Castano, son of the King of Soyen. Don Marcus, son of the
King of Rieland. Laurens Wello^^ Princes children. Laurens de Fretis Princes
children. John Tack. Princes children.
THE COPY.
MOst High and Mighty Prince, etc. We hope by Gods grace of your Princely
excellencies, good health, and prosperity, and by these presents offer you our
willing service, recommending our selves unto you. The cause that has moved
us to be so bold to write these fewes lines unto you, was first propounded
unto us by the earnest perswation and request of the worthy Gentleman Heram van
Sp^^l, (governor representing here your Princely person in the government of
these Countries; and to whom we therefore show all obedience) made unto us, to
send our young sons to be brought up in the Netherlands: to the end that
there they may be taught the grounds of Christian Religion, and brought up in
the studying of holy Divinity. Whereunto in this place we have small means
and occasions offered: We could not by any means deny it, but willingly
granted thereunto, and accordingly both our young sons are sent thither, who
are the bearers hereof. And as they by reason of the great distance of places,
are now wholly out of our sights; and consequently out of our fatherly care and
educations, and must remain under the protection of other faithful Princes.
By these, trusting and confidently reposing our selves upon your Princely
courtesy (whose immortal fame to us, that in respect of your Princely
dignity, dwell in woods and wildernesses, is not hidden:) Most earnestly
beseech your grace, to be pleased in our absence, to cast your wise and
respective eyes upon our children, and to receive them into your Princely
protection: To the end, that being educated and well brought up in learning,
and knowledge of Divinity, they may in time increase and further the honor of
Gods name, (namely under the blind people of these Countries) and withal
spread the fame of your Princely great and triumphant actions, abroad in
foreign Countries: and we will always be ready to requite the same unto your
grace by all the service that we may in any wise do for you; beseeching the
almighty God, most Noble Prince, to send your grace long life and happy
prosperity in all your Princely government and valiant actions.

Dated in the Castle of Ambine, the 1. of August, 1620. Underneath your
Princely most friendly subjects and faithful friends, Manuel King of Kielang,
and Laurenso de Sylua, King of Soyen.


