OF THE LOVE OF OUR ONLY LORD AND SAVIOVR, JESUS CHRIST.

Both that which he bears to Us; and that also which we are obliged to bear
to Him.

DECLARED By the principal Mysteries of the Life, and Death of our Lord; as
they are delivered to us in Holy Scripture.

With a Preface, or Introduction to the Discourse.

printer's or publisher's device IHS


D. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 29. O Amor, qui semper ardes, and numquam
extingueru Charitas, Deus meus, accende me.

O thou Love, which ever burnest, and art never quenched! O Charity, my God, do
thou enkindle me.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXII.

TO THE MOST GLORIOUS AND EVER-BLESSED PERPETVALL VIRGIN MARY the
All-Immaculate Mother, of our Lord God.
RECEAVE this Treatise, O Queen of Heaven, with thy Hand of grace; which the
heart of thy Servant, does prostrate at thy purest Feet; as a token, wrapped up
in words, of the most reuearing, and admiring Love, which he owes, and will ever
be striving to pay to thee. And vouchsafe (of thy Goodness) to present it to thy
Son our Lord, the sole Redeemer, and Savior of the World; since it aims at
nothing else, but his glory, which with infinite mercy, he has vouchsafed to
place, in the exchange of Love, with mortal Man. Thy self, and thou alone,
art that happy Creature, who by the abundant sloud of his Grace, were made
able to swim, through all the moments of this life, in the Purity, and
Perfection of this dunne Love. Nor did thou ever fail thereof, from the first
instant of thy Immaculate Conception, in the bowels of thy blessed mother, to
that other of thy Assumption, in the arms of thy most beloved Son. O suffer
not his Creatures, who are also adopted sons of thine, to be still so unlike
their mother; as to disperse, and dissipate themselves, by inordinate Love,
upon the transitory objects of this world. It is enough, it is too much, that
hitherto, we have defiled our souls; and that forsaking the clear, untroubled
spring of divine Beauty, we have been miserably glad, to stifle, and drown our
selves (whilst yet we are the works of his Hands, and the joy of his Heart) in
the muddy pooles of profane Delight. Behold how we sigh, and groan in thy
sacred ears: some of us, under the servile yoke of present sins; and some
others, under the sad effects, and consequences of our former wickedness; since
we are full of weakene; toward good works, and of an auersion from joyfully
and perfectly complying, with the superexcellent, wise, and holy will of God.
Demand of that God, obtain of thy Son; that he will print himself fast
upon our Souls; that so (O glorious Queen, O thou most certain Comfort of
the Afflicted) we may be discharged by thy prayers, from these chains, which
are striving to dragge us down as low as Hell. And once being free, we may fly
up, from whence we are fallen, and adhere to God, with thee, by an Eternal
Love.

THE PREFACE, DECLARING THE POWERS belonging to the Soul of man, with their
proper objects and acts: and how all the whole world lives by Love; and that
the object of our Love must be only God, directed by means of Jesus Christ,
our only Lord, and Savior.
IT is the ancient, and just Complaint of our Holy, and Wise forefathers, that
men affect the knowledge of certain f^rraine, and fruitless things, not ca^ing
to consider, or even know themselves. We are apt to wonder at the huge height
of mountains; the unwearied walk of rivers; the subtle course of seas; the
perpetual motion of planets; and in the meanetyme, we reslect not upon that
which grows in our own bosoms, which yet is a fitter subject for our
admiration to work upon. The most inestimable riches of the whole material
world, is but beggary, and misery, in comparison of the mind of Man. For what
Monarch, had ever such Ambassadors, and Spies, as are his Senses; or such
Solicitours, as are his Desires; or such Officers, and Executioners, as are his
Passions; or such a Lord Steward of his Household, as is his Reason; or such a
Secretary of State, as is his Invention; or such a Treasurer, as is his Memory;
or such a President of his Coun^aile, as is his Understanding; and which of
them, had ever, so absolute a Dominion over his Countries, and Vassalls, as man
has over himself, by the use, and exercise of his will?

Of all these Powers, the Understanding, and Will are the most important; as
being they, to which the rest are all reserred. Verum, or that which is True,
is the Object of the Understanding, and the Object of the Will, is Bon^, or that
which is Good. The Act which the Understanding exercises, toward his Object
of Truth, is Knowledge; for the Understanding, does ever desire to know; and
that which is exercised by the Will, toward the Object of God, is Love; for all
creatures which ca^ Love, are carried to a desire of that which is Good, or at
least which seems good to the. And indeed it may be truly said, if it be
discreetly understood, that there is no creature at all, which has not a Love,
that it looks after.

Even all the inanimate Creatures, do move with a restles desire to their
proper Ce^ter, through a quality which is impressed upon them, by the common
Creator, of them, and us. Fire flies upward, and earth falls down ward; they
are driven by their weight, they aspire to their places. By force you may with
hold them, but if you leave them to themselves, you shall quickly see, where
they have a mind to be. And as the actual Love which a reasonable creature
bears to any Object, is acco^ted for the weight whereby he is carried to his
iourneyes end, Amor meus pondus me^, eo feror, quocumque feror; D. A^^. Confess
lib. 13. c. 9.
so the weight or Virtus motiua of inanimate Creatures, may well be accounted,
and called their Love, whereby they are carried(...) knowledge of Good and Bad;
so also must he needs have a more universal, and noble means, for the
reaching, and arriving to the perfection of so excellent a nature. From hence
also it comes, that as it is proper to him, to apprehend his End, so he must be
enabled with all the means co^ducing to it. This last End of man, is perfect
and complete Beatitude. So as the true and undoubted Object of his Will, is,
Omne bonum, which is All Good. This Perfectio supposech, and of it self
implies, in any creature, which can aspire thereunto, to be, to live, and to
know. So that if any man be asked, whether he would be glad to Be, to Live, to
Know, and to be Happy, he cannot doubt of it, though he would; unless he were
out of his wits, and then in effect, he would be no man. Now, Beatitudo (as
says Boethius) est status, omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus. And Confess.
lib. 10. c. 21.
S. Augustine says, That if any man should be asked, whether he would be
happy, or no; all the world would say yea; as all the world if it were asked,
whether it would rejoice or no, would be sure to say that it would feign
Rejoice; which joy if it be true and co^plete, and without possibility of
mutation, is nothing else but mere Beatitude. But this, in the mean time, is
the main, and final, universal end of man. And from hence it necessarily
follows; That man seeing many particulars proposed to him, as means co^ducing
to this end, is not necessarily carried toward this, or that particular means
(which many times are contrary to one another) because he apprehends the^ not,
to be necessary, or not perhaps so much as sit, for his End, to which alone,
his desire is necessarily carried.

Hence flows the use and exercise of Free Will, whereby a man has power to
consult, elect, determine, and resolve; as also, on he other side, to refuse
and reject what he lyketh not, in all the particular occurre^ces of his life.
S. Thomas with his Angelical understanding expresses himself in few words to
this effect. The Form intellect^se^ universal etc. D. Thom. (...) 6. de m^^.
form of our understanding, which the inclination of our will does follow, is
universal; under which, many particulers are comprehended. And so, for as much
as the acts consist in those particulars, amongst which there is none which can
equal the power of an universal; there remains a kind of inclination of the
will, which carries it self indeterminately to several things. For upon a
desire, which a man conceaues of health, he begins to consult, about those
things, which seem to conduce unto it; and at length, he resolves to take a
potion. So that Counsel precedes the resolution of taking the potion; which
proceeds from his willingness to be counseled. If any thing be therefore
apprehended, (according to all those particulars, which may be apprehended) as
a convenient good, it will necessarily move the will. And from hence it is,
that a man does necessarily desire Beatitude, which is a State complete by the
aggregatio^ of all good things, as has been said.

Now, that the Will, is carried to any thing which is presented to it, rather
according to one particular condition which it has, then to another, may
happen especially upon any one of three occasions. First when the thing it
self is of more weight; and then a man is carried toward it, according to
reason. As when he preferrs, that which respects his health, before that which
respects his pleasure. Secondly, when he considers of some particular
circumstance, and not of another; as when a man will needs borrow money,
without thinking how he shall be able to repay it. And thirdly, it may happen,
by the disposition of the man's mind at that time; because (according to
Aristotle) As any man is in himself, such does his end then seem, to him to
be. And so we see, that the will of a man is moved toward any thing, after a
very different manner, when he is much transported by choler, to what he is,
when he is quiet.

But, the while, it easily appears, how noble these two Faculties are, of the
Understanding and the Will; and how greedy and earnest they will be sure to be,
in slying with a fierce kind of appetite, toward their several objects. And
as a man cannot fail to be happy, according to his main desire, if these
faculties be well addressed, by the particular means which conduce to it; So
by any disorder which they fall into, their Master grows to be miserable.
Such disorder uses to ariue, upon the allurement of some particular objects,
and the close quarter which is kept, between the understanding, and the will,
which are not only near neighbors, but greater friends, then many would
perhaps imagine, and so they make a mighty impression upon one another. And
howsoever, for as much as concerns the general, and final object, which is
Beatitude, though neither of them, can any more persuade the other to err
willingly, then it self can be subject therein to error; yet, hic and nunc,
when there is question of the particular address, or means, there uses to
grow much abuse. And as, if the understanding look upon things in a false
light, or (as it were) through the sin^^ars, or through a pair of lying
Spectacles, it will say shrewdly to the will, by way of inducing it to embrace
an erroneous belief; so if the will bestisly engaged, upon the earnest love of
an appare^t false good, instead of a true one, either by any ill habit
acquired: or by the veheme^cy of some temptation, or by the impotency of some
passion, or else by the surprise of some delightful object, or the like; it
does, many times, so work, and win upon the understanding, as to make it
co^curre toward the setting of wicked, and unjust decres; whereby Christ our
Lord may be crucified, and Barabbas discharged; the creature may be embraced,
and the God of al creatures be rejected. For thus, says. Conf. l. 7. c. 8.
S. Augustine, are sins committed, when thou, O God art forsaken, O thou
fountain of life, who art the sole and true creat our of al things; and when,
by a foolish, and particular pride of appetite, we grow to love that, which is
but a part of the whole, and which with all is false. But by h^ble devotion, we
return to thee again; and thou do cleanse us from our evil custom; and
art merciful to the sins of such as confess them; and thou hear the
groans of thy prisoners; and do take off the fetters which we made for our
selves. But so, as that yet we must no more advance the proud horns of false
liberty, against thee; through a covetous desire of enjoying more, which will
prove to be the loss of what we have already; if we love our own pretended
private good, more then thee, who art the common good of all.

So that now we see, how necessary it will be for us to take some course, for
the coupling of these two extremes (which, on the one side, is our selves, and
on the other, our final End or Beatitude) by some means which may be both
sweet, and strong, toward the entertayning, and employing of these faculties,
and powers of ours; that so we may be secured, from loosing our way, to a
iourneys end, which does so much import.

For the errors of the understanding are dangerous in a high degree. To the
understanding it first belongs, to specify, or present all particulers to the
will; and if that be done with disguise, the man is like to be in ill case. For
the will, is an obeying, and blind faculty, which discourse (...) but executes,
if it lists, in conformity of what is offered, by the understanding; and
therefore it is, as if it had no life at all, till the understanding give it
meat, to feed upon; which she takes at the hand thereof, though it be poison.
The errors also of the will, are at least, as dangerous as those others; for
this is the seat, and Center of the Affections, and it is both extremely
laborious, and withal very lickerish after all the delightful objects which
it looks upon. And for listening, and gazing it grows first to cheapning, and
then to buying; and by the disorder, and diste^pered heat thereof, it blows
with vehemet desire upon them. And so it rayseth a dust into the eye of the
understanding, whereby it is made, as blind almost, as the blind will it self.
And whereby it grows persuaded, that how dear soever that co^terfeit ware do
cost, it may prove a kind of saving bargain to us, in the end.

Now, what a case are we therefore in, if our Love, being so restles a thing, as
it is, and so resolved, to be ever feeding upon some object or other, we suffer
that to be such a one, as besides the endless tormes of the next life, can never
bring us to any true rest in this? For the soul can never rest in the
possession or fruition of any creature. The reason heerof is plain; because
the rest of any thing consists in the attayning and inioying of that last
end, to which it was ordained, in the creation thereof. And therefore the soul
of man, being made for the fruition of God, whose glorious vision is only able
to make us say, It is enough; what marvel is it, that it can take no lasting
true contentment, in any thing which is less then God?

The holy S. Bernard says heervpon, to this essect: It is no marvel that the
soul of man can never be satisfied with the possessions, honors, and
pleasures of this world. For the soul desires to feed upon such a meat, as may
carry proportion to it self. Now, the entertaiments of this life, carry no
proportion at all to the soul, in the way of giving it entiere satisfaction.
For the soul is spiritual, and immortal; and all these objects, are either
temporal, or carnal. And therefore, as he who were ready to starve for lack
of meat, would be ridiculous if he should think to kill his hungar, by going
to a window, and gaping there like some Camelion, to take in the air (which
air is no co^petent and proportionable food, for a body of flesh and blood;)
just so a man who shall pretend to satisfy and fulfill the desires of a
spiritual and immortal substance (as we know the soul to be) by feeding fowly
upon the Carrion of Corporal things, is at least as very a fool as the
former. And besides his folly, and his loss of labor in the mean time, he
will, hereafter, grow to suffer by it, so much more; he^ the otherr; as the
eternal damnation of a soul, is a matter inco^parably more considerable, then
the death of a mortal body.

No; it is God alone, who can quench the infini e appetite of his reasonable
creatures. He alone made the whole world for us; and us for himself; and he
only is our Center, and place of rest. He only is that first Truth, which our
understanding should aspire to know; and the only Good, which our Will should
be so inflamed to Love. And because as has been said, the question is, but of
the Means, whereby we must tend to this most perfect End: and for that, by the
treachery of our se^ses, we are induced to place our hearts, and the affections
thereof upon dangerous, and vicious objects; it is therefore, shat I am procuring
to set that one before us, which is the most strong, and sweet, and perfect
means, and which may not only inuit, but assist us also admirably otherwise,
toward the ariuing to our last End.

The line which leads to this fair full point, and the way which guides us to
this eternal habitation, is that top of beauty, and excellency, Jesus Christ
our Lord; upon whom if we can persuade our selves to fasten the roots of
allour Love, we shall not only be happy there, but eue^ here. And to the end
that we may consider the innumerable, and inualuable reasons, which we have to
love this Lord of ours; I have labored first, to show the unspeakable dignity
of his person; and then the infinite love it self which he has borne to us.
And this I have deduced, out of the principal mysteries of his most sacred
life, and bitter death, as they have been delivered to us in holy. Scripture.
And although whilst I treat of the Love of our Lord to us, in every one of the
particular mysteries, I do, also show, the strait obligation into which we are
cast, of returning love for love to him: yet I procure to do it more expressly,
toward the end of the book in the two last Chapters. The holy ghost be he who
by sweetly breathing upon our souls, may enable us to do this duty well; which
has been so highly deserved of us, and which only is able to make us happy.

OF THE LOVE OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, declared by showing his Greatness, as he
is God.

CHAP. 1.
THE Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, to this wretched and wicked creature Man,
is such a Sea without any bottom, and such a Sun without all Eclipse; that
not only no fadome can reach it, must not so much as any eye behold it, as
indeed it is. And whither soever we look, either up or down, or toward any
side, we shall find our selves over wrought by the bulk, and brightness
thereof. Now The quality of the persons which love each other, gives price and
value to the love it self.
because the love of any one to any other, does take a tincture, from the
quality of the persons between whom it pasles; therefore the love of our Lord
to us, is proved hereby, to be infinite and incomprehensible, because the
dignity, and Majesty of his person, is incomprehensible, and infinite. It will
therefore be necessary to declare some part of the excellency of his person.
And for his sake, who loved us with so eternal love; I beg in this beginning,
an exact attention. Because The reason why exact attention. is here required.
what I am to say in this place (being the ground, whereon the rest of this
discourse must rise) will both give it clearer light, and greater weight, and
more certain credit. Nor can any thing, which shallbe delivered in the
progress heerof, be so high, or deep, or wide, or hard; to the belief
whereof, the soul will not be able to fly, at full ease, and speed, between
the wings of faith and love; when it considers and ponders well, who it is, of
who^ we speak.

Our Lord Jesus Christ (being perfect God and perfect Man) as God, is the only
begotten eternal son of his Father, and wholly equal to him. And because The
generation of the Son of God.
he is begotten of him, by an act of Understanding, proceeding out of that
inexausted fountain of his wisdom (as if it were out of a womb) he is
therefore called the Wisdom begotten; the Word, the Image, and the Figure of
his Father; from whom, together with the Son, the Holy Ghost proceeds. And
for as much as the Father, could communicate to his Son, no other nature but
his own; the Son is therefore Consubstantiall with the Father, and true God,
who only possesses immortality.

His Essence The essence of Christ our Lord, as he is God.
is an infinite kind of thing eternal, and immutable, which does necessarily
exist; and wherein, as in the sovereign cause, all other perfections are
contained after an unspeakably sublime manner. And such excellency is resident
in that most simple and pure Essence of his, that he is infinitely far from al
necessity of any thing created toward the complement of his own beatitude.
Now concerning the creatures, they have no being but by him; or rather they
have it not so properly by him, as in him: Is any man, Lib. 1. Conf. c. 0.
says S. Augustine, able to frame himself? Or is any one of the veins,
whereby our being, and life runs toward us, drawn from any other root
then this, That thou, O Lord, do frame us? Thou, to whom being and living,
are not too several things, because supremely to Be, and supremely to Live, is
the very thing it it self, which thou art; for thou art supreme and art not
changed. And a little before, speaking, to God in the self same discourse, he
expresses himself thus, in most profound and yet most elegant manner: Thou, O
Lord, both ever live in thy self, and nothing dies in thee, because thou
art before all ages; and before all that, which can even be said, to have been
before; and thou art the God, and the Lord of all thy creatures. And in thy
presence, do stand the causes of al things, which are unstable; and even of
all things which are changeable, the unchangeable roots remain with thee;
and the eternal reasons of things do live, whilst yet the things
themselves, are but Temporal, and Irrational. Thus says S. Augustine: and so
infinite is the essence of God; and so absolutely nothing are all those things,
whose being is not derived from him, and conserved in him.

Infinite also is his The power of Christ our Lord as he is God.
Power, and it reaches to the making or changing of al those things, which
either are, or else may be; so worthily is he called The Omnipotent. And not
only does he create all the substances of them all; but he does so truly, and
so immediately of himself, frame all their motions; that without his concourse,
not so much as any moate of the air could stir. And upon his three fingers,
Isa. 40.22.
he so conserues the whole machine of the world; that if, but for one moment,
he should suspend the influence which he gives, it would instantly run
headlong into that Abisse of being Nothing, out of which it was called, by his
voice.

The What a nothing the world is, in comparison of God.
whole race of mankind, is but a smoke, a shadow, a Dream, saving that more
truly it deserves the name of Nothing, in respect of him. No ball upon a
Racket, no straw in the midst of a huge furnace, no poor withered leaf, in
the mouth of a devouring tempest, can express the poverty, and infirmity of
all the Creatures (if they were all put into one) when once they shall be
compared with Almighty God. Sap. 5. Iac. 4. Job. 14. Psalm. 101. Job. 20. Psalm.
72.
And if all the things which are created, have not the proportion of one
withered leaf, in comparison of a whole world, what kind of things are thou
and I; and in what part of that leaf shall we ever be able to find our selves?
The breath of the Nostrils of the God of hosts, Isa. 29.
makes the whole heaven to tremble. He visites the world in thunder, and
earthquakes; and in the huge voice of a whirling tempest; and in the flame of
a consuming fire; and the multitude of all the Nations, before him, shall be as
some dream by night. Behold, our Lord is strong and mighty, like a push of
hail, and a whirlwind, Isa. 2^.
which tears up; and like the force of an ouerflowing river which bears
down, whatsoever it touches. His very looking upon the earth, makes it
tremble; Psalm. 103.
his touching of the Mountains, makes them smoke. His head and hair, are
described by snow and wool; Apoc. 1^.
his face by the brightness of the Sun; his eyes by the flame of fire; his
voice, by the noise of many waters and of huge thunder claps: and it sends out
of his mouth, a two edged sword. He can rule all nations with a rod of Iron,
Psalm. 2.9.
and he can bruise them, like a potters vessel. And he treads the press of
the wine of the fury of his wrath; and in his thigh this Title is written:
Apoc. 9^
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: in comparison of whom, all other Kings are
toys. And so we see, what is become of a Pharao, Exodus 14. Dan. 4.4. Reg. 9.
Act. 12. Isa. 13.
a Nabuchodonozor, a Iesabell, a Herod, and a thousand others, who have
succeeded them in sin. When therefore the day of God shall come, it will be
cruel, and full of indignation, wrath, and fury; and it shall make the whole
earth become a desert, and it shall deliver up sinners to be ground to dust.
Such I say, is his Power, and such will be his revenge upon the wicked, if they
will needs be wicked; but he desires with admirable love, and procures with a
sufficiency of grace, that all the world may be saved, if they will cooperate
therewith; and the ways whereby he does it, are admirable, because his
Wisdom is as infinite as himself.

In The infinite wisdom of Christ our Lord as he is God.
virtue of this Wisdom, he does most perfectly comprehend, not only all the
Creatures, which have, or had, or are to have any being, (together with all
their powers and proprieties) but all others also, which by his omnipotency he
might create, if he would. He beholds future things which to him are present),
with a most steady eye. He numbers all the Stars, and calls every one of them
by their names. Isa. 40. Psalm. 114. Ierem. 10. Isa. 40.12. 1. Paral. 18.9.
Ierem. 1. Job. 31. and 34. Eccles. 1. and 23.
He weighes out the winds, and he measures out all the waters. He sees the
secrets of all hearts at ease; He numbers all the paces of all our feet; all the
actions of all our hands; all the casts of all our eyes; all the words of all
our tongues; all the thoughts of all our hearts; all the minutes of all our time;
all the dropps of the sea; all the graynes of the sand; and all the parts, and
motions, both internal, and external, of all his Creatures, are numbered and
disposed, by him. And all this he does, with one only eternal act of his
understanding.

Nay he has moreover, the Idea's, or Forms of innumerable other worlds before
him; for the composition, and disposition, and ornament whereof, he conceaueth,
infinite ways, and means. He has framed the parts of this world of ours,
and of all the bodies contained therein, with such exact perfection, that
nothing can either be added, or dimished, without making it either less fair
in it self, or less fit for the other parts thereof. The very least of these
things, he governs with that depth of Wisdom, and addresseth it to the
several ends, by so apt, and admirable ways; that, not so much, as a hair
can fall from a head; nor a sparrow light on the ground; nor a fly, can either
live, or dye, but by his pleasure and providence; and A most strange, but most
certain truth.
even that little miserable thing, does serve as a part, without which the
whole (as has been said) would be less beautiful. Nothing happens to him by
channce; nothing by surprise; but all things are done by eternal Council. And
(which increases the wonder), all this is determined, by one simple act of his;
without any deliberation at all; or the interposing of the least delay; and
this so perfectly, and so fully, that having, with his own infinite Wisdom,
contemplated his own works, by the space of infinite ages, he could never
find, that any thing was not most wisely done; nor any thing which was capable
of the least amendment, or alteration.

The The infinite goodness of Christ our Lord, as he is God.
infinitenes of his Goodness does also appear by innumerable ways, but
especially by this. That although his divine Justice be every whit as infinite
as his Mercy; yet (his Mercy extending it self first to us, even out of his
own intrinsecall, eternal goodness to us, and upon no original motive on our
parts) his How the mercy of God may be said to be greater then his Justice,
whilst yet both are infinite. Psalm. 44. Ose 13.
Justice does never exercise, or employ it self upon his Creatures, but by
reason of some former express provocation from them; and therefore it is most
truly said That his mercy is above all his works, and that the perdition of
Israel, is from it self. What shall we say, in further proof of his Goodness,
but that he having made us all of nothing, and being able with the same ease,
to make a million of better worlds then this; he does yet so court and woo us
to love him, and to be entirely happy in him, as if himself might not be so,
unless we would be pleased to grant his suite. To these miserable ungrateful
creatures of his, he does so deerly, and so many ways communicate himself, as
that no one of the^ does exist, which does not, in every moment of time,
participate of his divine Goodness, in most abundant and various manner. He
seeks us when we are lost; he calls us when we go astray; he imbraceth us as
soon as we dispose our selves to return, notwithstanding the millions of
sins, which we may have committed against him. He The diverse ways, whereby
God communicates his mysteries to us.
makes himself all in all to us; now performing the office of a King by
commanding; now of a Captain by conducting; now of a Mother by cherishing;
and continually of a Pastor by feeding us; sometimes with Comforts, whereby we
may be encouraged; and sometimes by Crosses, through the ouercomming whereof, we
may be fortified and refined. Nor Consider of this truth with great attention;
for it is of unspeakable comfort.
is there any one instant in this whole life of ours, wherein, by virtue of his
former grace, we may not (even by some act of our very thought alone) acquire
new degrees of grace (as will be showed more largely afterward) to every one of
which degrees, a several degree of eternal glory in heaven, does correspond;
and every one of which degrees of glory (though it should last but for an
instant) is incomparably more worth, them all the pleasures, and treasures, and
honors, which ever were, or will be tasted in this world, by all the race of
man, between the creation of Adam, and the day of Judgment. If we consider
this truth as we ought; and if God, of his mercy will enable us to feel it in
our very hearts; we shall instantly admire the infinite liberal goodness of his
divine Majesty, who would not so much as permit any evil at all in the world,
if it were not to derive more good from thence, then otherwise would have
accrewed, without that evil: Romans 8.
For all things do cooperate to the good of Gods servants, as S. Paul
affirms; and S. Augustine infers thereupon, That even our very sins, when
they are forsaken do cooperate, as serving to inflame us with greater love of
God, and consequently they bespeake for us, more resplendent thrones of glory,
in the kingdom of Heaven: then, without those sins, we should have had. So
infinite, I say, is the goodness of God, and so excessive is his love, as will
further yet appear, by that which follows, whereby the excellency of the soul
of Christ our Lord, as Man, is to be declared.

The Love of our Lord Jesus, as he is Man, is much commended to us, by the
consideration of the Excellency of his Soul.

CHAP. 2.
SINCE the dignity of the Soul of Christ our Lord, is a great part of the
ground of his immense love to Man (as will be showed particularly afterward) it
may here come fitly in, to point at the supreme excellency of this Soul. First
therefore it must be taken for granted, that Christ our Lord had an
Understanding which was created, at that instant, when he was endued with a
true and natural soul of man. Hereupon it follows, that he had a knowledge
also which was created, and which was distinct from his divine knowledge. This
truth was thus declared by Pope Agatho: S. Synod. Act. 6. and 8.
We publish and confess, that the two Natures of Christ our Lord, and each of
them, had the natural proprietyes, which respectively belonged to such naturs.
And the Council of Calcedon does in like sort define: That he took to
himself, a perfect reasonable soul, without the want of any propriety
belonging to such a one; and that in all things, it was like to that of ours,
excepting sin. There was anciently indeed, an heresy of certain persons, who
were called Gnostici, as S. Irenaeus relates, Affirming that Christour Lord was
ignorant of many things, Iran. lib. 1. aduer. haer. ca^ 17.
and that he learned many things, under the direction of some Master, as
other men might do. And so also The heretics of al ages, are lead by the same
spirit of error, Calu. in Harmoni^ passim.
do Sectaries of this last age of ours blaspheme (being lead by the same spirit
of error, as well in this, as many other things) whilst they lay an
imputation of ignorance, upon Christ our Lord.

But the holy Catholic Church, abhors all such impious conceit as this; and
so al her Doctors, with S. Thomas, do auow, That Christ our Lord man, had ever
the beatificall vison of God Joan. 8. Joan. 11.
our Lord Jesus, as he was man, had ever the beatificall vision of God. This
truth is thus declared in the Gospel by the mouth of Christ our Lord: I
speak those things which I have seen, with the Father, and where I am (that
is to say in Glory) there shall my servant also be. For since he was, from, and
in the very beginning, the natural Son of God, and the universal Father,
and head, both of men, and Angels (the influence whereof was to be derived
into all the members) it was but reason, and it could not be otherwise, but
that his Soul should be endued with this Beatificall knowledge, as is declared
by the holy Fathers. By this knowledge he beheld, and did contemplate the most
B. Trinity, after a manner, incomparably more sublime, and noble, then any, or
all the other creatures, put together. And because, by how much the more
clearly God is seen, so much the more are creatures seen in him; it will
follow that the Soul of Christ our Lord, did behold in God, not only
innumerable things, but even outright, all those things concerning creatures,
which ever were, at any time; or which are, or shall hereafter be; since It
belongs to Christ our Lord, as le is our Judge, to know all ^^inges, vhich
co^terne the creatures, vhom he is to judge. Matt. 28.^8.
he is the Lord of all, and the Judge of all, and has all power given to him,
both in heaven and earth; for the just and orderly execution whereof, it is
evident that he must have the knowledge of them all.

The Catholic Fathers, and Doctors, do also ascribe a second kind of
knowledge to the soul of Christ our Lord, which Christ our Lord, a Man, had
also infused knowledge.
they call Infused, as being a kind of supernatural light, whereby it did
certainly and clearly discern, and know all things created. And although it
be not so expressly contained in holy Scriptures, that Christ our Lord was
endued with this knowledge, in particular and distinct manner (since they only
affirm. That he knew all things (which is sufficiently made good, by that
beatificall vision, whereof I spoke before) yet are there pregnant
consequences, and weighty reasons, which exact at our hands a firm belief,
that he had also this other Infused knowledge. For the soul of Christ our
Lord, was always truly Blessed; he was not only a Runner toward felicity
(as all other humane creatures are in this life) but he was a Comprehender of
it, even from the very first instant of his Conception. It was necessary
therefore, that his soul being Blessed, should have all the endowments of a
blessed Soul, vvherof this Infused knowledge is one; and whereby it did
certainly, and clearly know all things created, whether they were natural,
or supernatural. And that in themselves, and in their proper kind, or element,
as they call it; and not, as only appearing, and shining in another glass, as
they are seen, by that former Beatificall vision, but directly, and immediately
in themselves. And for this it is, that the incomparable S. Augustine, does
declare: That the Angels are endued both with a Morning, and an Evening
knowledge: understanding by the former, the beatificall vision, and by the
latter, the knowledge which they call infused.

Our Lord Jesus had moreover, a third kind of knowledge, which is termed by
the name of Experimental. This Of the experimental knowledge of Christ our
Lord.
knowledge is acquired by the industry of the senses; and it was the fame in
Christ our Lord (for as much as concerns the means whereby it was gathered)
with the knowledge, which we compass in this life. But yet with this great
difference; That in Christ our Lord, it was without any danger of error;
whereas in us, it is, with very great difficulty of judging right. And it is in
consideration of this kind of knowledge, that the holy Evangelist affirmed,
Christ our Lord, to proceed and grow. Luc. 2.
But those miserable men whereof I spoke before, having the sight of their Faith
so short, as not to discern in his sacred soul any other kind of knowledge
then this last; did absolutely impute ignorance to it, at sometimes of his
life, more then others; as if it had not been Hypostatically united to God; in
whom not only the knowledge of all things, but Nothing is, but so far as it
is in God.
even the very things themselves remain; and if they did not so remain, they
could not be.

Now upon this, which concerns the knowledge of Christ our Lord, it follows
clearly, that he knew all things plainly, which are, which shall be, and which
ever were. It follows also, that he never ceased, in any one minute of his
life, from the consideration of what he knew; since he had such knowledge as
was wholly independent upon those images, or forms, which use to be impressed
upon the Phansy: and therefore the working of his knowledge, was no way
interrupted, even when he was sleeping. And yet again it follows, that
having a perfect comprehension of all things created, together with the causes
and effects of them all; he Christ our Lord as Man was endued with the perfect
knowledge of all arts and sciences.
consequently was endued with the truth of all Arts and Sciences.

He had moreover a most sublime gift of He had a most sublime gift of
Prophesy.
Prophesy, and that, not after a transitory manner, (as others have been
enriched with it by God) but permanently; and sticking, as it were, as close
unto him, as his own Nature. And lastly, it must follow, that he was the
possessour of all Christ our Lord as Man was a most perfect possessor of
prudence.
Prudence, and the parts thereof, which might any way be fit, either for the
ordering of his own actions, or for the direction and government of others. So
that, by what we have seen, he might well be naturally, the Master, and
guide of al mankind, which yet will more clearly appear, by the Power, and
Sanctity of that precious Soul.

The Power and Sanctity of the Soul of Christ our Lord, is considered; whereby
we may also the better see his excessive Love.

CHAP. 3.
BESIDES the Consideration of the divine Wisdom, and knowledge of Christ our
Lord; I should deserve no excuse, if, when there is question of his infinite
Love to us, I should not also touch upon the Power, and the Sanctity of his
soul; Which if they be seriously considered, will greatly serve (though I
mean, but even to touch, and go) to set forth his dignity in himself, and
consequently, it will put a more express, and perfect stamp of value, upon
his infinitely dear, and tender love to us. For How every several excellency
in Christ our Lord, does justly raise the value of his love
the more he knows, and the more continually he cares, and the more wisdom
he enioyes, and the more power he practices, and the more holiness he
possesses, the more happy are the creatures whom he loves.

The The power of Christ our Lord, as man.
Power therefore, vvhervvith Christ our Lord was endued as man, was so
wonderfully great, that he could work what miracles he would; and, at his
pleasure, was he able to inuert the order of all natural things; and all this
by what means, he would think fit. This Power he also had, in as permanent a
manner, as we have said already, that he had his Prophesy; nor was it only
obtained for him, by his particular prayers made to God, from time to time,
according to the exigence of occasions; as it has been granted to some of
the servants of God. But we read, that when he was passing, and doing other
things, Luc. 8.
yet virtue even then, issued out of him, vvherby the vvorking of miracles is
meant. And, else where it is also affirmed, that the virtue which issued out of
him, Luc. 6.
cured all diseases, And the leaper who was recovered in the Gospel, was
inspired by the good spirit of God, to say thus to Christ our Savior; O Lord
if thou will, Matt. 8.
thou can make me clean. And our Lord did show, that he was not deceived
therein. For instantly he said; I will, Be clean. Now all this Power he
employed for our good, both corporal and spiritual, but especially for our
spirittuall good. For even in the Gospel when he cured men's bodies, by way
of illuminating their eyes, and enabling their limbs, and restoring their
lives, he cured also many of their souls, and the several infirmities which
they were subject to, as will be shevved else In the discourse of the Miracles
of Christ our Lord.
where. Nor wrought that holy omnipotent hand of his, any outvvard miracle,
vvherin some inward mystery was not locked up, as some rich Ievvel might be,
in some rare Cabbinet.

The The sanctity of the soul of Christ our Lord.
Sanctity also of Christ our Lord, was supreme. For Sanctity, being nothing,
but a constant and supernatural cleanes, and purity of the soul, whereby it is
made acceptable and dear to God; how holy must that soul needs be, which
was so highly The soul of no Saint in heaven was to have been any other then
odious in the sight of God, but for the merits of Christ our Lord.
dear to him; as that it is only in regard of that soul, that all other
souls are not odious, and ugly in his sight. Supreme I say, was the Sanctity
of Christ our Lord; for, by the grace of the Hypostaticall union, he was made
holy, after a most high, and incomprehensible manner, and he became The beloved
Son of God, receiving grace beyond al power of expression. That so from
thence, as from the treasure-house of Sanctity, all men might take, according
to their capacity. Not only as from the greatest Saint, but as from the
sanctifyer of them all; and, as I may say, from the very dye of sanctity,
whereby all they, who ever think of becoming Saints, must take their color
and luster, and all they who will, may fetch what they desire out of this store.

So that we may see, with ease enough, how inco^parably much more the Sa^ctity
was of Christ our Lord, then that of any, or all the other creatures put
together. For among them God has given, drops to some, and draughts to
others; but to him, grace was communicated by streams and floudes beyond all
measure or set proportion. His soul indeed, could not have been united to the
divinity, without a most special grace; but that being once supposed, the
other could not choose but follow, as connaturall. And by the force of this
Sanctity of Christ our Lord, he was wholly, and naturally made incapable of
sin, yea and of any moral defect whatsoever.

Concerning the Virtues, which are called Theological, namely Faith, Hope, and
Charity, the last only of the three, could lodge in him; for the former two
being Why christ our Lord, was incapable of Faith and Hope.
Hope and Faith, were incompatible with the clear vision and perfect fruition
of God, which he still enjoyed. But Christ our Lord possessed all the moral
virtues in all perfection.
as for the moral virtues, as Liberality, Magnanimity, Patience, Purity,
Mercy, Humility, and Obedience, withal the rest; it appears by the history of
his sacred life and death, that he had them all; and that they were most
perfect in him; and ever most ready to be put in practice; as not being
impeached, by so much as the offer of any contraryes. All the gifts of Gods
spirit were in him, nay he was the resting and reposing place of that spirit.

This Soul of Christ our Lord, was therefore inhabited by all the virtues,
Isa. 11.
and graces of God, as heaven is by so many several quires of Angels in
heaven; but that which did sublime them all, was Charity. This soul if it be
well considered, will look, as if it were some huge, wide, bottomless sea of
Crystal; but The unspeakable working of the soul of Christ our Lord, in the
spirit of love.
a Crystal, sweetly passed, and transpierced with a kind of flame of love. It
was unspeakably quiet; and yet, in a kind of perpetual agitation, by the
impulse thereof; like the flame of some torch, which is ever moving and
working, yet without departing from it self. It is like that kind of Hawke,
which keeping still the same pitch, aloft, in the air, does stir the wings
with a restless kind of motion, whilst yet the body does not stir. It
spendes, but wastes not it self, by spreading grace upon all the servants of
God, after an admirable manner. Sometimes looking into the hearts of men, and
by that very looking, changing them; sometimes by sending, as it were, certain
invisible strings, from his heart to theirs; and so sweetly drawing them to
himself, whilst No soul can move one pace toward God, but drawn by the
love, of Christ our Lord.
yet the world would ignorantly conceive, that they went alone.

But above all, that which may strike our weak, and dark minds with wonder,
is to consider the profoundity, and The admirable order with still was held in
the soul of Christ our Lord, notwithstanding the wonderful multiplicity of
acts with he exercised, al at once.
order, which is held in that divine Soul, though it looked upon almost
infinite things at once. Still did it adore the Divinity, still did it abase
and even (as it were) annihilate his own humanity; still did it most straightly
embrace with strong arms, and patronize with the working bowels of tender
mercy, all the miseryes of all the Creatures in the whole world; unspeakably,
ardently, thirsting after the glory of God, and the felicity of man; and
eternally keeping all the facultyes of his mind, erected upon that high and
pure law of Charity.

So excellent, and so noble was this divine Soul of Christ our Lord, through
the high endowmentes, wherewith it was enriched by the eternal Father. Wherein
no passion did ever once presume to lead the way to reason, but was glad of so
much honor, as to follow it. And though whatsoever concerned the vegetative,
and sensitive powers of the soul, may seem little, in respect of what is said
concerning the reasonable, which inuolueth both those others; yet since nothing
is little, which is able to do service and homage to him, who is so truly
great; it may deserve to be considered, how those The vegetative and sensitive
powers of the soul, were wholly in the hand of the will of Christ our Lord.
Vegetative and Sensitive powers, were wholly in the hand of his will. And so he
could have chosen, whether his body should grow; or whether his meat should
nourish; or whether his flesh should feel; or whether his blood, upon the
inflicting of a wound, should follow; or whether his person should send out any
such images or species of it self, as whereby it might become visible, to the
eyes of others. And The body of Christ our Lord though it were a true and
natural body, yet was it wholly in his power to determine how far it should be
subject to the conditions of such a body more or less.
in fine, in his choice it was, whether he would let himself be liable to any
of those propertyes and conditions, to which the rest of man is subject. And
now because the graces, and perfections of his sacred body, do contribute to
the excellency of his divine person, I will also procure to describe the
supereminent beauty and dignity of that sacred flesh and blood. For thus we
shall grow to have a perfect notion of his whole person, which will convey such
an influe^ce of value upon every act of love, which afterward he will be showed
to have expressed, as I hope will make us wholly give our heart to him, by way
of homage, for his incomparable benefits.

The dignity of the precious body of Christ our Lord, is declared, whereby the
excellency of his love is magnified.

CHAP. 4.
THE Spirit of God, in his holy Scripture does prophetically delineate the
beauty and dignity of the sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus; I mean, of his
sacred flesh and blood. It speaks of him thus, Psalm. 44.
speciosus forma prae filijs hominum: A The beauty of the body, of Christ our
Lord.
person, endued with another manner of most excellent beauty, then was ever to
be seen, in any other Creature. And indeed, (even abstracting from what is
revealed to us by way of faith concerning his beauty in particular) what kind
of admirable thing must that Humanity needs be, according to all discourse of
reason? On the one side, let us consider, that this sacred body of his, was
compounded of no other matter, but that purest blood Royal of his al-immaculat
virgin mother. Royal The dignity and sanctity of his desce^t.
it was by her disce^t from so many kings; Sacerdotall, and Prophetical by her
being also derived, from the Sanctity of Prophets, and of Priests. Great
prerogatives were these; but yet they are the least of them, wherewith this
holy body of our Lord was endued. For it was much more dignified, in that,
before it came to be his, the body of the sacred virgin, did cohabite, with her
own most happy, and most accomplished soul. Whereby How sublimly spiritual
the B. virgin was.
her very flesh was gown after a sort to be even Spirit, as we see the very
souls of sensual persons, to participate, as it were, the very nature of
flesh. Much more advantage did it yet receive, in that the holy Ghost did frame
this body of our B. Lord, out of the blood, and in the womb, of our B. Lady.
And most of all was it advanced by this, That in the instant when she
conceived, his incomparable soul was infused, and both his soul and body was
Hypostatically united to the divinity.

Of the happiness of that soul, already we have spoken; and even by this little
which here is touched, we may behold his body as the prime and maister-peece
of all visible beauty. Amongst Why the body of our B. Lord, must needs be
admirably beautiful.
the Children of this world, we see indeed, that even they who are borne of
handsome, through the disorder, which naturally accompanies generation; and
besides it also grows, sometimes through a disconformity, which nurses have to
the mothers. But his body was framed by the never erring hand of the holy
Ghost; and here the mother, and the nurse, were one, and the same most holy
Virgin Mary.

The excellency of Corporal Beauty, does consist The conditions which are
required for the making up of perfect Beauty.
either in complexion, for as much as concerns color; or in feature, or
shape, for as much as concerns proportion; or in facility and grace, for as
much as concerns disposition, and motion. We see how any one of these parts
of beauty, if it be eminent, does affect the eye, and heart of a beholder;
although such a person do either want the other two; or have them, at the most,
but in some moderat degree. And the perfection of any one part, pleads the
excuse, of wanting any other. And whether therefore shall we be so bold, as to
think that Christ our Lord was not endued with them all, in all perfection; or
else so blind as notwithstanding such unspeakable beauty as his was, not to be
enamoured of him.

It is not enough that a body have only beauty, for the perfection thereof, but
For the compleme^t of Beauty there are required health and strengh.
withal it must have health, and strength. Now what want of health could the
body of our B. Savior have, whose soul was not only free, but so infinitely
far, from the curse both of Actual and Original sin; the true cause, not
only of sickness, but of death? And what infirmity, or weakness, could that
Humanity be subject to (unless he had would, Isa. 63.
as indeed he would for our greater good), which not only was not obnoxious to
any distemper of humors, but withal it was made to be one person with
allmighty God himself. And now let him that can, conceive heerby, the
sublimity, even of his Corporal beauty.

Quis est iste, says the Prophet Esaias: Who is he that comes out of Edom;
with his garments dyed from Bozra? this beautiful one, in his robe, walking
on, in the multitude of his strength? This, S. Denis affirms, Decael.
Hierarch. c. 7.
to have been spoken in person of the All the Angels in heaven were amazed to
see the beauty of the body of Christ our Lord.
Celestial Spirits; they being possessed with an admiration of the unspeakable
Beauty of Christ our Lord; Whose divinity was vested with our humanity, as with
a robe; which once was white, though it grew to be crimson, through our sins.
Well might those spirits wonder, and well might men be amazed to see their Lord
and ours, walking through those ways of Palestine, and through those streets
of Jerusalem; unknown to men, but adored by those Angels, as their God. He
went like another, and a better Joseph, seeking his brethren. Like another and
a better Moses, Genesis 37. Exodus 4. etc. 1. Reg. 17. 1. Cor. 4. Luc. 10.
procuring to deliver his compatriots from the slavery of Egypt. And like a a
true valiant David, who came to fight against, and to defeat Golias, by whom
the Israelites were threatened, with total ruin. More truly and more nobly,
by innumerable degrees, then S. Paul, was this Humanity of our Lord, made a
spectacle to the world, to Angels, and to men. That spectacle which kings and
Prophets had reason, to desire so much, to see; and which The Patriarchs and
Prophets, would have exulted to see this sacred Humanity. Joan. 8. Luc. 10.
Abraham did so long to look upon; and in spirit he did see it, and it ioyed
him, at the very roots of his heart. And no marvel if the belief thereof, did
so joy him; the presence and sight whereof, did, by the testimony of Truth it
self, make those eyes so happy which beheld it.

How the Beauty of our Lord Jesus Christ, did convince and conquer all lookers
on, saving only where excess of sin had put out the eyes of the soul.

CHAP. 5.
INFALLIBLY this is true; That if any Christian of common sense, (who were not
withal of some extremely currish, and devilish nature) should see any person,
of that admirable complexion, feature and motion, which was in the humanity of
Christ our Lord (even abstracting from all those supernatural advantages, and
endowments which did abound in him) although that person, were made odious by
any adverse, and hateful circumstance; as namely that he were some Jew, or
Turk, or slave, or murderer, or otherwise, some most hateful, hurtful
thing): infallibly, I say, it is true, that yet, that presence would exact a
kind of reverence and love; or else at the very least, a great compassion, of
his frailty or misery. The Nothing but Abyss of sin, could have disobliged
me^ as it were from doting upon the humanity of Christ our Lord.
Scribes and Pharisees alone, had their souls so full of envy, avarice, and
hypocrisy, that not only grace was quenched, but even very nature, in a manner,
killed in them. For else, that diuinely-humane presence of our Lord, would have
subdued them to an ardent love of his person; and they must needs have been
far from finding in their wicked hearts, to hate and malign that sweet
humanity after such a reprobate, and restless manner.

The people The people of the Jews, were captiued in their hearts, to the
sacred presence of Christ our Lord. Luc. 5.
which was less wicked, ran flocking after him whither soever he went, when it
was left to it self, and not led prisoner by the power and passion of their
blind guides. And that, not only when they had need of some miraculous cures,
(for then they were feign to vntyle some men's howses, to let others in, to his
presence) nor yet when he would be chauking out to them, the way of life, by
the words of his divine wisdom, (for then wanting room in houses, and even
in public streets the very earth seemed to little, to hold both him and
them, who swarmed about him, and) he was feign to go on shipboard, whilst they
remained upon the shore; and from thence would he ravish both their greedy
eyes, their hungry ears, and their panting hearts, all at once. Nay even when
he would be seeming, as though he could be weary of them; and to be ridd of
company, did retire to comtemplation, in the desert, (where there was plenty of
no earthly thing but penury) so deeply yet, were they taken by his divine
presence, as The people followed Christ our Lord, being lead by no other
interest, but only the delight to see and hear him speak. Marc. 8.
to forget themselves, and to follow him on, by thousands, and to continue
three days and nights in that wilderners, with their wives and Children; not
fearing to dye of hungar, nor caring for the comfort of any other food, but
him. But There is nothing lost by leaving any contentment for the love of God.
he, on the other side, pitied them for taking no pity of themselves for his
sake; and did so multiply a few loaves and fishes, Ibid. v. 7.
as that there might not only be enough to feed them, but to spare. Nor was
that enamoured heart of his, content, that they should, in have, Ibid.
or with incomodity refresh themselves; but he made them all sit down, upon
cushions of hay or straw; and to be served in order, and at their ease; whilst
yet, for ought we know, himself did neither sit, nor eat. O infinite charity
of his soul? but O unspeakable beauty, and dignity of his body, which was
able, to lead, or rather which could not choose, but draw, so many thousands of
rude persons, into such appearance of distress, with their so much delight?

What kind of beauty, and visible dignity must that needs be (for his miracles
alone, would have induced the^ to declare him rather to be a Saint or a
prophet, then to be a Prince) which could persuade such multitudes of men, to A
great argument to prove the matchles visible beauty, and dignity of Christ our
Lord
think, and firmly purpose, the making him their king, who had the apperance
in fortune, but of a beggar? And because his contempt of the world, his
profound humility, and his inviolable modesty, did give them little hope, that
he would accept that honor at their hands, they treated amongst themselves (as
is affirmed by the sacred Text), vt raperent eum in Regem, to use violence, in
procuring to draw him, Joan. 6.
from that inferour degree of fortune, wherein his infinite love to them had
lodged him; though this indeed, were then, a point of Faith, beyond their
Creed? What kind Another demonstration, to prove this truth.
of grace and sweet Majesty did shine in him, when they went no longer now by
thousands, but by millions of souls, of al nations, and ages, strewing the
earth underneath, where he was to pass, with palms and garments; and filling
the air above, with voices of high applause, and acclamation; which ceremonies
were not used but in triumphs, and that upon victories of, Matthew. 28. Joan. 10.
the highest rank? And, Baronius makes it clear, that both for the multitude
of persons, who did assist, and for the quality of demonstrations which were
made, there was never, perhaps, in the whole world, a greater triumph, then
they exhibited in his honor. For though he buried himself, in the very
bottom of contempt; yet they, being urged by that matchless dignity of his
person (besides his wisdom and power) did revive, and raise it up, to receive
that homage, without asking him, so much as leave.

O precious and sweet Humanity of Christ our Lord! And We at worthy of all
punihment, if we become not even the slaves of the Humanity of Christ our Lord.
how shall we who know that thou were humaned for us, (and did not only
descend to be a man, but did degrade thy self further down, for the love
of us) how I say shall we sufficiently admire and love thy Beauty, which was so
great even in their external eyes, who had not withal, the internal eyes of
Faith, wherewith thou have enriched our souls! And where shall we find either
holes, or hills, to hide, or cover us from thy wrath, if we, who are
Christians, do not by the eternal obsequiousnes of our harrs, outstrip those
obstinate, but yet withal, inconstant Jews. Obstinate in their minds when
they were grown to malice, but inconsta^t in mantayning those tender thoughts
which they excelle^tly did sometimes oblige them to, in the performance of so
many Sovereign signs of honor.

The admirable visible grace and disposition of the person of Christ our Lord,
is further declared.

CHAP. 6.
WHAT heaven on earth, could ever make a man so happy, as to have beheld this
sacred person of our Lord Jesus, in any of those postures, which are described
by the hand of the holy Ghost, in holy scripture? To have The incomparable
grace of Christ our Lord in all his actions.
seen that god, made man, as he was walking before the front of the Temple;
when his heart, the while, like a true Incensary, was spending it self into the
perfume of prayers, which ascended before the Altar of the divine mercy; even
then, and even for them, who there, went in and out, contemning, and maligning
him, in the highest degree. Mar. 11. Joan. 20.
To have seen him walking, and bestowing those dear limbs of his, upon those
sands, Mattb. 4.
with incredible grace, and love, near to that lake or sea of Galilea, (as if
it had looked but like a kind of recreation) when his enamoured soul, was yet,
the while, negotiating with his eternal Father, Ibid.
the vocation of his Apostles, and by them the salvation of the whole world. To
have seen him, Luc. 4.16 etc.
standing upon his sacred feet, whilst, with reverence, he would be reading in
the Synagogue; and then sitting down afterward, when he would take upon him
the office of a teacher; Ibid. 20.
so pointing us out, by any little motion of his, to the purity, and perfection
of every action. Marc. 3.
To have seen him sitting, in the mindst of a room, with all that admiring
multitude round about him, whilst news was brought him, of the approach of his
all-immaculate mother, and of his kindred and domesticke friends; who had
reason to think, every minute to be a world of ages, till their eyes might be
restored, to that seat and Center of all joy. And he the while, (with divine
sweetness, and modesty, looking round about him, and lending a particular eye of
mercy to every soul there present; and extending his liberal hand with an
incomparable sweet noble grace), did with his sacred mouth, and with such a
heart of love as God alone is able to understand, adopt both them, and all the
world, into his nearest dearest kindred; upon condition, that they would do his
Fathers will, which was the only means to make them happy.

To The infinite gracious goodness of Christ our Lord.
have seen that son of God, whose face is the delight and glory of all the
Angels in heaven, (and at whose sacred feet they fall adoring with so
profound reverence) deueste himself first of his upper garment with such
lovely grace; Joan. 13.4. etc.
and gird the Towell about his virginal loins with such modesty; and fill the
vessel full of water, by the labor of his own delicate arms, with such
alacrity; and cast himself with such bottomless humility and charity upon
those knees (to which all the knees of heaven and earth were obliged to bow)
and from which the eternal Father, was only to have expected such an homage)
at the feet, and for the comfort, and conversion of that devil Judas; Yea and
to wipe those very feet, when he had washed them first; and that, perhaps,
with the tears of his own sacred eyes, to see if yet, it might be possible to
soften the heart of that Tygar, who was able to defile such a beauty, and to
detest such a goodness; and who in despite of that prodigious mercy, would
needs be running post to hell, by co^miting that abominable treachery. They
say, the vale discouers the hill, and the dark shadow of a picture, sets off
the body, which there, is drawn. Never was there such a piece of chiaro
oscuro; such a beautiful body as that of Christ our Lord; never was there
such a black shadovv, as that vvretched man, whom for the infamy of his crime
I vvil forget to name.

But in fine, to have seen through the whole course of his life that holy
Humanity, sometimes svveating with excess of labor; some times grown pale,
with the rage of hungar; some times pulled and vvracked several vvayes at
once, by importunities; sometimes pressed, and as it were, packed up into less
room, then his own dimensions did require, by crowdes of people; and Christ
our Lord, maintained his grace, and Beauty, notwithstanding all the
inco^modities, to which he was put.
ever to have beheld, in his very face, such an altitude of peaceful piety,
and such a depth of humility, and such an unlimited, and endless extent of
Charity, by removing all diseases, and dangers, both of body and soul, as
hereafter In the discourse upon his Miracles.
will be showed more at large; for a man I say to have had the sight of such an
object would be sure I think to have freed him, from ever, longing after any
other.

Of Titus it was said, that he was deliciae humani generis, the very joy and
comfort of the world, for the sweet receptio^ which he vouchsafed to make to
all comers. Of Julius Caesar it is recorded, that being threatened with danger
of a mutiny, and defection, in his army; he spoke to his soldiers, this one
only word Quirites That word, did show, that he held them no longer for
soldiers of his, but only as citizens of Rome, and that thought pierced their
hearts, with sorrow and shame.
, wtih such circumstances of grace and wisdom, as that he drew al their
hearts, toward him at an instant. It is true, and it was much, and there have
not been many Caesar's in the world. But yet, away with Caesar, a way with
Titus; they were but dirt and filth, when they were at the best; and now like
damned spirits, their souls are cursing God in hell. And what Titus, or
Caesar, dares show himself, (when once there is question of grace and
wisdom) in presence of this sacred and precious Humanity; this deerly sweet,
and yet most subtle, and searching beam of divine sple^dour; whereof the
Sun, from which it flowed, is no less then the Divinity it self?

We make account to have beheld many excellent beautyes of flesh and blood. But
there No other corporal beauty is so exact, as not to have some defect.
was never any yet (since that of our our first parents) which had no fault;
excepting this of our B. Lord, and his sacred mother, which did incomparably
exceed that of Adam and Eve. Some pictures indeed and statues we have seen,
which far exceed any Natural either of men or women. And we have discerned a
countenance, in some of them, which does (as it were) even breath and speak
the very soul; and deliver over, into the hand of our mind, whatsoever
virtue, or noble affection we will call for. But now, since all There this no
means of approaching to the expressio^ of the excellent beauty of Christ our
Lord, by any picture or gatue; and which this cannot be done.
pictures, or statues, grow either from the imitation of some original life,
which has exteriourly been seen, by the eye; or else from the fancy of the
painter, or sculptour, who conueys, and ferries over, his invention, into a
picture or statue, by the skill and maistery of his hand; so miserably must
every such expression, shrink and fly out of sight, (if once it be compared to
this divine dear Lord of ours), as there is an infinite distance, on the one
side, between the paynter or sculptour, who devised that picture or statue;
and the Holy Ghost, on the other, who drew this sacred person out of the purest
blood of our B. Lady.

I allow, that painters who have skill in drawing, by seeing of a man, may
find with ease, if he be graceful in the disposition of his person; and a A
true token more or less, of grace in the disposition of a man's person.
ready sign thereof is this, If whilst he falls into any posture, without
particular design, and, as it were, by chance, it be decent, and natural, and
fit to be put into a picture. Whereas, on the other side, if a man be either
rude, or else affected; howsoever you shall bid him place his body, he will ever
be, as if he were a kind of forced, imprisoned thing; and the painter can never
please himself, in taking the posture of such a man. The disposition and
behavior of our B. Savior, was so easy, and so natural, and withal so
sweet and graceful, as infallibly there was never any motion, or disposition
so amiable as that. And therefore, whether he sat, or vvalked, or stood, or
kneeled, or spoke, or only looked, or whatsoever else, in fine he did; it was
the topp of that which could be done for grace; and therefore, it was no
marvel, if wheresoever he went, he vvonne their hearts; and if therein they
were glad to keep his picture.

We daily meet with some who are deformed both in feature and color, and
yet if they have a svveet behavior, and especially if their minds be
perfectly well composed within; the very The sa^ctity of the soul, does even
bestow upon the body a kind of beauty.
sanctity of their souls, breathes out such an influence upon their bodies, as
to make them pleasing. This is certainly true, and we daily meet with it by
experience; and such power has virtue, as to make an eye, both forgive, and
moreover, even to like deformity, in an object, where it desires beauty; or
rather to procure, that a person who otherwise was deformed, should not only
not seem, but not so much as be so; through the grace which is communicated
to it, by the soul. Then By that account, how incomparable was the beauty of
our B. Lord?
from that Horison, let us take the height of this Star of Beauty; and
contemplate, the best we can, how much more Beautiful and graceful must
that exterior Beauty of our B. Saviors most holy person have been (which yet
of it self was so exact) through the tincture which still it would be
receiving from his most gracious and most glorious soul. How would it shine
through every action and motion of his body, how povverfully would it inuit,
how straightly would it oblige, and how ardently would it inflame the well
disposed mind of man, to admiration and love?

The same discourse is prosecuted and concluded, concerning the excellent
Beauty of our Lord; especially of the attractiuenesse of his sight.

CHAP. 7.
IF their feet which carried news of Peace were beautiful (as by the
testimony of our Lord himself they are) how beautiful must those feet be,
Isa. 52.
which carried not only nevves of Peace, but that very Incarnate Peace it
self, which passes all vnders^tanding? Phil. 4.
How The liberality of the hands of our Lord Jesus. Cantic. 5.
beautiful were his hands which are described by the spouse (who knovves
them best, and has tasted oftnest of their bounty) to be of gold and full of
precious stomes, for their riches; and vvithall to be round and smoth; to
declare thereby, that those riches, and graces, are daily and hovverly dropping
down on us? How beautiful were those svveete, and sacred lips of his;
that treasure-house of divine graces, which locked up, and let out that Ievvel
of the words of eternal wisdom, according to our capacities, and occasions?
We The wisdom and power of his speech. Matthew. 21. Luc. 4. Joan. 7. Mar. 7.
perceive in the Gospel, how they were amazed, and yet with much delight,
to hear him speak; how they auovved that never man had spoken like him; how
they acknowledge him to have, a kind His inimitable grace.
of inimitable authority, and power of language. Which yet was so far from
incroaching upon the possessions of his meekenes and modesty, which is a part
of beauty that the Prophei, long before he was borne, foresaw, how he was to
be no clamorous or contentious person, but that so softly he would The
admirable meeknes and modesty of his speech. Isa. 41. Matthew. 12. Ibid. 2. Cor.
10.
speak, as to make no noise in the streets. And it is also said of him, That
he would not break the bruised reed, nor so much as quench the smoking flax,
as if he would rather make his own eyes water, then offend the poorest
creature upon earth. And the Apostle also, not long after his death, being
earnest with the Corinthians, that they would be careful to conserve their
spirit, coniures them to it, by the meekenes and modesty of our Lord Jesus, as
by virtues which shined in him after an extraordinary manner.

How The sweetnen of his divine voice. Matthew. 11.
sweet was that voice of his, which invited all the world to bring in their
loades, and to discharge them all upon his shoulders; and when, through the
compassion of our extreme need to be refreshed, he could not continue his
general custom, in speaking softly; but cried out with a loud voice (and he
did it upon the last day of the feast of the Tabernacles, which was a time of
great solemnity, that so he might be heard by the greater number of people) and
he invited them all, Joan. 71
to drink of that water of life, with a full mouth. Confess. l. 12. cap. 10.
For he indeed is the true fountain of life. Hunc bibam and tunc viuam, says
S. Augustiue: Let me drink of him, and I shall live. What His arde^t sighs
and groans.
scalding sighs, what profound internal groans, would that flaming heart be
often sending out, by his sacred mouth, to the Justice seat of God (whereof we
find some, expressly to be recorded in the holy Text) that so the divine
Majesty, Marc. 71
beholding the sorrows of his soul, might be obliged to forgive the sins of
ours? How dear The charming accent of his voice.
and how delightful must the ordinary accent be, of his heavenly voice; since
the accent ever carries a kind of nearer conjunction to the mind; and which,
even for that cause, can hardly be described by any words. And now, the nearer
it was to the incomparable soul of Christ our Lord, who can doubt, but that
needs it must be so much the fuller, of delight and grace?

But especially how beautiful were those holy happy The inestimable pure and
perfect beauty of his eyes. Genesis 49.
eyes of his, those heavenly Orbs? And what felicity was theirs, who might at
leisure glass themselves therein; they being so full of latent Majesty, but yet
sweetened by such Humility and Charity. Those eyes, which are pulchriores vino
(as the Patriarch Jacob says, speaking literally of Christ our Lord) for the
quality they had, to inebriate, with being looked upon, far, more powerfully,
and more sweetly, then any most precious wine can do, the man who drinks it.
With what kind of modest grace, do we think that he would now be raising them
up, Joan. 11.
toward heaven, beholding the Creatures in Almighty God; and then returning
them down to the earth, Joan. 8.
to see God in his Creatures? And what kind of fountains do we think they
grew to be, when they did so often swymme in tears, through the compassion of
our miseries, Haebr. 5. ^ Luc. 19.
and the remission of our sins; at the raising of Lazarus; for the ruins of
Jerusalem; at the giving up of his soul into the eternal Fathers hand; and
those many times more, which are not set down in the sacred text?

How sweetly would they lay themselves to sleep, (being folded up, in those
liddes, the only sheets, which any part of him did use) for the releese of that
frail nature, which for our sakes he had assumed? And he lent them rest, with
so much the better will, because Christ our Lord, did negotiate our salvation
with God, as well when he was sleeping, as waking Joan. 2. Matt. 4.
sleep gave no impediment to the working of his mind for our good; the
knowledge of which mind was no way (as has been said else where) dependant
upon his Fancy, as ours is. How were they able when he was pleased to do it, to
pierce the hearts of men by way of terror; when for the zeal of his Fathers
glory, he punished the buyers and sellers in the Temple; without their daring
once to bring him to the least account, for that supposed excess? And by way
of powerful mercy, when, seeing his Apostles, he called them at once from the
world, to his eternal service? And looking afterward upon S. Peter, in the
time of his passion, by only looking The looks of Christ our Lord did move S.
Peeter to contrition. Luc. 72. Luc. 7.
he retired him, at an instant, from his sins, as will be seen, more at large,
afterward. And not only did those eyes, so full of majesty and modesty, and
humility, and suauity, captive those hearts which they beheld; but others who
beheld them, were as inseparably also captiued thereby, as if there had been,
no place left for election, whether they would be taken prisoners or no.

The enamoured How the divine presence of Christ our Lord did most chastely
captive the soul of S. Mary Magdalen.
Penitent S. Mary Magdalene, who formerly was so abandoned to the pleasure of
sense, found her soul so maistered by this divine object of our B. Saviors
presence; that her former honny did instantly turn gall; and she was so
ingulfed into a sea of chaste and pure delight, that in the life time of our
Lord, she did even, as it were, nail her self to his sacred feet. Nay she
forsook them not, in his very passion when they were nailed to the Cross. She
was in chase of them, till his Resurection; and after his Ascension, she
confined her self, for all those thirty years of her suruiuing, to a rude and
most retired desert; disdayning, with a holy kind of scorn, that her eyes
should feed upon any other object, then that, which her memory would ever be
sure to help her to, of her most beloved, and most beautiful Lord.

His sacred presence, had not any superficial, or glearing beauty belonging to
it, but The Beauty of Christ our Lord was so abounda^t, as to make a man
despise all temporal riches.
a beauty which contained a Mine of plenty. S. Matthew shall witness this; and he
shall do it better, then by words. For instantly upon our Lords commandment,
and their mutual sight of one another, he followed him, and that for ever; and
he discovered in our Lord Jesus, another manor of beautiful abundance, then
all the whole world could help him to. And perhaps, there is not a better
proof of the rich beauty and excellency of our Lord, nor a stranger conversion
of any man recorded, Luc. 54
then of this Apostle. Who was (as we may say) in flagranti crimine, in the
very seat and chair of sin; beseiged by the company of others, who were
likely to be as much depraved as himself. He was in the exercise and occasions
of new extorsions; and yet The Co^uersio^ of S. Matthew was most heroical.
he left all, without taking, so much as an hours time, to clear his books
of account, which could not choose but be intricate. And all this, upon the
single sight and hearing the voice of a mere man, as Christ our Lord appeared
to be. And yet, I say, so rich was our Saviors beauty, and so attractiue was
his manner of speech, that insta^tly, it was able to draw that Publica^ though
he were besotted by desire of gain) to follow him; who through his poverty,
seemed withal, to be the owner of no earthly thing, but only of his own
individual person. But the Maies^ty and splendor of the divinity though it
lay hid, Comment. in Matthew. c. 7.
did yet shine so brightly in his face of flesh and blood, (as S. Hierome
says) that upon the very first The sovereign power which the aspect of Christ
our Lord had over creatures.
aspect it was able to draw all such as looked upon it. For if there be such
virtue in a lodestone, or a piece of amber, as that it can draw to it rings of
iron, and straw; how much more easily (says this Saint) could the Lord of all
the creatures, draw to himself, whom he was pleased to call.

So delighfull therefore, and so plentiful, was this beauty and dignity of our
Lord JESUS. And if it appeared powerful in their eyes at the first, when they
beheld it but by startes and glances; much The felicity of the^ who might
behold the person of Christ our Lord at pleasur. Bernard. sermon. 20. in Cant.
more would it do so, afterward in the sight of his Apostles and Disciples,
who had liberty, and commodity to feed their senses at large upon that sacred
object. In contemplation of this beauty in great part, it was, that they gave
themselves away to him without resuming themselves any more; husbands forsaking
their wives; and children their parents; rich men, their whole estates; poor
men the very instruments of their profession; that they might have the honor
and happiness to follow him. And to such excess they grew therein, that they did
not endure, Matthew. 16.
to hear so much as any speech, even of the Passion it self of our Lord,
though by it, their redemption were to be wrought. For till the Holy Ghost, was
sent to inhabit their souls after his Ascension, they could The unspeakable
gust which the Apostles had to be ever looking upon Christ our Lord.
not content themselves to weane the outward man, from the gust and joy, of
looking on him.

But though our Lord were pleased to nourish their faith and withal to teach
them how to find him reigning in their hearts, by with drawing his corporal
presence from their eyes; yet that love, was just and due, which they bore to
him, whom God had given to be Incarnate for a spouse to the Church, and to all
elected souls, so to draw their hearts more powerfully by that sacred sight of
his person, then formerly they had been withdrawn, by unlawful pleasures.
Nay even great part of our felicity in heaven, is, to consist in our behoulding
the most sweet presence of the humanity of our blessed, Savior, and to enjoy
his embraceme^ts; and yet the form of his divine face, shall be the very same,
which in this life it was. For The figure of the person of our Lord Jesus, was
so excellent; as that neither does glory now make it other the^ it was; neither
did passibility and mortality disgrace it, Matthew. 17.3. part. q. 45. art. 1. ad
1.
so we find, that after his Resurrection, he continued to be known by his
former countenance; and so he was also before that, in his Transiguration, as
S. Hierome notes; and S. Thomas teaches, That his form was not changed into
another; but only that there was an addition of such splendor, as belonged to
a glorified body. As on the other side, the Passibility, and Mortality, which
for our good he would have it subject to, did no way deprive it, both of
perfect, and most powerful beauty.

How this infinite God, and super excellent Man, our Lord Jesus Christ, did,
with incomparable love, cast his eye of mercy upon mankind.

CHAP. 8.
WE have now beheld, with the eye of our Consideration, being illuminated by
the light of Faith, the incomparable excellency of the person of Christ our
Lord and Savior; consisting of his Divinity as God, and of his most holy
soul, and most beautiful, and precious flesh, and blood, as Man. And now this
eternal God, this second person of the ever Blessed Trinity, the
consubstantiall son of the eternal Father: Colos. 2.
In whom the treasures of knowledge, and wisdom, were laid up; and in whom,
and by whom, Joan. 1.
and for whom, were created all things, and without him was made nothing, that
was made. This God I say (with being all that I have already expressed, and
being infinitely more then we know, yea, and more then we can explicitly
believe) did not only cast the eye of his compassion upon the misery of man,
but he resolved to reach out his helping hand, toward the redress thereof. He
had created the world and made this man the Lord of it, and The indowments of
Adam at his first creation.
endued him, in the person of Adam, with many precious gifts, whereof some were
supernatural, as Original Justice, Grace, and a kind of Immortallity, with
many others; and some were incident, as Connaturall, to that condition whereof
he was made; namely an Understanding and freewill, wherewith he was to know and
love, Apoc. 2.
first and last, the Creator, and Center of us all. A precept of Obedience was
given to this forefather of ours, to abstain from tasting of the forbidden
fruit; which he contemning (upon his wives pernicious counsel) did Upon the
first sin of Adam his supernatural gifts were destroyed, and his natural
guyfts decayed.
forfaite out right, those supernatural guiftes; and deserved, that those
others, which were but natural, should be so wounded and weakened, as we find
them to be, by sad experience. This trying of conclusions, cost him dear; for
instantly the whole state of his house was changed; and his Passions which
were meant to be but inferior officers, became the Lords of that Reason,
which was appointed to govern both them, and him. Now then, it is no
marvel, if when this was done, he played the unthrift; and laid so many
debtes, and rent-charges upon his land, that, in some sense, a man may say. The
profits do scarce quitt the cost. For How soon the root of sin did bear
abounda^ce of bitter fruit.
hence grevv that pride, that envy, and malice, which being rooted in the
heart, did fructify so shortly after, in the hand of the accursed Cain; and in a
word, that consummation of all impiety grevv from thence, which did provoke,
and dravv, with a kind of violence, a resolution from Almighty God, to drown
the whole world except eight persons.

But eue^ those fevv, were enough to make the rest of mankind, the heirs of
their corrupted nature. And so we see, what a world we have of this,
vvherin we live. What a coil, does this The disorder of the Irascible and
Concupiscible, is the ground out of which almost all our sins do grow.
Irascible, and Concupiscible keep in our bodies and souls; when either we
desire that for our selves through an inordinate love of our selves, which
looks upon us with a face of joy or pleasure, or when we would inflict
matter of grief, or pain upon others, through an inordinate auersion from
them? The very schools of sin, have been set open in the world, and
rewards have been propounded, for such as have excelled therein. The Provinces
of the earth, have often changed their Lords, and forms of government; and not
only the feilds have been bedevved, but even great Rivers, have been dyed
with blood. The The great weakness of man even besides his Wic. kednes.
weakness of man, (even abstracting from express and malicious wickedness)
is a lamentable thing to look upon. How often do we err in that, vvherin
we procure least to fail? who has not desired, and even purchased many
things, which he thought had been a means to make him happy; from which,
yet, he has gathered nothing, but the bitter fruit of misery? No The miserable
inco^sta^cy of man.
Cane is so vveake; no vvinde is so inconstant, and wavering from the
imoueable North, as man is from the Center of his rest, by the variety of
contrary dispositions, which reign in him. Making him to be, now merry, and
then melancholy; now devout, then distracted. Nay he sometimes, who is valiant,
temperate, wise, and happy; within an hour after, will be fearful,
luxurious, indiscreet, and miserable; and even himself shall scarce know, how
that grows, nor why. So that, not only every Country, and City, and family is
upon all warnings, subject, to mutation toward the worse; but there is no
particular man, who, even in his own bosom, has not the woeful sense of
such disorder, confusion, and restless variety of discourse; that unless our
Lord God had vouchsafed, and resolved upon some remedy; neither would our
possessession have been free from desolation; nor our bodies from destruction;
nor our souls from damnation.

S. Augustine exclaimeth thus, by occasion of his own particular, and what
then might he have done upon the general? Tibi How justly my we all, imitate
that incomparable Saint, in saying this. Confess. lib. 6. cap. 16. S. Leo ser.
2. de Natiuit. Dom.
laus, Tibi gloria, fons misericordiarum: ego fiebam miserior, and tu
propinquior. To thee, be praise, to the be glory, O thou fountain of mercy: I
grew further of from thee by misery, and thou came nearer me by mercy. For
when the world was at the worst, and wickedest, then did our Lord, the God of
heaven and earth, whose very nature is goodness it self, whose will is power,
and whose work is mercy, resolve upon the remedy thereof. His Nor should we
content our selves in doing small services, to such a Lord of love as this.
pity was not satisfied, with contynuing the whole world to our assistance,
and service, although by sin we had forfeited the same. It was not satisfied,
with mainteyning to us, the use of our faculties and senses, whereby we had yet
procured, to employ our selves wholly to his dishonor. It was not satisfied,
with rayning down sweet showers of other blessings, and blowing over many
bitter storms of vengeance, which his justice would feign have powered upon us.
In fine, it was not satissied with such expressions, as are wont to be made by
the dearest parts of flesh and blood; nor would less serve his turn, then to
give us his own only Son for our total redress. And yet, not only, for the
saving us from hell, (which is but the pain due to sin) but for the guilt
also it self of sin, which is in comparably worse. For so God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that By Faith working
with charity: but Faith without works is dead as says S. James. Prou. 22.
whosoever should believe in him, Joan. 3.
might not perish, but have everlasting life. And so that was verified, which
was said by the mouth of his holy Spirit: Dives, and pauper obuiauerunt sibi,
Dominus autem operator vtriusque. The rich man and the poor, have met one
another, and our Lord is the worker of both. For who so rich as God, he being
the abundance and the very inexhaustednesse itself, of all plenty; and what is
so poor a thing as man, and such a man, as was even upon the very brimme, of
dropping down into the bottom of hell, if our merciful Lord, had not put
himself between him and home.

The Original Root and Motive of the infinite Love of Christ our Lord, to the
Salvation of man, is discovered.

CHAP. 9.
THE Love, which our Lord Jesus was pleased to show mankind, is found to be
very different, from that which the men of this world, are wont to bear to one
another. For either we love them who are rich that they may reward us, or who
are useful that they may help us, or who are beautiful that they may delight
us; and the best kind of love which we are wont to bear, is when we give it,
by way of gratitude, for some benefits, or favors, which we have received.
But The difference of the love which our Lord bears to us in respect of that
which we bear to one another.
man, in relation to Christ our Lord, was so poor, and so deformed a thing,
and so wholy disobliging him to love, as that there was nothing in man,
which might, so much as speak of challenging any, at his hands. It may also
seem a greater vvonder, how he could induce himself to love us; since as
there was no merit on our side; so, there was no passion or blind
capriciousness on his; which yet is the thing, that cooples creatures
together, many times, in the chains of love, without all desert.

For The former doubt is solued by considering the first motive of the love of
our Lord to us.
the soluing of this doubt, at the very root thereof, we must resort to the
motive of the love of Christ our Lord. Amor de Dios.
Which was not (as Doctor Auila does excellently show) any perfection in us,
but only that which was in himself; and which, by his contemplation of his
eternal Fathers will, was put in motion toward mankind. It depended upon that
solemn decree, which, with infinite mercy, was made by the most blessed
Trinity, of employing him upon the Redemption and Salvation of the world. When
therefore he became Incarnate, in the pure womb of his all-immaculate mother,
in the very instant of the Creation of that most holy soul, which was infused
into his precious body, it was endued, with all those incomparable blessings
and graces, vvherof we have already spoken; and all upon no other original
ground, but only because our Lord God was pleased to amplify and extend his
bountiful hand over that soul, and so to exalt his own goodness, both
toward it and us. Nor even was that soul then in case to have performed any
one act which might be meritorious in the sight of God, out of whose pure and
primitive grace and mercy, those unspeakable benefits were bestowed.

But when in that happy instant vvherin it was created, it did first, open
the eyes What unspeakable affections would be raised in that soul by that
sight?
of her already deified understanding; and did see her self freely made that
excellent thing which God is only able to comprehe^d; and when it knevv from
what hand it came, and found it self to be in possession of an absolute
principality over all the Creatures; and did contemplace al those Hierarchies
of Celestial spirits in heaven, who being prostrate in his sight did adore
him, in that happy instant, as S. Paul affirms. Tell me (says doctor Auila
(if ever this can possibly be told) with what love would this soul (being such
a one) love him, who had glorified it to such a height? with what kind of
desire would it covet, that some occasion might be offered, whereby it might
have means to please so mighty a Creator, and benefactour? Are the tounges of
Cherubims, and Seraphims, able to express this love?

Let us further add, says he, that upon this extreme desire, it was declared
to the soul of Christ, that the will of God was to save mankind which had
perished by the sin of Adam, and that this blessed Son of his should, for
the honor of God, and in obedience to his holy will, encharge it self with
this work; and should take this glorious enterprise to heart; and should never
rest till he had brought it to a perfect end. And It is love which sets all
causes and creatures on work for the obtaining their end.
for that, the way, which all Causes, and Creatures hold, is to work for love
(since they all do work for some end or other which they desire, the love
whereof, being conceived in their hearts, does make them work) therefore since
Christ our Lord was to take this enterprise of the redemption of mankind upon
him, it follows, that he would love men with so great a love, that for the
desire which he had to see them remedied and restored to their Title of glory;
he would dispose himself to do, and suffer, whatsoever might be fit for such
an end.

And now (says D. Auila) since that soul which was so ardently desirous to
please the Eternal Father, did know so well, what it was to do; with what kind
of love would it turn it self toward men, for the loving and embracing of
them, through the obedience which he carried to his Father? We Note this
comparison.
see that when a piece of Artillery, discharges a bullet with store of powder,
and that the buller goes glancing, as by way of brickwall from the place, to
which it was designed, it beats back with so much greater force, as it was
carried thither, with greater fury. Since then the love, which this soul of
Christ conceived toward God, did carry such an admirable force (because the
powder of Grace, which was in a manner infinite, did give the impulse) and
when, after, it had proceeded in a right line to wound the heart of the Father,
it rebounded from thence, to the love of men; with what kind of sorce, and joy,
would it turn toward them, both in the way of love and help?

This Consideration is made, in effect, as here is lies, by the holy man
Doctor Auila, to show the infinite love of Christ our Lord to us. Wherein We
must clyme toward the knowledge of the love of Christ our Lord by degres.
we may also, yet further help our selves, by rising, as by so many degrees
through the several loves which are borne by creatures to one another. For we
fee how vehemently men have loved their frind; we see how men have loved
themselves; we see how Saints have loved their Sanctifier: but what trash is
all this, if it be compared with the love of Christ our Lord to God; which
love is both the ground and measure of his love to us. We may justly therefore
cry out, in the way of extreme admiration, Aug. Co^fes. lib. 11. cap. 9.
Quis comprchendet, quis enarrabit? There is no tongue, there is no power
created, which can comprehend, and much less declare the bottomless, and
boundless Ocean of this love.

The mystery of the Incarnation is more partiticularly looked into; and the love
of our Lord Jesus is wonderfully expressed thereby.

CHAP. 10.
FOR the restoring therefore, and the stre^gthning of our vveake and vvounded
souls, to the eternal honor and glory of God the Father, and in obedience to
his wise and holy will, did Christ our Lord with incomprehensible love,
undertake the work of our Redemption, and sollicitously procure our
sanctification, for as much as concerned him; but that could not be completely
wrought without our concourse. Because as S. Austen says, when he speaks of
God to man; Qui tecreauit sine te, non te saluabit sine te: He that created
thee, without thee, will We must cooperate with the grace of God, or else the
merits of Christ our Lord will never be applied to us.
not save thee without thy self. In this enterprise, he resolved to employ,
and as it were, to give himself away, from the first instant of his precious
life, until the last.

Any one only act of his, through the infinite value of the divine person (to
which both his soul and body were hypostatically united) had not only been
sufficient, but abundant, even ex rigore Iustitiae, for the redemption both of
this world, and as many millions more of worlds, as the omnipotency of God
could have created, howsoever there be Calvin
Sectaries who tremble not to say, That he selt even the pains of the very
damned souls in that soul of his; as if the work of man's redemption could
not have been wrought otherwise. Where, by the way, it well appears, even to
half an eye, whether the Catholic Doctrine, or that other, do erect a higher
Trophee to the honor of Christ our Lord. But the while, every single act of
his, being indeed so all-sufficient for the reconciliation of man to God; it
follows here, (as will be also touched elsewhere) that some one only act,
was performed by him in the way of Justice, to appease that infinite Majesty
offended; and Consider hee^ and wonder at the ardent love of Christ our Lord to
man.
that all the rest (which were so many millions, as he alone is able to number)
were performed in the way of ardent, and tender love to us. So that David had
all reason to maguify the mercy of Almighty God, and to acknowledge, that
Copiosa apud eum redemptio; Psalm. 129.
that it was no pinching, or scant redemption, which was prepared for us, but
abundantly of over measure, and downe-weight.

And now it the bounty of God, and the love of our Lord Jesus to man, were
such, that where one single act of his, might have served the turn of our
Redemption, he would not yet be content with doing the less, where he had
means to express the more; how much less would it be agreeable to those
bowels of his Charity and mercy (which under that very name of tenderness,
Lue. ^^
are so often celebrated by his own holy spirit, in holy Scripture) that he
should redeem us, by another less glorious, and gracious The means of our
Redemption was a more noble benesitt, then the very Redemption it self.
means, then by the gift of his own only son, as has been said. Though
yet, he might sufficiently have done it, either by the creating of some new
man; or by employing of Angels for that purpose; or in fine, by any one of so
many millions of means, as to his wisdom would never have been wanting, if
he had not been pointed out to this, by his love to us, which did so abound.
But his Incarnation was the means, whereby he would vouchsafe to accomplish the
work of our Redemption, which may well be called a mystery, as indeed it is,
for the many and divine deep secrets, which are locked up therein. For by this,
the Pride of man, which sticks incomparably more close to his soul in our
corrupted nature, then any skin does to a body; has been showed the way, by
an oueruling kind of reason, how it might learn to The Incarnation of Christ
our Lord, does first read us a lesson of Humility, and then of Glory.
become h^ble. By this, the baseness of man was also taught, how to clyme up, so
far, as to grow to be a kind of God, by a diminution, as it were, of the
divinity; and an infusion, and laying it (as one may say) to steep in the
humility of the humanity of Christ our Lord, that so by means of Grace, we
might swallow and suck it up, as an infant would do his nurses milk. Hearken
how divinely, S. Augustine does express the altitude of Gods mercy, and
wisdom, in particular; and if ever you will admire the height and sanctity of
that great man of God, it may be now. I Observe and po^der the divine discourse
of this great Saint. D. Aug. Confess. l. 7 cap. 18.
was (says he) in search of a way, how to get some strength, which might be
fit for the enjoying of thee o God; but I could meet with none, till I
embraced the mediator between God and man Christ Jesus, who is also God, above
all things blessed, for all eternities; And who calls us, and says, I am the
way, the truth, and the lise: And who is the food, which yet I wanted strength
to digest; till he mingled himself with our flesh; that so thy The second
person of the B. Trinity.
wisdom (by which thou did create all things) might frame it selse into the
nature of By his Humanity he did accommodate himself to our Capacity.
milk, whereof we might suck, in this infancy of ours.

But I, not being humble, could not apprehend my Lord Jesus Christ, who was so
very humble. Nor yet did I understand, what he meant to make us learn He meant
to teach us Humility thereby.
by that infirmity of his. For thy The son of God.
word (which is the eternal truth) being so highly exalted above the highest
of thy Creatures, does raise them up unto it self The good Angels who were
confirmed in grace for their humility.
who were obedient and subject to it. And here below, among thy The race of
Adam.
inferior creatures, it built, for it self, The precious body of Christ our
Lord.
a poor house of the same clay, whereof we were made. By Humanity of Christ our
Lord.
which they were to be depressed from their high concert of themselves, No man
who is not humble can be a true member of Christ our Lord.
who would become subject thereunto; and so it might suck, and draw them unto
it; curing the tumor of their Pride, and nourishing their love. Christ our
Lord became Incarnate to destroy our Pride.
To the end that they might not go further on, in vanity through any
confidence in themselves; but might rather acknowledge their own infirmity,
when they should see the Divinity it self, lying, as it were, By the
participation of our frail nature.
infirm, before their feet, by being content to wear the garment of our
slesh and blood. And Our Lord disdaines us not, though we come not to him, till
we be weary of the tyranny of sin.
so being weary, they might deiect and prostrate themselves upon this The way
of ascending by the divinity of Christ our Lord, is first to prostrate our
selves upon his humanity.
humanity of Christ our Lord, and it ascending up, might raise them also up,
together with it.

To such excess grew the love of Christ our Lord to us, degrading himself
that he might exalt us; afflicting himself that he might ease us; and imptying
himself, of hiselfe, that he might make us full of him, which first was made
apparent even to these eyes the^ selves of our flesh and blood by the
admirarable mystery of his Nativity.

Of the immense Love of Christ our Lord, expressed to Man in his holy Nativity.

CHAP. 11.
WE have no reason to find it strange, that our Lord should be more taken, by
the circumstances of that service which he expects, and exacteth of us, the^
by the very service it self. The whole world is his, and he needs not any
thing which we can give. He The reason, why God is more pleased with the
manner, and mind wherewith we do him any service, then with the thing it self.
is the plenitude of all things, and can receive no substantial increase at
all; but he is only capable of honor, and glory at our hands; and that does
only accrue to him on our part by the affection, wherewith it is procured by us.
Now this truth, of his regarding, more the mind, and manner wherewith, and
wherein things are done, then the very things themselves, is declared to us many
ways, but Our Lord did practice that in his own person which he expects of
us.
especially by the sovereign example it self of Christ our Lord. For, as if
his pleasure to redeem us from the torments of hell, and the slavery of sin
had been nothing; as if his Incarnation, (which was an ineffable descent for
the Divinity to make) had been no great matter; he letts us further see, by the
manner of it, what a meaning he had to bind us yet faster to him, by the
chains of love.

It would have cost him nothing (since he would needs become man for us) to
have vested his soul, with the body of a perfect man, all at once; and as
fully complete, in all the functions and actions thereof, as afterward his own
sacred body was. At ease, he might also (since there was no remedy, but that he
would needs become a Creature) have taken so much of the greatness of the world
to himself, as would have made him incomparably more glorious, more
triumpha^t, and more abundantly happy, by a flood of temporal felicity, then
Solomon, and all the Caesar's did enjoy.

But not the substance of our Redemption, not the substance of his own
Incarnation, could satisfy and quench the ardent desire which reigned in his
sacred heart, to show his love to us; Our Lord God would not be satisfied with
less then becoming a poor and naked child for us. Lue. 2.
unless, for our sakes, he had withal, been borne a child; and had become
thereby, obnoxious to all the impotencies and miseries of that age; in sucking,
crying, and swathing, with a thousand other incommodities.

This King of glory was also pleased, to commend his love, as much by poverty
as he had done already by infirmity; and instantly The excessive poverty of our
Lord.
to put himself, instead of a Palace, into a stable at the towns end of
Bethlee^, all abandoned and open, such as are used in hot countries. And
there, the B. Virginmother, did stay, and suffer many days, which any vagabond
Gypsy would have found difficulty to do. Our Lord was laid in a Maunger,
instead of a Cradle of gold; under a Rock, instead of a rich Cloth of State.
He was wrapped in cloutes, instead of being adorned with Imperall robes. He was
attended by the Ox, and the Ass, instead of Counselors of his State, and
Officers of his Crown, and magistrates of his kingdom. And all that, at such
a time of the year, then which a harder, and colder could not be found; and
even in the very first hour after midnight, to show that his love, would not
give him leave to stay till the second.

This mystery of the holy Nativity of our B. Lord, was meant by him (as all
those others also were, of his life, and death) not only as a means of our
redemption, Our Lord Jesus bacame man that he might redeem us, and that we
might imitate him.
but as a most just motive also of our Imitation, of those virtues which shine
therein; and especially of Humility, Patience, Charity, and Poverty. The
original sin which descends to us by our Forefathers, being accompanied
by our own actual sins, had greatly dissigured the Image of God which was
made in us; and for the enabling us to repair, and reform the same, it
concerned us much to have some such excellent true pattern as this, according
to which we might mend our selves. It concerned us also much, as is excellently
pondered by Father Titulo de Dios.
Arias, that, on the one side, this Guide or pattern, should be visible It was
wholly necessary, that our Guide to heaven, should be both vifible and
Infallible.
and perceptible by our other senses. For (besides that it is a most co^natural
thing, and carries great proportion to man, who is compounded both of body and
soul, that he should ascend by visible, and corporeal things, to such as are
spiritual and invisible) man became by his sin extremely incapable and
blind, toward the knowledge of those invisible things, and therefore it
imported much, that the example which he was to follow should be visible. And
on the other side it was wholly fit, that this Guide should be infallible, and
known to be unable to err; for otherwise, men could not follow him without
much danger, or at least without much fear of error.

Now God of himself was not visible, and so he could not be this Guide
according to that former condition; and man as man, could not be securely free
from error, and so he could not be a Guide, according to the latter. The The
diuiue invention of love where by our Lord was pleased to negotiate our
salvation. In sermon. de Natiuit. Dom. apud Ariam loto citato.
remedy therefore was resolved upon by Almighty God; That, for our good, he
would become, and be borne a man; that so being man, God might be visible; and
man being God, might be infallible. And this is briefly declared by the
incomparable S. Augustine saying. Man who might be seen, was not to be
imitated by men, because he might err; and God who might securely be imitated,
could not be seen; And therefore to the end, that man might have a Guide, who
might both be imitated and be seen; God vouchsafed to become man. Justly
therefore, does Father Arias express himself, Titulo de Dios c. 1.
in this admiring manner: O how great was the mercy of God! O how deep a Sea
was it, full of mercies, that he would so accomodate himself to our weakness,
and condescend to our baseness! For as much, as because man, was not able to see
any other, the^ the works of flesh and blood; he, who was the Creator of the
Angelical spirits, would make himself man. And for as much, as he, who
holds his Imperial seat and throne, in the highest heavens, and who
conuersed only in heaven, and was there beheld by the Angels, would grow to be
visible, in this inferior world; and converse, and treat with mortal men; that
so, by his example, he might teach them, the way to eternal bliss. All this
is delivered by the holy and learned Father Arias.

How by the Poverty of our Lord Jesus in his Nativity, poor men are comforted,
and the rich are kept from being proud.

CHAP. 12.
BY the poverty which our Lord Jesus was pleased both to feel in himself, and
to declare to us, in this sweet mystery of his Nativity, he showed even in
other respects, particular love to all the world. For It ought to be of much
comfort to poor people, to consider that Christ our Lord would be borne so
poor.
he gave comfort thereby, to all such as should be borne of parents, who were
poor; that so, that accident might no longer be summed up, in the account of
men's great misfortunes, according to the custom of the world; when they
should see that the true king of glory, would vouchsafe to keep them company
therein. And as for such others as do, or shall descend of rich progenitors;
our Lord with ardent Charity, did give them also now, alesson of humility, by
his own being borne in so great poverty. For By this so poor Nativity, rich
men are obliged not to vaunt the^ selves upon that occasion.
who is he that can be excused in such a vanity, as to take much pleasure and
glory, in that which Christ Jesus would not countenance by his example? This
poverty is counted to us by another circumstance which is very considerable.
For his sacred, and imaculate Mother, was as highly noble, even according to
the extraction of blood, as a creature could be; she being lineally as, has
been said, descended from so many Prophets, Kings, and Priests. Now for our Lord
to permit, that so high nobility, should be left in the hands of such
necessity, as even with ours, we may feel him to have been subject to; as it
heaps the more contempt upon him, so it does more proclaim his love to us.

I omit to show how, that although that purest womb of the B. Virgin were in
some respects a more glorious Palace then heaven it self, could have helped
his humanity unto; yet in others it might go for a kind of prison to his body;
as restrayning it, according to those conditions, to which then he vouchsafed
to let himself be subject. But howsoever he was no sooner delivered from
thence, the^ the poor How our Lord as soon as he was borne did intertaine
those poor she. pheardes with a Quire of Angels.
Sheephards were wooed, by him, to receive the token of his impatient, and
incomparable love. And according to that infinite finite wisdom, which became
his God head (which is wo^t to govern inferior Creatures, by such as are
superior to them) as also because he would both call, and free those poor
men, at once, from error; he disdayned not to solicit them by a quire of
Angels; that the glory of so supernatural, and sublime a vision, might auert
them from all that want of faith, which his poor appearance, might easily
have inclined them to. Those Angels proclaimed, and did appropriate, as it
were, All glory is due to God.
All glory to God; which was so highly and truly due to him per excellentiam,
for the admirable humility and charity which was expressed by him in this
act; and vvithall they published and applied all good and peace to men.

But yet to men, not so far forth as they might only chance to be mighty, or
witty, or noble, or wealthy, or learned. And much less, to such as should be
given to repine, or who should be so abounding, and regorging with sensual
pleasures (all which are the sadd effects of self love, and very contrary to
the love of our Lord Jesus, in whom alone, originally, true peace is found)
but only it was bequeathed to men of a good will. The The condition of a will,
which is truly good.
property of which, true good will, is to put every thing in his due place. And
what place can deserve, that the love of our hearts should be lodged in it by
us, but that divine person of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Who in
this little space of one night, has knit up such a world of testimonies of his
dear love to us; and who did cast himself down, from the top of glory to the
bottom of misery, that so he might carry us up to the place from whence
himself was come. And who, (though he were not only, the true owner, but the
sole Creator of the whole world; and who created it no otherwise then by
filling it, with his very self) was yet content to see his own sacred
humanity, so deprived and turned out of all; as that no place should be emptye
for the receiving of him (Quia non ^rat ei locus in diuersorio) but only such a
one, as might seem rather to have been taken from beasts, then given by men.

These How rich those poor shepherds were mada at an instant.
Sheepheards indeed were of that good will, which was so commended by the
Angels; and as such they carried, not only peace from that sight of Christ our
Lord, and his blessed mother, but joy also. And that, no ordinary, but an
excessive joy, which is another gift of the holy Ghost, and a mere, and
mighty effect of his divine love. To the participation whereof together with a
most entire thanksgiving, the holy Catholic Church, inuiteth all her faithful
Children, in these most glorious and magnificent words, upon the day of this
great Festiuity, The Preface of the Mass upon Christmasse day.
in the Preface of the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Vere dignum and instum
est, aequum and salutare, nos tibi semper, and vbique gratias agere: Domine
sancte, pater Omnipotens, aeterne deus. Quia per incarnati verbi mysterium,
noua mentis nostrae oculis lux tuae clariatis infulsit: vt dum visibiliter Deum
cognoscimus; per hunc, in inuisibilium amorem, rapiamur. Et ideo cum Angelis,
and Archangelis, cum Thronis and Dominationibus, cumqueue omni mili^ia
caelestis exercitus, hymnum gloriae tuae canimus, sine sieve dicentes; Sanctus,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath. Pleni sunt caeli and terra gloria tua,
Hosanna in excelsis. Benedictus qui venit in nomine Dommi, Hosanna in excelsis.

It is reason that we give thee eternal thanks, O holy Lord, O omniporent
Father, and eternal God; in regard that by the mystery of the Incarnate Word,
a new light of thy splendor, has cleared up the eyes of our mind. That so
whilst we are grown to know God after a visible manner, we may be vehemently
carried up, to the love of invisible things. And therefore, together with the
Angels and Archangells, with the Thrones, and Dominations, and with all those
Squadrons of that Celestial Army, we sing out this Himne of glory, saying to
thee, without end, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Saboath: the heavens and earth
are full of thy glory, Hosa^ana in the highest. Blessed be he who comes in the
name of our Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Thus, I say, does our holy mother the
Church exhort us, to rejoice and give thanks to God, for his great mercy in
this divine mystery; and he is no true son of that mother, who will not
hearken to her voice.

Of the unspeakable love, which our Lord Jesus expressed to us in his
Circumcision.

CHAP. 13.
Luc. 2.
BUT as for the love, which our Lord did show to those poor Sheephards, some
ignorant carnal person, may chance to say, or at least to think, That it did
not cost him much. Let such a one therefore look, upon his painful, and
shameful Circumcision. Paynefull, and shameful to him, but of unspeakable
love, and benefit to us. And first, for as much as concerns the pain, it
deserves to be considered, that the soul, and body of Christ of our Lord, had
another manner of understanding, The soul and body of our B. Lord, were more
sensible of shame and pain the^ any other.
and delicate feeling, then any other Creature, has ever been acquainted with.
Exodus 4. Number. 5. D. Aug. lib. 2. de gratia Christ. cap. 31.
Which circumstance I will not here dilate, because when afterward I shall
have reason to speak of his sacred passion, the occasion will be, fayrely
offered. But the pain must needs be excessive, to have a part of the body so
cut of, by a violent hand; and that not with a kinfe, or any such sharp
instrument, which would have brought it to a speedy end; but according to the
custom, with a stone, which was ground into a blunt kind of edge; and which
must needs prolonge the torment of the patient.

Yet Dishonor to a noble heart is far more insufferable then pain.
pain how great soever, is but a toy to a generous mind, in respect of
reproach and shame. And amongst all degrees of shame; that is far the
greatest, which implies the party to have deserved it, and that, in the
deepest kind. Now as, when there is question of pride, the affectation and
desire to have a fame of sanctity, is far superior to any ambition of
riches, or strength, or knowledge, or any other such advantage whatsoever; so
the infamy of impiety, of sin, is that, which, of all other, wounds most.
This infamy is therefore the very thing, to which, our Lord, with strange
contempt of himself, did submit his divine excellency. And notwithstanding the
perfect hatred which indeed he carried to all that, which looked like sin; he
was yet content to lay that thought aside, through the infinite love which he
bare to us; and he pinned that badge upon his own sleeue, which was only to
have been worn by the traitors and Rebels of Almighty God; and he resolved
to wear it, being God himself.

By taking Our Lord, by the pain and shame of his circumcision, did satisfy
for our sins; he did purchase grace, and fortify us by his example.
this badge of sin, which was pain and shame, to his own person, he did not
only satisfy for the sensuality and pride of man, but he delivered us also from
being subject any longer to those tyrants; both by the grace which he obtained
thereby at the hands of his eternal Father, and by the example which he gave in
this his Circumcision of a most profound contempt of himself. And who is
therefore that man, who by way of retribution, for the love of this Lord, will
not now procure to follow his example; and at least, by little and little, to
weane himself from estimation of honor, and delight in pleasure; since the
king of glory, did content himself, for the love of us, to be thought a sinner;
and to undergo the obligatio^s due to such a one.

Doctor Auila, Cap. 76.
in his Audi Filia, uses this excellent comparison. If Consider and ponder
this comparison.
a King should go upon his bare feet, and should be weary, and should sweat
through the length, and sharpnes of the way; having his back laden with
sackcloath, and his face with tears, as king David did, and had, by occasion
of the reuolte of his son Absalom, what servant or Courtier could there be of
his, who, either for love, or shame, would not also go on foot, and vnshodd,
and as like his king, as he could be? And so the holy Scripture affirms, that
all the servants of David did, and all the people which accompanied him at that
time. And the same author says afterward; That the altitude of the state of
perfect Christians, is so great, and that Christ our Lord has wrought such a
change in things, by his holy example; as that the bitter, and the base of this
world, is grown to be honorable, and delightful. And Let worldlinges think
as lightly as they will of this; the perfect servants of God, do find the truth
of it, at their very hearts.
that he enableth his true servants to cast the gorge, when they are but to
rast of that, in the pursuit whereof, worldly men, are upon the point of
cutting the throats of one another. Thus says Doctor Auila.

Fa. Arias does serve himself of another comparison to this effect: If a King
sitting in his chair of State should, by a Titulo de Redemtor. Ca. 4.
law, command that the Caualleroes of his Court, should wear their garments of
plame stusse, for the enriching of his kingdom; or that for the defense thereof
they should accustom themselves to carry such or such a kind of weapon; it is
clear that they would take themselves to be in obligation of observing that
law. But if the king himself, at the very gate of his Royal Palace, should
proclaim the same with his own princely mouth; and for the example of others,
would gird such a weapon to his own side; and put such a garment upon his own
back, without doubt his Courtiers would take themselves to be more straightly
bound to keep this law. And as they should be honored who would obserne it, so
the breach thereof would instly intytle the infringers of it to more grievous
punishment. Now Observe this application, and it will move thee.
God being in his Thron of glory, did command, both by the natural, and
written law, that men should live according to virtue; and be caresull to
embrace those means, which might conduce to their salvation. This law, he
published, by means of his Angels, and other Creatures; and the world was
bound to observe the same; and the breach of it was both threatened, and
revenged with the eternal fire of Hell. But in the time of the law of grace,
God himself descended from his Imperial throne, and came down into the
world; apparailing himself with the garment of our flesh and blood. And with
his own sacred mouth be did proclaim his Evangelical Law. And in his own
sacred person, he The perfection of Christ our Lord
complied with all that virtue, and sanctity, in supreme perfection, which he
exacted at the hands of men. And His mortification.
he embraced all the means of pain and shame, whereby sincere and solid virtue
is obtained. So that there can be no doubt, but that our obligation to keep
his law, is much the greater, since it is auowed by his own example; and
consequently the fault in breaking it, would be more inexcusable, and the
punishment due to it, more intolerable. And Give great attention to this
circumsta^ce.
if when Christ our Lord was yet on earth, and did command his Disciples to
preach his will, to the people of Israel; and (to moon men also by their
example) he commanded that they should go on foot, and not only without
money, but even without shoes; and that otherwise also, they should be poorly
cladd; and did then protest that the people who would not hear their Doctrine,
should find themselves in worse case, at the day of Judgment, then they of
Sodom and Gomorra: how incomparably much more will it increase our damnation
(who have been taught by the very mouth, and have been convinced, by the
example, not only of the Disciples, but of Christ our Lord himself, the king
of glory) if we imita e not his virtues, and if we embrace not his
mortifications.

This is the sum and substance of that excellent discourse of Fa. Arias,
where he treates of Christ our Lord under the quality of his being our
Redeemer. And although he do in general, propound it there, as inducing us to
penance and virtue, upon the consideration of the doctrine, and example of
Christ our Lord, at large; yet That the consideration brought by Fa. Arrias
does very particularly belong to the Cu c^cision of our Lord.
it seems very natural, that here I should apply it in particular manner, by
occasion of this mystery of the Circumcision. Wherein, the first, of that most
precious blood, was shedd, whereby the world was to be redeemed; and when he,
who was the true, and supreme Lawgiver did diminish himself so much, as to
become obnoxious to that penalty of his own Law; since as his holy Apostle
says, He who is circumcised, is bound thereby to fulfill the Law. And lastly,
Gal. 5.
when he who was the eternal spring, the ouerflowing river, and the bottomless
sea of all sanctity, would be contented for our good (and for the drawing us,
by his example, to love, pain and shame) to be accounted by men, for a
creature, as odious and abominable in the sight of God, as all sinners are.

But he thought not all this too much, so that he might free us from the curse
of that law, to which he would be subject. Aduising, and enabling us heerby, to
Circumcise The corporal Circumcision of Christ our Lord must teach us how to
circumcise our affections.
the inordinate affections of our hearts; which are as so many veins, whereby
the blood of lise is drawn from that true love, which is only due to such a
Lord as this, who is all made of love. Now because this miserable race of men
would not fully correspond, with that incomparable Charity of Christ our Lord,
it was so much the more agreeable, to the justice of God the Father, to
acknowledge, and revvard this unspeakable humility of his son. And therefore
then it was, that he stamped upon him, the name of Jesus, Luc. 2. Phillip. 2.
to which the knees of all Creatures should be obliged to bow. Celestial,
whose charity he had surpassed; terrestrial, whose life he had instructed;
and Infernal, whose pride he had confounded. And heerby we further see, how
infinitely are we bound to this Lord, for this strange love of his, who,
when there should be question of taking such aname as might be proper to him,
laid all such names aside as might express the Majesty of himself; and made
only choice of that name of Jesus which might declare his Sovereign mercy to
us.

The Names which grovve from God, are far unlike to those which are imposed
by men; for these latter, are mere extrinsecall denominations; and the former,
are a most exact abridgement, and map of those Conditions which grow within.
So that, together with this name, our Lord Jesus was sublimed to the office,
and dignity of a perfect Savior of mankind. Not What an yowor thy, and weak
Savior, Christ our Lord is made by the Sectaries.
such a Savior, as the Sectaries of our age are miserably wont to make him;
who conceive him, to have only saved our souls from Hell, which is but a
punishment of sin, (as was said before) and which punishment how great
soever it be, is incomparably of less deformity, and true misery, and were
far rather to be accepted, and chosen then the least sin it self which
can be committed) but such a one as does chiefly save our souls from the guylt
of sin; and that, by sanctifiyng us indeed, with his inherent grace, and not
by a kind of Justice, which only, is imputed to us, whilst the while indeed
it is none of ours. Through the vva^t vvherof, the leaprousy of our souls,
should not be cleansed and cured, but only they should be covered and clad, as
those deceauedmen conceive, with the robe of his innocence.

Our Lord give them light, to see, and know, how deeply and dangerously they
deceive themselves, and dishonor him, under the pretense of piety, and
perverse and counterfaite humility, whilst they make him but such a Savior as
this. Audi Piliacap. 88.
This error (as Doctor Auila says) proceeds from the want, of knowing the
love, which Jesus Christ does bear, to such as are in the state of grace,
whom his bowels of mercy, would not permit, that (whilst himself was just,
and full of all good things) he should say to such as he instifyed, Content
your selves with this, That I abound with these good things, and esteem them
for your own in regard that they are in me; although in your selves, you
remain unjust, impure, and naked. There is no head which would hold such
language as this, to his living members; nor one spouse to another, if he
should deerly love her. And much less, will that Celestial spouse say so; who
is given for a pattern to the spouses of this world; that so after his
resemblance, they may treat and love their fellow spouses. You mensaith S.
Paul, love your wives as Christ loved his Church, who gave himself over for
it, to sanctify it, and to cleanse it by baptism, and by the word of life. If
then he sanctify, and wash, and cleanse it, and that with his own blood (which
is the thing that gives power to the Sacraments, to cleanse souls, by his
grace which they impart) how can that soul remain unjust, and silthy, which
is washed and cleansed by a thing which is of so extreme efficacy. And in
conformity of that which was affirmed before the same Doctor Auila, does also
clearly show afterward, that such opinions as that, do no way, serve The
doctrine of imputative Justice, is expressly impugned by holy scripture, and
does impeach the honor of Christ our Lord.
either toward the verifying of the Scriptures, or for the doing of Jesus
Christ, sufficient honor. For since the pain (says he) which is due to
sin, is a less evil to any man, then the guilt of the same sin, and the
injustice and deformity which is caused thereby; it cannot be said, that Christ
our Lord does save his people from their sins, if by his merits he only
obtain, that they may not be imputed to them, for their punishment; unless
first he should take the guilt away, by the gift of grace. Nor yet that he
obtayneth purity, and piety for men, unless by detesting sin, they may keep
the law of God. This is the iugdement of Doctor Auila.

We The catholic Doctrine, concerning this point.
therefore according to that truth which is revealed by Almighty God, and
propounded to us to be believed by the holy Catholic Church, his imaculate
Spouse, do confess, to the joy, and triumph of our hearts, and with
irreuocable vows of the highest gratitude that we can conceive, for such an
infinite benefit, not only, that he is the Savior of us from hell (which is
but as an effect) but from sin also it self, which is the just cause thereof.
And not only so, but that he saues us further also from the want of all those
helps, and graces of the holy Ghost which are convenient. vt sine timore, Luc.
1.
de manibus inimicorum nostrorum liberati, seruiamus illi, in sanctitate, and
institia coram ipso, omnibus diebus vitae nostrae. That being delivered from
the hands of our enemies, we may serve him without fear, in holiness and
justice before him, all the days of our life. At the end of which days we
shall be admitted to see a day in heaven, which has no end, and which admits
no cloud. This I say, is to be the precious fruit of this morning sacrifice,
of his Circumcision, to put us into a state, which can admit no evening. For as
S. Augustine says, dies septimus sine vesper a est, nec habet occasum, quia
sanctificasti eum ad permansionem sempiternam. That seventh day of thine,
Conf. lib 13. cap. vlt.
O God, is without any evening; nor does that sun ever set, because thou have
sanctisied it, to an eternal continuance. This is that infinite benefit, which
is to be imparted to us by this blessed Lord of ours; and the means to convey
it, is the office of his being our Savior, which is declared in this
Circumcision, by his holy name of Jesus, and whereof the next Chapter, will tell
us more.

Of the name of Jesus, and the incomparable love which our Lord does show to us
by that name.

CHAP. 14.
FOR as much as there is no Name, which can go near to express the nature of
God, the holy The reason of giving so many several names to God as God.
Scripture, to make some kind of signification of the infinite Being, and the
other infinite petfections of his divinity, and of the benefits which he besto
was upon us, does give him many attributes, and many names, which may in some
small measure declare the effects of his divine perfections, and the Offices
which he performs toward his Creatures; as namely to be Almighty, of
infinite wisdom, of infinite goodness, of infinite mercy, of Creator, of
Conseruour, of Governor, of Father, of the beginning and end of all things,
and the like.

In the self same manner, The reason also of giving so many several names to
Christ our Lord.
to express that immense sea of perfections and graces, which the whole
blessed Trinity did impart to Christ our Lord as man (that is to say to that
most sacred humanity, united to the person of the son of God, the eternal
word; and those incomparable and innumerable gifts and benefits, which he
communicated to us by means thereof) the same holy Scripture, does give him
also many several Names, and Titles as of King, of Priest, of Pastor, of
Doctor, of Lawgiuer, of Spouse, of Mediator, of Advocate, of Redeemer, of
Sau^our, and diverse others whereby he may the better be conceived, since he
cannot be sufficiently declared by any one. Of all these names, and of all the
rest which may be raunged, and reduced to these, there is none so excellent,
nor which does so include the rest, as does the superexcellent name of Jesus,
which declares our Losd, to be the Savior of the world. S. Bern. sermon. 2. de
Circum. Dom. and sermon. 15. sup. Can.
This was that Name, which the holy S. Bernard, could by noe means, be made
content to want, amongst so many other most honorable appellations, as the
Evangelical Prophet Esaias applied to him. This Prophet, being full of joy, upon
the fore seeing of our Redeemer, does express himself thus, as S. Bernard
notes; Puer natus est nobis, filius natus est nobis etc. A child is borneto
us, A son is given to us, and his principality is placed upon his shoulder,
and his name is called Admirable, Co^scllour, The strong God, The Father of
the future age, The Prince of Peace. Great, says S. Bernard, are these names,
but where is The name of Jesus is the most comfortable of all the names of
Christ our Lord.
that name which is above all names; that name of Jesus in which every knee
shall bow?

The friends and favorites of Christ our Lord have walked in a very different
way, from that, wherein such persons of our times, as are disaffected to this
sacred Name, will needs employ themselves. We see, how that, both Cherubim and
Seraphim of flesh and blood, the beloved disciple of our Lord Jesus, his
Apostle, and Evangelist S. John, (who sucked in such a bundance, from the
divine fountain of that breast, to which he used to lay his mouth) did paint
out no other word so often, as that holy and divine name of Jesus. S. Paul The
great Devotion of S. Paul to the Holy name of Jesus.
that full vessel of election being reprehended in that high vision of our B.
Savior (though in a most amourous, and tender manner) for persecuting him in
the person of the Christian Church, was told by our Lord himself, that he
persecuted; he says not God, nor Christ, nor the Lord (though he were all
that), but only Jesus. And afterward he said moreover to Ananias, that this was
the Name, which Paul, as a vessel of election, was to carry over the earth,
among Gentiles, and Kings. And so, as I was saying, it is admirable to
consider, how he was all taken with an unspeakable delight to be ever in
repetition of that sacred name, in all his Epistles. See also how the
incomparable S. Augustine does in his Confessions to our Lord, relate that he
was vehemently delighted in the reading of certain books of Philosophy, lib.
3. c. 4.
which pointed him out to the search of wisdom. But yet (says he) in that so
great delight, this only cooled me, and took me off, that I found not the name
of thy Christ therein. For this name, O Lord, through thy mercy, this name of my
The name of Christ our Lord which S. Augustine had so greedily sucked up in his
infancy was the name of Savior of Jesus; and note, how this Saint esteems the
gift of devotion, to this holy name, as a particular mercy. Bern. ser. 15. in
Cant.
Savior, thy Some, my young and tender heart, had even, in the very milk of my
mother, drunk up, devoutly, and carefully retained; and if any discourse
whatsoever, though never so learned, so elegant and so true, had wanted this
name, it did not carry me away entierely.

The same discourse concerning the holy Name of Jesus is further prosecuted.

CHAP. 15.
THE day had need be long, wherein I would pretend to make particular mention,
of the incredible devotion, and tender affection, which the Saints and holy
servants of God, have carried to this blessed name of Jesus. S. Bernard whom I
mentioned before shall therefore serve this turn, instead of many; whose
fifteenth: Sermon upon the Canticle, I beseech my Reader even in the name of
Jesus, that he will procure to read. For there, he may see, how in this holy
name it is, that we meet with the remove of al our cares. He applies to it
that clause, of the Canticles. Oleum essusum nomen tuum, Thy name Note and love
this sweet contemplation of of S. Bernard, upon the holy name of Jesus.
says he, is a precious Oil, powered forth. O blessed name, O oil which every
where is powered forth. How far? from heaven into Indea; and from thence, it
runs over the whole earth. We may well say, it is powered forth, since it has
not only distilled abundantly, both in heaven, and earth; but it has sprinkled
even them who are below the earth. This Christ, this Jesus (being insused to
the Angels, and essused or powered out upon men; and those men, who were grown
rotten. like beasts, in their very dunge) does save both men and beasts; so
greatly has God multiplied his mercy. How dear is this Oil, and yet how
cheap? It How Grace is both deer, cheap.
is cheap, and common; and withal, it gives health. If it were not cheap,
it would never have been powered upon me, if it were not wholesome, it would
never be able to recover me. Without doubt, (says he) there is a resemblance
between the name of spouse, and oil, nor did the holy ghost, in vain, compare
them to one another. For my part, (unless somewhat, which is better, do
occur to you) I hold it to be, for these three qualities. For it shyneth, it
feeds, and it annoynteth. It entertaines the fire, it feeds the body, and it
asswageth pain. It is Light, Food, Physic. Now see if it be not just so, in
this name of the Spouse. It shyneth, when it is preached; It feeds, when it
is considered; and asswageth and suppleth, when it is inuoked. Is not, (says
he) this name of Jesus, both Light, and Food, and Physic to you? What does so
nourish, and fat the soul, which feeds upon it? All food of the soul is dry,
if it be not bedewed with this Oil. It is inspide, if it be not sprinkled with
this salt. If Observe, admire, and imitate this sweet Saint.
thou write, I have no gust in it, unless I may read the name of Jesus there.
If thou dispute, or confer, it contents me not, unless I hear the sound of
Jesus. Jesus is honey in the mouth; it is music in the ear; and it is a
melting kind of joy in the heart. Thus, does this holy Saint, express himself
in the place alleged, concerning this particular. He also shows there, at
large, how it is, that Our Lord Jesus is not only the Food; but light also. and
the Physic of the whole world.
light illuminating the world, and the precious Physic curing all the wounds
and miseries thereof; as here, for breuities sake, I have only showed our of
him, that it is the food which strengthens us in all our weakness.

Such has been the spirit of devotion, of the Saints in the Christian
Catholic Church (from the first, to the rest, and, now at last, in this
present age) toward this holy name of Jesus. Nay we see, that by his goodness,
it is rather improued, then decreased now. For in very many Cities, there are
kept, every week, (though not in the same, but different churches thereof)
devout solemnities, in memory, and honor, of this supereminent name of our Lord
Jesus. And we also see, that the two great Lights of this last age of ours, S.
Ignatius of Loyola, and S. Teresa, were so deerly devoted to this holy name;
that the latter of them, for this cause, has deserved to have the name of her
own family, as it were forgotten, and that now she is known, instead thereof,
by the Name The Devotion of S. Ignatius and S. Teresa, to the name of Jesus.
of JESUS; as being called Teresa of JESUS. And the former, though he kept his
own name, to his own person; yet to show, how entirely, and how irreuocably
he had given all away to the service of our Lord Jesus; and withal to prove
the reverence, and religion which he bare to that divine name of his; he did,
in the instituting of his Society, renounce the appellation of his own name;
and See in the life of the Saint.
he ordained it to be eternally called under the honor, and only auow of the
holy Name of Jesus. I omit here to show how supernaturally the Saint was
concurred withal heerin, by our Lord himself; and how by the visible head of
his Church, the Society has been successively confirmed, under this Title; but
I only consider, what devotion these two so high servants of our Lord, had to
it; in conformity of that spirit, which has still inflamed the hearts of the
former Saints, of the Catholic Church.

In this The wonderful effects which have been wrought by the devotion of
Christians, to the holy name of Jesus.
Name it is, that devils have been cast, both out of bodies and souls. That
the faith has been planted among Paga^s; That worlds of miracles, both
corporal and spiritual have been wrought, in confirmation thereof; That
Martyrs have been made tryamphant, over all the bitter torments, which men, or
devils could inflict; That so many millions of ugly, and importunate
temptations, have been overcome; millious of desolations, and motions of
despair driven away; millions of serene, sweet comfortes, brought into the
soul; and in fine, that whatsoever is miserable and sinful has been removed,
and whatsoever is holy, and happy, has been procured for Christians, at the
liberal hand of our Lord.

Yet all this is not so idly meant, nor is to be so ill understood, as if these
benefits would acrew to such as should only care to pronounce the bare Name of
Jesus, without any reverence or faith and love of him, whose name it is. But
only they are praised here (and that most worthily) who are devoted to his
divine name, as signifying the Savior of the world who is expressed thereby;
the same being a means by which the mind is made to ruminate, and reflect often
upon him. And they who are not yet devoted are exhorted to it, as to the love of
a lively picture of an admirable Original; or rather, as of a curious cup,
wherein most precious liquor is contained; or, in fine, as of the very
compendium, and whole abbreuiated History, of all that excess, which our Lord
did say, or do, or else endure, in this mortal life, for the redemption of man.
And indeed, how can they love our B. Savior who delight not in that dear name
of his, which declares him so clearly, to be a Savior; and who follow not the
stepps of the holy servants and Saints of God; whose hearts have so tenderly
melted, in their devotion to this sacred name, of our Lord Jesus.

Of the great love which our Lord showed to us in his Epiphany, or
Manifestation to the Gentiles, in the person of the three Kings.

CHAP. 16.
BUT to return again, and so to take our leave of those Sheephards, who were
surprised by this newborn Lord of ours, as if it had been, with the netts of
love near at hand, we may observe how he took those three Kings, by shooting
them from a far off, with a star, which struck them at the heart. S.
Augustine complains (but he does it, like himself, after a most deer and
tender manner) that our Lord had also peirced his heart, with love, Confess l. 9.
cap. 2.
Sagittaueras tu cor nostrum charitate tua, and gestabamus verba tua transfixa
visceribus. Thou had says he) O Lord shot through our hearts with thy love;
and we bare thy words in our bowels, whereby they were stricken from side to
side. In like manner did he shoot, through the hearts of these holy men, in
whose person he consecrated the whole body of Gentilisine to himself. Now The
difference between the arrows of Gods mercy, and of his Justice. Psalm. 119.
God has arrows of diverse sorts. The arrows of his Justice, are pointed,
and they wound, and kill. Sagittae potentis acutae cum carbonibus desolatorijs.
Those arrows of that mighty man, are sharp, and they carry at the heads thereof
certain coules, as hot as the fire of hell. But the arrows of his mercy and
Charity are forked and barbed; and though they wound, it is far from being to
death, unless it be a sweet death of love; and besides those arrows do not
loose their hold. And so that Archer, with his long Arm, can by that very
arrowe, draw the wound and wounded person within his reach, that so after the
wound he may give the cure.

In this manner did our Lord, by that star both strike and draw those Magi
after it; Matt. 2.
till at last they arrived in that stable, which was then grown to be a heaven
on earth? There, in the throne of his sacred Mothers arms, they adored their
Lord; having already been made so rich, as to receive, wherewith they might make
a present to him, and do him homage. For All comes from God both the means
whereby, and the mind wherewith any good is done.
of him it was, that they had both the means and mind, wherewith they made him
a fit present; which yet, withal, he was pleased, should be such, that it
might (as a man may say) be two to one, against himself. For though by the
Gold which they offered, they did him homage as to their king; yet the
Frankencense fignified the Priesthood which he was to exercise in their
service, both at the last supper, and upon the Cross; and the Mirrhe was to
put him in mind of his burial, which must suppose his precedent death.

Let him that can, contemplate the ardent love of our Lord, which swells and
slames in every circumstance of those actions, which any way concern this
sacred Infancy of his. For no sooner was he borne; but he had his death and
passion in his eye. And besides, it deserves our admiration, to see with what
suauity, that divine goodness was pleased to gather the first flower of the
Gentiles with his holy hand.

It was said of God before, Psalm. 108.
by the Prophet David; Quia ipse cognouit figmentum no strum, record at us est
quoniam puluis sumus. He knew whereof we were made; he remembered that we are but
dust. This was said long ago, but it is practiced daily and howerly on us. And
in conformyty of this knowledge, his love is never failing to condescend to our
natural inclinations. The great goodness of God in condesce^ding to man.
Sometimes he serves himself of our secular studies; sometimes of our vain
curiosities; yea and sometimes of our very sins, whereby he may cyther dispose
us to a conversion from heresy, or any other impiety; or else to a vocation to
his better service. So I think may any man observe in himself, that our Lord
has proceeded toward him; and so it is evident that he procceded with these
Magi The Magi were taken, and brought, to God, by the bayte, and book, of
their own natural inclination.
. For as they had much employed themselves, upon the contemplation of nature,
by means of the Stars; so by a star, which was the likelyest lure to which
they might be drawn to stoop, (for though their eyes looked upward for a
while, yet soon after, it brought them down upon their knees, at the sight of
the divine infant) he vouchsafed to summon them to his service.

How certain must it be, that the love of our Lord, did subdue and melt the
souls of these holy men, after a strange manner; whose messenger alone (the
star) did so illuminate, and in flame them interiourly, that they felt not
the incommodities, and dangers of so long and labourious a pilgrimage, as
they were making. It may also be further seen, by this; That upon the recovery
of the sight thereof (for whilst they were in Jerusalem, the star was seen by
them no more (to teach us, that Courts are not proper for contemplation of
celestial things.
Courts, and store of company, are not wont to intertaine, but rather to
estrange our internal eyes from the sight of heaven) the sacred text does thus
declare in most weighty words, the excess of joy, which they were in: Matt. 2.
Videntes autem stellam gauisi sunt gaudio magno valde. Upon the recovery of
the sight of the Star, they rejoiced, and it was with a mighty, and most
excessive joy. And when it had led them to that stable where the Omnipotent
Infant lay; neither was the eye of their faith obscured, not the edge of their
most reverent, and withal most ardent love abated, but rather whet, by that
show of humility, and poverty, which they met withal. And they opened their
treasures; they made litter, as it were, of their own Royal persons; and were
so ravished by those divine beams of Charity, (which passing from that Sphere
of fire of our Lords sacred heart, did seize on theirs) that in their return,
they had now, no more thoughts of meaning to be regaled by Herod, according to
the purpose which they had made before. For by Upon the sense of celestial
comforts, the delights of this world grow conte^ptible.
that time they were fedd from the table of heaven, with supernatural visions,
and most sweet and solid comforts of that kind; and from our Lord, they carried
home, another manner of heat and joy, then the Star, (which was but a figure
of our Lord) could help them to, in their going thither.

Though yet those holy souls, were the least part of that object, upon which
the love of our Lord did mean to work; for we it was, who in their persons,
were designed. And therefore, as the holy Catholic Church, does use these words
of S. Paul, Tit. c. 3.
in the office which she celebrates on Christians day; Apparuit benignitas, and
humanitas Saluatoris nostri Dei; non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos,
sed secundum suam misericordiam saluos nos fecit etc. The benignity and sweet
mercy of God our Savior, has been made cuident, and clear to us; not through
any works os justice, which we have wrought, but according to his own mercy,
whereby he saved us etc. So may we also use them, in the consideration of this
holy mystery, of his Epiphany. Nay we may do it, in some respects, upon a more
particular reason. For in the Nativity, our Lord did appear and manifest
himself to the Jews in chief; but here in The Epiphany does most properly
belong to us who descend from Gentiles.
the Epiphany, he seems to have had a particular aim at the vocation of the
Gentiles; from whom we find our selves descended. Then he reueyled himself to
us, who were rebels and enemies to the Lord of life, till that time; obeying
sense and bestiallity in all things, and hating not only Religion, but even
very common sense, and reason. But he like a true sun dispersed those clouds,
and cleared up the mist of ignorance and error in our progenitors. Who
together with almost the whole world were so miserable, as to worship stocks,
and stones instead of God. Nor were they more dark in the understanding part,
then they were depraved in their will; and if we be now in any better case, we
must only impute such a divine effect to an omnipotent cause, which was the
love of our Lord, who was wholly impatient to differ our conversion any longer,
and therefore upon the very day of his Nativity, he directed, and commanded
that Star to prepare a way for the Epiphany.

The Prophet This place deserves particular consideration. Cap. 60.
Esaias, in this mystery, (forseeing the beginning of the glorious state of the
Church of Jesus Christ, our Lord) did thus, by way of anticipation, express
himself. Arise, be illuminated Jerusalem, because thy light is come, and the
glory of our Lord is risen upon thee. For behold, darkness shall cover the
earth, and a mist the people; but upon thee, shall our Lord arise; and his
glory shall be seen upon thee; and the Gentills shall walk in thy light, and
Kings, in the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and se
how all these, are gathered together. They are come to thee; thy sons shall
come from far, and thy daughters shall come from thy side. Then shall thou
see, and abound, and thy heart shall marvel, and be enlarged; when the
multitude of the Sea, shall be converted to thee, the strength of the Gentills
shall come to thee. The inundation of Camells, shall cover thee. The
Dromedaries of Madian and Epha. All they of Saba shall come bringing gold, and
Frankenceuse, and showing forth payse to our Lord.

The How both the parts of this Prophesy are fulfilled.
latter part of this prophesy, was most literally fulfilled upon this day of
the Epiphany, upon these holy Magi, as we clearly see, by the sacred
Evangelical Text. And the former part, which announceth the glory of the
Christian Church, has been as cuidently accomplished, in the Communion of the
holy Catholic, Aposiolike, Roman faith; in the light whereof, the Gentills
were to walk. And so many successions and Series of Kings, (when first they
should be converted from Paganism to this faith) were to go on, in the
brightness of the rising thereof. And such multitudes were then to come in, to do
her homage, both from far and near, as should amaze and strike her through,
with joy. Nor was he able to express the plenty and abundance of that people
otherwise, then by the name of seas, and inundations.

And I dare make my reader, my Judge
here let any man who has but the use even of common sense consider, in what
community of Christian people, this prophesy has been fulfilled; whether in
the Catholic Roman, which is spread far and near, in all the four
quarters of the earth, as Europe, Affrique, Asia, and America; or in any other
present Sect of these parts of the world, which never went further, then to
some Provinces of Europe only. Nor was ever even here, such as now it is, but
only since the time of Luther, when also it is divided into a world of sects.
Whether in the Catholic, which converted all the Countries which ever were
converted from Paganism, to the faith of our Lord; or in any Sect at all,
which never converted any one; but instead thereof, has perverted as many as it
could, from the true faith to their own carnal fancies. Whether in the
Catholic, whereof such a world of Emperors, and Kings, and Queens have been;
or else in any other now on foot, which never had any one, who was, and did
continue of their communion. We They are Catholics only, who adore our Lord
Jesus, as the Magi did.
Catholics are they to whom our Lord did manifest himself, according to the
prediction of his holy Prophets; We who find him in the stable, in the arms
of his sacred, and all-immaculate mother; and We, who adore him, and present
him, not only with our hearts, as his enemies do also pretend themselves to
do; but with our Gold also, by alms, and all kind of Charity; with our
Incense by deuo^ion and piety; and with our Mirrhe by mortification and
penance; in union of that infinite love of his, whereby he has made choice of
us, to whom he would vouchsafe to be made known. And therefore let us follow
S. Leo his counsel, Ser. 2. de Epiphan.
who like a true supreme Pastor, spoke thus to the universal flock committed
to his charge: Let this most sacred day of the Epiphany be honored by us,
whereon the author of our salvation appeared; and let us adore him in heaven,
being so omnipotent; to whom the Magi did express such veneration, he being
in his Cradle, but an Infant.

It is showed by the Presentation of our Lord Jesus in the Temple, how infinite
love he bare to us.

CHAP. 17.
THIS Omnipotent Lord Jesus having as it were emptied his fulness, or rather
abridged the show of his greatness, by growing into the narrow compass of being
a child in his Nativity, and having also submitted himself, both to pain and
shame in his Circumcision, where he took to himself the sweet name of Jesus,
for our eternal good; did proceed yet further, shortly after, in a most
amourous obedience to that Law, which we alone were subject to. Under the
obligation heerof, he was, and would needs be presented in the Temple, to
Almighty God; Luc. 2.
as the first borne of all parents were bound to be, in memory of that
destruction, Exodus 12. Exodus 13. Leuit. 12.
which God brought upon the first borne of the Agyptians, and so delivering
his own people, which was the Children of Israel, by means thereof. So
punishing his enemies because they presecuted his friends; or rather so
punishing his enemies that they also might become his friends; if they would
not resolve to be their own greatest enemies. But yet vvitha I, it was
ordained in the old law, that the first borne so offered, by the parents,
(when once they had done that homage to the God of all things) should not be
so appropriated to his service, as that the parents were wholy to loose the
comfort of them. But See here the tender goodness of almighty God toward man.
Number. 8.
all, except they were of the Tribe of Leui, who were to serve in
Ecclesiastical function, might be redeemed and recovered back again. And
that, at so lo a rate, as should not undo them, how poor soever they might
chance to be. The beasts indeed and only they were to be sacrificed in Specie,
as they were offered to our Lord.

This Oblation was therefore made by the people of God, for the perpetuating of
the memory of so great a benefit: Though yet, no oblation, was able to make
that infinite Majesty of the eternal God, a Sauer, for his having delivered
them by the death of the first borne of their enemies, till he was pleased that
his only son, should come and offer himself in flesh and blood for their
deliverance, Coloss. 1.
he who was the first begotten of all Creatures, and who performed that, in
deed, and truth, which all other oblations and Sacrifices, did, but only, as
figures in respect of him.

Now this Act of the Presentation of our Lord Jesus, was made by our B. Lady.
Or rather he offered himself, in those sacred and most pure hands of hers,
which he enabled for that excellent purpose, with unspeakable and most ardent
love. And as hereafter we shall see, that he chiefly made oblation of himself
in his sacred passion, by way of propitiation for our sins, and impetration
of grace: So the Presentation seems to carry a particular respect, to work by
way of thanksgiving, for all the benefits, which that open hand of God was by
moments rayning down upon the Creatures. And to the end that the goodness of
this Lord of ours may not be cast away upon us, it will be necessary both now,
and very often hereafter, to cast a careful and well considering eye upon the
former Cap. 2.
discourse, wherein we observed the unlimited knowledge of that divine soul of
Christ our Lord; and whereby it is evident, that all things concerning the
Creatures, (for whom he would vouchsafe to be offered,) whether they were past
or to come, were as present to him, as the very instant of time wherein then he
lived. In so much, as there was not, nor ever could be imparted the least
benefit to mankind by Almighty God, which was not present to his
incomprehensible, but all-comprehe^ding mind; and for which our Lord Jesus did
not offer himself then, by way of thanks, with most particular love.

So that now we see our Lord surrendered up into the hands of his eternal
Father, as if the world after a sort were dispossessed of him. But so full of
Charity was that Father, as to ordain the son to be sold back again,
What soever is given to God, is given us back again with advantage.
for the imparting of all those divine savors, which appear to have been
done to us, by him, in the whole progress of his holy life and death. And
vvheras he exercised, with a perpetuity of burning love, those offices of a
Lawgiuer, a Master, a Father, a Friend, a Spouse, and lastly of an omnipote^t
Redeemer, by his five sacred vvounds; in this mystery, we find him to have
been recovered and brought back to us, with the payment of five Sicles;
which according to the most probable opinion of computation, do not exceed
two shillings.

O omnipotent love of our Lord JESUS who so would give himself to us; as that
indeed he choose rather not to give himself, but rather to innoble us so far,
as to enable us to give him somewhat for himself, though the price fell
infinitely short of the thing, which was to be redeemed. A price it was, which
fell short, even of being able to buy a very slave; and what proportion then
could it carry, with purchasing a God, and King of glory; saving that his love,
did make up the rest. His love, which was as precious as God himself (for God
is love, and he being man is also God) and so he was not only willing, but even
able to pay as much, as God was able to exact. But we the while, besides the
contemplation of our own obligation, may do well to consider that course of
providence and love, which from the beginning of the world, has been held,
with man, in addressing him to an expectation, and firm belief, and love of
this divine Redeemer. Even in the law of nature, all was full of figures, and
sacrifices were also offered then, (and There is no truth of Religion, where
there is no visible Sacrifice.
wheresoever there is no visible Sacrifice, there neither is, nor ca^ there be,
any true Religion, nor true worship of God;) and the minds of many were endued
with light according to the exigency of their state, which ledd their inward
eyes toward this mark.

In the times of the written Law, another curtain (as a man may say) was
drawn; and the faith of men grew more explicit then; the Majesty of the
Church was increased; the figures were both more, and more significant, and
more evident; and there was store of Prophets, who expressly foretold the
qualities of the Messiah to come. But now that he was indeed arrived, no time
was lost; such love as that, could not be slack; and we have seen how
instantly the Sheepheards, and in their persons, such others as were near at
hand, were invited to that feast of joy, by the call of Angels. After that the
Magi (and in their persons, all the Gentills though never so far off either
in respect of time or place) were drawn under the conduct of a Star. And
now, that such, as were most particularly deputed for Gods service, might be
far from not knowing their redeemer; behold how he Our Lord was declared by
Saint Simeon to be come for the salvation both of Jews and Gentiles.
declares himself in the Temple, to all the world, by the mouth of holy
Simeon, and Anna, to be the Savior thereof; to be the glory of the Jews; and
the light of the Gentills. That so, there might be none, who should not taste of
that fountain of love which was distilling into al those hearts, which would
receive it. It came not doubtless down by drops, into that of Simeon. For
instantly upon the taking of that celestial infant, who was the Lord of life,
into his dying arms, he fell into an extasis of joy; and withal, into a
divine, deep wearines of the world; and was so deadly wounded by the love of
our Lord, that he could not endure to look upon him, but upon the price of
being willing to live no longer.

How in the flight which our Lord Jesus made to Egypt, he discovered his
unspeakable Love to man.

CHAP. 18.
OUR Lord Jesus was no sooner brought back into the power, and designed to the
use of men, but he was disposing himself, by this incessant Charity, to do
and suffer strange things for them. For what stranger thing could there be,
then that he, who created the whole world, and who carries and conducts it all,
by the word of his power; in whose sight the Angels tremble, and the gates of
heaven do shiuer; and in What a poor Nothing the whole world is in comparison
of God. Matt. 2.
comparison of whom, all creatures are not so much as one poor, single,
naked, desolate grain of dust; that he, I say, should be content for love of
us, to fear, and fly, from such a thing, as Herod was. That thing, which once
was Nothing; and now was grown to be so hideously worse then Nothing, as it
is incomparably worse, to be an enemy and persecutour of Christ our Lord, then
not to be at all.

But imediatly after the Presentation in the Temple; our Lord Jesus was carried
to Nazareth; a place, remote almost fourscore miles. And The occasions of
Herod's fear. Matt. 2. Luc. 2.
the noise of his Nativity; and of the Star which ledd the Magi; and of the
Presentation in the Temple, together with the prophesies of the King of the
Jews to be borne at Bethleem; gave Herod an all-arme of extreme fear; least
he who indeed was come to give us the kingdom of heaven, had meant to rob men
of earthly kingdoms. But what (says S. Augustine) will his tribunal, Ser.
30. de Tempore.
when he shall sit as judge, be able to do, now that his Infaurs cradle, is
able so to fright proud Kings? How much better shall those kings do, who seek
not to kill Christ like Herod; but rather desire to adore him as the Magi did?
Him I say, who at the hands of his enemies, and for his very enemies, did
endure that death which now his enemies designed him to; who, being killed
afterward, did kill that very death, in his own body. Le^ The duty of King sto
this King of Kings.
Kings carry a pious fear toward him, who is sitting at the right hand of his
Father, whom this impious king did so fear, whilst he was sucking at the
breast of his mother.

This cruelty of his, did extend so far, as to command the death of all the
Infants, within two years of age, in Bethleem, and all the places near
adjoining; who are esteemed, as appears by Ecclesiastical history, to have
arrived to the number of about Vide Salmeron Tom. 3. Tract. 44.
fourteen thousand. That so he might be sure (at least as he conceived) to
make our Lord away, who had not then, in likelihood, the age of so many
months. But because some Children are more forvvard in growth then others;
and some error might chance to arrive by the mistaking of age, within a
little compass; he thought it was less ill, to murder thousands more then
needed; then to adventure the escape of that one, who yet came voluntaryly to
dye, even that the tyrant himself, might not perish. So different, are the
designs of God, and man; so different are their desires. And the success is
also so very different, as that the divine Majesty does take, sometimes, the
God draws good out of evil.
perverse will of man (yet without having any part in the peruersenes thereof)
for the execution of his just decrees, yea not only such of them as are founded
in justice, but even in mercy also.

It would seem to some, who judge of God, by the laws which they use to
prescribe for themselves, that it had been much more agreeable, to the greatness
of such a God as we describe, not to have permitted that such a Tyrant, should
live to commit so vast a crime as this? How easily could our Lord, with the
least breath of his mouth, Deutr. 4.
which is a consuming fire, have blown down that painted wall? how little
would it have cost him, to have strocken Herod lame, or blind, or mad, or dead,
or to have damned him to hell, for all eternity, and at an instant? How soon
could he have sent that infamous, Rebellious little worm, who presumed, after
a sort to spit in the face of that high Majesty, into the bottomless pit of
Nothing, from whence with mercy he had been drawn? It might have been
instantly and most easily done. But the wisdom of God, took pleasure to
draw great good, out of great evil; and his love was that, which did set his
wisdom, so on work. For The wise mercy of God.
by this permission of his, and by the publishing of Herod's cruelty, the notice
of the mystery of his own Nativity, was much inereased; that so his love to
the souls of men, might be declared. And besides, if tyrants were not
permitted on earth, there would be no Martyrs in heaven, as S. Augustine says.
And if this tyrant, had then been strocken by some suddayne death, the mercy
of God might have seemed less; whereas now by forbearance, even Herod also had
time of penance, though his Malice were such, as that it made no use thereof.

And The happiness of the Innocents and their mothers against their own, and
the Tyrants will.
as for the happy Innocents, who were murdered by that Tyrant upon the
occasion of Christ our Lord; it is plain, that the world, which would deplore
their misery; yea and their afflicted mothers who did also lament their own
infelicity; were far from judging as they ought. For how much better was it
for those mothers, to be created mothers of so many Martyrs, (who instantly
went to a seat of rest, and presently after the Resurrection of Christ our
Lord, were placed as a garland upon his own sacred head; and carried into an
eternity of glory, for having been murdered, in despite, and for the hate of
him, then to have continued as they were, but the mothers of Children like the
rest? Who if they had run on, in their own natural course, they might
perhaps have ended it, with the loss of their souls; whereas now they were
not only saved, but (which is more) it was done, without their having ever
so much as once offended God; and so they were made, the very flovver and
first fruits of martyrs.

So that the love of our Lord, was exercised heerin, upon them all. And The
love of our Lord Jesus enters every where, and upon all occasions.
where may we not look for this love. And what place can be found which is
void thereof; since even in the poysned Cup of the Tyrants hate, the precious
liquor of his divine love did svvym so high, as to fill the same. To himself
he took the most sad, and painful, and shameful part. The compassion which
he had of the holy Innocents pain, and death I mean, of that little which
they felt of pain, in that passage, for his sake; was a kind of infinite
thing. That of the mothers was extreme; for the sacred Text discribes them, by
way of Prophecy to have been so profoundly afflicted, Ierem. 31. Matt. 2.
as that not only they could not, but even they would not receive comfort. But
as the love of the tendrest mother to the only infant of her womb, may go
even for hatred, if it be compared to those unspeakable ardours of affection
vvhervvith the heart of our Lord does ever flame toward all the Creatures for
whom he dyed, Esaias. 49.
for although a mother should forget her son, yet can not I forget you, says
our Lord, so may their grief, how great soever, be termed a kind of joy, in
respect of his. Theirs, growing our of self love, would feign have hindered
their childre^s death, but his growing out of pure and perfect love, and out
of a thirst of their instant, and eternal good, he permitted it to his own
bitter grief. And by A strong comfort to such as are persecuted for the cause
of Christ our Lord.
the self same measure, we may also discern the same love, which by our
Lord is borne to all the rest of his servants; whom he suffers to suffer
for his truth; and he deserves to be adored with all our souls, since he
makes even them, who pretend and mean to be our greatest enemies, to be the
chiefest instuments of our glory and good.

The great Love of our Lord Jesus, is further showed in his flight to Egypt.

CHAP. 19.
THIS act of so great love was in the heart of our Lord Jesus, but he contents
not himself to love us only with his heart, unless vvithall he may put
himself to further pain and shame. And behold (when he was fast a sleep,
in those dear arms of his all-imaculate and most holy mother; and in house,
with that holy Patriarcke S. Joseph, an Angel appeared to that Saint, being
also at that time a sleep, Requiring him to rise, Matt. 2.
and take the child and his mother, and to fly into Egypt, and there to
remain, till he should be willed to return, because Herod would procure to
destroy the child.

But where shall we find means, wherewith to admire, and adore this Lord of
ours? Who for the discovery, of the infinitenes of his love, would vouchsafe so
far to over shadow the omnipotency of his power, as that he, being the Lord
of Angels, would be directed by an Angel; (a) Observe the strange humility,
charity, and patience of our Lord in this Mystery.
and being God himself, would be disposed of by a man; and being the seat and
Center of all true repose, would be raised from his rest at midnight; and,
(together with that heavenly Virgin), to be sent, flying from the face of an
angry tyrant, in so tender years; into a Country so remote, so incommodious,
so barbarous, and so Idolatrous? It was a journey of Three hundred English
^^yles. See Baradius Tom. 1. l. 10. cap. 8.
twelve days; at the least, for any strong traveler; and could not be of
less then thirty or forty, for this little family, which was forced to be
fleeting thus, from home. This family which was compo^ded of a man in years,
who loved to converse in the house of his own holy heart; a most pure and most
delicate virgin, who was not wont to be showing herself to strange places and
persons; and that excellent divine infant, who would permit himself to want as
much assistance, as that weak state could need, which must needs increase the
trouble both of them, and him. Their poverty without all doubt was very great;
for though the Magi (when they opened, and offered of their treasures to him)
must be thought to have left enough for the contynuall entertainment of such a
company; yet by a circumstance which may be considered here, it will be
evident that they were grown poor again. For at the Prosentation of our Lord
in the Temple, (whereof I have already spoken, but here it will be fit, to look
back upon it once again) our B. Lady was, and would be purified. Not that she
had need of being purisied, (she in comparison of whose high purity, the most
pure Seraphims of heaven, are but dross and dust) but because our Lord her
Son, would be subject to the imputation of sin by Circumcision, our B. Lady
his mother, would be thought subject to the common shame of mothers by
purification. To which heroical act of contemning her self, our Lord, by his
example, had drawn her, and thereby withal, did make us know, that it was
not impossible for mere creatures, (by means of that grace The omnipotency of
Gods grace.
which is imparted to us, with so much love) to abandon and despise our selves;
and not only to be content, but even delighted, in being despised by others.

Now at the Purification of al women, an oblation was to be made by order of
the law, and a lamb was to be offered by the rich; and a pair of Turtle doves,
or two young Pigeons, Leuit. 12.
by the poor. And A demonstration to prove what shift our B. Lady made to
grow quickly poor again.
since this latter was the offering which the B. Virgin made, it is clear that
through her charity to others, her self would needs become poor again. She
having such a strong example of poverty before her eyes, as that God should
make himself a naked child for the good of men; and she not failing to learn,
and lay up the lesson of this virtue, which was the first that was made to her
by our B Lord. So that since they were persons so very poor, and so, unfit for
travail, and to take a journey of so great imcommodity and lengh without so
much as an ynch of any ground of hope, that after such, or such a time expired,
they should return; was such a dish full of difficultyes for them to feed upon,
as could never have been digested, if it had not been dressed and sawced with
the most ardent love of our Lord lesus.

By this example of his, he has given us strong comfort in all those
banishments and distresses, which we may be subject to. And it has wrought so
well with the servants of God, as that they have triumphed with joy for the
happiness of being able to suffer shame or sorrow for his sake. But The great
change which was wrought in Egypt, after the Presence of our Lord Jesus.
especially did it work wonders, in that rude and wicked Country of Egypt. For
he had no soever perfected the mystery of our redemption upon the Cross; but
through the odor of his sacred infancy, that Province did early, get a kind of
start, beyond all the others of the world, in breeding, and nursing up huge
troops of famous Marlyrs, Anchorites, Eremits, and other holy Monks, in the
strongest Mortification and penance, which has been known in the Christian
world.

And now let us see who has the face vvhervvith to deny, or the heart
vvhervvith to doubt the effects of the infinite love, which our Lord did show
by this flight of his into Egypt. Where such a renouation of the inward man
was made, as that instead of dogs, and catts, and serpents, and devils,
which, with extraordinary diligence of superstition, were usually there
adored, beyond the other parts of the world; so many Tryumphant Arches, were
erected there, so shortly after, in honor of Christ our Lord, as there were
high, and happy souls, who consecrated themselves to his service, in a most
pure and perfect manner, with detestation of all those delights, which flesh
and blood is wont to take pleasure in. And they embraced, with the arms both
of body and soul, all those difficulties and miseries, which they found that
our Lord had been pleased to endure for the^, and which the world does so
deeply fear, and so deadly hate.

The Tyrant, in the mean time, Vide Maldonat. in c. 2. Matt.
after some six or seven years expired, (according to the most probable
opinion) not disposing himself to lay down that batbatous and bloody mind,
whereby, like a wolse he persecuted the lamb of God, Joan. 1.
who takes away the sins of the world, and who during all that bitter
banishment of his, did never cease to vvooe him by inspirations, and many other
means, to depart from his damnable design) came, at last, to his due, and
deserved end. For he fell into the compass of those impenite^t sinners, which
S. Augustine discribeth thus, after his divine manner. Confess. l. 5. cap. 2.
Subtrahentes se lenitati tuae, and offende^tes in rectitudine^ tuam, and
cadentes in asperitate^ tuam. Videlicet nesciunt quod vbique sis, quem nullus
circumscribi^ locus, and solus es praesens, etiam his, qui long fiunt a te.
They withdrew themselves (says he from thy mercy, and they met with thy
Justice, and they fell upon thy rigor, or revenge. And all, because they knew
not, that thou, O Lord, art every where; whom no place does circumscribe, and
who only art present, even to them who will needs make themselves far of from
thee.

This was Herod's case; who in vain, did look for the Lord of life, here, or
there, to murder him, who was not only here or there, but every where. Or
rather with him there is no such thing, as any where, but only so far forth as
it is made to be so, by his Omnipresence. Particularly our Lord had still been
knocking at his heart. But the Tyrant locked him out, seeking him in that wicked
manner, and the more he sought him so, the further of he was from finding him;
though yet himself was found by him. Confess. lib. 4. cap. 9.
For (as the same S. Augustine says else where of a sinner:) Quo it, quo fugit,
nisi a te placido, ad te iratum? and vbi non inuenit legem tuam, in paena sua?
and lex tua veritas, and veritas tu. Whither goes a sinner, or whither flies
he, but from thee being pleased, to thy self being offended. And where shall
he not find thy law to his cost? and thy law is Truth, and this Truth, is thou
thy self.

By this law of Justice, and by this Truth the tyra^t was found out at last.
For our Lord, considering that he would not make use of his love to him by
asking pardon, resolved that he would make him an instrument of his own love to
us, by giving us an example which we might avoid. And so he How the Justice of
God upon Herod, was grounded in his mercy and love to us. Vide 10. seph.l. 17.
Antiquit. cap. 8. and Eusebius. l. r. Hist. Eccle siast.
strocke him with extreme afflictions of mind, and unspeakable torments of
body, according to the description of Josephus. For within, he was all burning,
as in fire; his lyms were swollen, his pudenda turned themselves into vermin;
and his whole body was of so hateful a smell; as that he might rather be
thought, a lining, and feeling, and talking dunghill, then a ma, and so he
dyed. Yet now, though our Lord did show his Majesty as a God, he would not yet
forsake his own humility, patience, and charity as man; but he expected in
Egypt, till this hungry wolf were dead. And then, upon the admonition of an
Angel, he returned and went into Galilea, and so to Nazareth, where he
remained with his sacred mother, and the holy Patriarche S. Joseph, his
supposed Father. Lue. 2.
And he grew (as the Evangelist says) and was strengthened, being full of
wisdom; and the grace of God was with him. Both which, he showed after an
admirable manner at his disputing and teaching in the Temple, as will appear
by that which follows.

Of the great Love which our Lord Jesus showed by his disputing and teaching in
the Temple.

CHAP. 20.
AS on the one side, our Lord JESUS did omit noe exquisite diligence, which
might serve for the delivery of himself, to the knowledge and the love of men;
so yet on the other, he used it with so much caution, as to make such as saw
him, rather to desire, then to glut themselves upon him. For How sweetly our
Lord did manifest himself by degrees.
he, being (as he was) the Sovereign original light of the whole world, chose
to manifest himself to it, which lay in darkness, by degrees; least otherwise,
instead of being illuminated, it might be dazeled. He was twelve years old,
before he made any show of himself, but only by making those holy Pilgrimages
to the Temple, at three several times of the year. To which howsoever he were
not bound in that tender age, nor could he be indeed obliged at all; yet it is
most likely that even before, he would bind himself, as now we se he did, by
his love, to give us that great example of his devotion, as also not to deprive
his all-immaculate mother, and S. Joseph, of that comfort, which without him,
they could not so well enjoy. Those indeed were Pilgrimages, How Pilgrimamages
to holy places ought to be performed.
which the world may look upon, both for admiration and imitation. With what
silence, what introuersion, what height of piety, were they performed? and how
present to the mind of our B. Savior, were all those persons of the world,
who would deny, and deride such Religious iourneyes, to holy places. And such
others also, who both believing, and practicing the same, would yet abuse that
holy institution, either by voluntary and long distractions, or else by
oftentation; and for both those kinds of people, would his love solicit him
to be deeply sorry. He saw also such others, as would greatly honor him, and
his Saints, by such devotions; and not only did he take particular larioy, in
every one of them; but by his merits, and prayers, and especialliy by every one
of those holy paces, did he obtain, at the hands of his eternal Father, that
grace and strength, whereby such actions might be well performed.

But when they were at Jerusalem, in the frequent assembly of that people, it
was not so strange, that the parents should loose the sight of the Child,
whereupon The grief of our B. Lady and Saint loseph upon the loss of Christ
our Lord in the Temple.
they sought him with grief enough. They thought that some of their friends,
and kindred, might have procured to make him return with the^; as who would
not have been glad, to become as happy as he could by the excellent presence of
our Lord. So as they looked him amongst their friends, a days journey off from
Jerusalem; and not finding him there, they returned to the City full of care,
and found him, the third day, in the Temple. With how vnspeable love both to
God and man, did our Lord JESUS dispossess himself, for a while, of the
greatest joy, and comfort, that he could receive in this world; which was the
sweet society of his sacred mother? wherein, although through the eminency of
grace which had been communicated to her happy soul in the very first instant
of her Immaculate Conception, he could never have found the least distraction
from the immediate and most perfect service of Almighty God; yet because the
parents of his disciples, and servants, would not all, be such; but would often
be diuerting and diswading us from corresponding with his inspirations, and our
obligations; he was pleased, not only to give us an example at large, but even
to impart the very express words themselves whereby we might overcome their
entreaties.

And rather then we should not be instructed to forsake all flesh and blood,
when once there should be question of Gods service, and rather then we should
not be armed well against those temptations which might grow to us from our
Parents, he was content to exemplify the case in his own sacred person, with a
seeming diminution to his B. Mother. For this it was, that when the
all-immaculate virgin, spoke to him in these tender words, Son why have thou
so done to us? L^^. 2.
behold thy Father and I, sorrowing did seek thee. Our B. Savior answered
thus (not in the way of reprehension, as certain course-harted people will
needs conceive) but In what sense our Lord Jesus spoke to his B. mother.
out of compassion to them, and out of instruction to us: Why is it that you
sought me? did you not know that I must be, about those things which are my
Father? And to show that his meaning was, but to benefit us, by that expression
of himself, and not to cast the least aspersion, of imperfection, upon his
most holy mother, and S. Joseph, he caused his holy spirit to record it
instantly after in holy Scripture, that: he departed from the Temple with them,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. And here, let him that can,
consider and admire the unspeakable dignity, and excellency of our B. Lady; to
whom the God of heaven and earth would become a subject. And let him much more
adore God, for the infinite humility and Charity of our Lord JESUS, The
incomparable love of Lord, in being so subject to our B. Lady and S. Joseph.
who vouchsafed by this strong example of his, to procure the quenching of our
pride, and the kindling of our love; by making himself a subject to flesh and
blood, for our sake; he who was the superior and sovereign Lord of all the
creatures, both in heaven and earth.

He showed well what he was, whilst yet he sat in the Temple, amongst the
Doctors. Of whom, he heard what they could say; and he asked them, to see
what they would answer. And many other things he also did at the same time,
though holy Scripture, by wrapping them up in silence, do rather leave matter,
for our souls, then for our senses to work upon. For he did both pray his
eternal Father, for their conversion to his divine Majesty, and for the
manifestation of his glory; not only in their hearts, who were present then;
but in as many, as by their means should afterward come to know what had
passed there.

The sacred Text affirms, How all that heard him, were aslonished at his
wisdom and answers; and that seeing him they wondered. And we may well
assure our selves that, their admiring his divine presence, and their being
astonished at his wisdom, was to that holy soul of our Lord Jesus, an
occasion of much mortisication, which nothing but ardent Charity could have
made him so willingly embrace. For he was then but twelve years old; and he
had been bred in a poor and plain appearance; and he dwelt in the very depth
of profound hamility: And humility when indeed it is profound, does make a
soul much more abhor admiration and praise, then any heart which is vain,
can appreh end, and hate to be despised.

The while, if all they, were so amazed by hearing him, who were the
Doctors of the law, and who were likely to despise all the world, in
comparison of themselves; and if the very sight of him, made them wonder,
whose eyes were even almost put out, by the dust of Envy, and Hypocrysy,
which the mind of pride had raised into them, and which our Lord JESUS, by the
dropps of his divine grace, was procuring them to lay in a far higher
manner; must We are particularly bound to admire the wisdom and grace of our
Lord Jesus.
we who are Christian, and whom our Lord instructs, not only at some
certain times, as he did that people, in the Temple, but to whose hearts he is
ever preaching, in a most particular manner (and happy are they who apply the
ears thereof to his sacred mouth) adore the Majesty of his wisdom, and power;
and admire the dignity and beauty of his humanity; and be inflamed, and even
consumed with the sense of his eternal providence, and ardent love.

But yet withal, we must consider, that howsoever it be said, and that most
truly, Th^it he proceeded in wisdom, and age, and grace with God and men,
this is only to be understood, of that kind of wisdom which might grow
through experimental knowledge, by way of the senses; which he had like us,
though yet with this difference (as Cap. ^^
has been showed) that even therein, he was free from all possibility of
error, which we are not. For his wisdom, otherwise, was so great, as not to
be capable of any increase; as nether was his grace; whereof in the instant of
his Conception, that divine soul of his had received all absolute fulness. But
he may be truly said to have increased daily with God, and men in Grace, that
is, in Favor; because every day, more and more; his soul was beautified, by
new acts, in the sight of God; and daily he made more and more discovery of
himself to men, according to the rates of their Capacity; and they would not
have been men but beasts, and blocks, if they had not been taken, by such an
object. We are taught withal (by his growing thus in grace before God and
men), to perform our actions in such sort, as that we must nether procure to
please God alone, by not caring for the edification of men; nor yet men alone,
through Hipocrisy, or want of purity, in the intention; but they both, must go
together, hand in hand, as daily our Lord, when he grew afterward to man's
estate, did effectually teach us, more and more.

Of the excessive love which our Lord Jesus showed to us, in that he would
vouchsafe to be Baptized.

CHAP. 21.
WHAT thought of man or Angel, can reach to that humility, which Christ our
Lord (being long since grown to be a man, and now upon the point of
publishing his Gospel) did express in his holy Baptism; and consequently to
that Charity, which cast him upon the practice of this profound impenetrable
humility? For it was Our Lord Jesus began all from Charity: we must begin all
from Humility.
not in him, as it is in us, who must begin with acts of humility, as with
the foundation, that so we may arrive to Charity afterward, which is the
consummation of a spiritual building. But in him, all moved at the very first,
from pure and perfect Charity, which was as a kind of cause of his humility.

They want not good ground of reason, who affirm, that between the Birth, and
death of Christ our Lord, he never performed an act of greater love, then in
being thus Baptized. For as the expression of true love, consists more in
doing, then in saying; so consists it also, much more in suffering, then in
doing. And as the least sin, is more abhorred by a soul, which is faithful
to God, then the sensible to^ments even of Hell it self: So the dishonor for
that soul to be thought sinful, which is not only pure, but wholly impeccable
(as that of Christ our Lord and Savior was) does sarre outstrippe all other
aspersion and infamy whatsoever, as was also insinuated else where. Yet By how
rugged ways our Lord Jesus was content to pass in his love to us.
by these rugged ways, would he pass; and upon these bitter pills would he
seed; yea and he did it with unspeakable joy, for love of us. And not only had
he been content to be Circumcised, which showed, as if he had been obnoxious to
Original sin; but (to declare that the his love longer he lived amongst us
the more care he to us. took to show how he loved us) he now vouchsafed to be
baptized; which (according to all appearance) did betoken as if he had been
subject, even to actual sin. To this let it be added; that since
Circumcision, was ordained by the law (to which although he were not bo^d
indeed, yet was it thought that he was bound) it might not only seem fit; but
even just, that he should be Circumcised, both to do honor to the law, and to
prevent all scandal of the people. But for him, to receive the Baptism of S.
John, was no appointement of the law of God; but a mere voluntary devotion,
which might have been forborne without any sin, or the just offense of any
man. And It was a far greater act of humility for our Lord to be baptized,
the^ to be circumcised.
therefore as I was saying it was admirable humility, (performed out of
unspeakable charity) that, for our example, and benefit, our Lord would fasten
such a mark of actual sin upon himself.

But the gracious eye of our Lord, being lodged upon the miseries of man; and
his heart being full of most ardent desire of our felicity; he contemned
himself, and resolved to enter into the waters. Luc. 7.
And though S. John, being then the greatest among the sons of men, did well
know, and with a most dejected faithful heart acknowledge, how far he was
from being worthy to baptize, that true and natural Son of God; yet so
precise was the pleasure of Christ our Lord, in this particular; that the holy
Baptist betook himself to his obedience. And our Lord vouchsafed to let him
know, and us withal, that perfect Justice is not observed, where the heroycall
acts of Humility, and Charity, are not performed,

S. John had been preaching the doctrine of penance to the jews; immediately
whereupon, they were baptized by him in Jordan. Matt. 3.
And the holy Scripture affirms, that Christ our Lord was baptized after
them; as resolving belike to be the last of the company. And vvithall, it is
very probable, by the sacred Text, Ibid.
that he would also be present at the sermon of S. John, like a common
Auditour; and being the increated wisdom of God, he vouchsafed to seem as if
he had needed to be taught by man. What proclamations are these of his
affection to us; and of direction, how we are to proceed with others? It being
reason that we should blush, even to the bottom of our hearts, when we take our
selves in the manner, of striving for precedence, even of our equals; whilst
yet we see the Son of God place himself after all his inseriours. And Lay
good hold on these lessons.
when we shall think much to resort for Sacraments, and other spiritual
comforts, to such as we conceive, to be, any way, of inferior Tale^ts to our
selves. Or else, when we shall have shame, to frequent the remedies of sin;
when here we may behold the Savior of all our souls, and the institutor of
all the holy Sacraments, through ardent charity, assist at a sermon, and
receive the water of Baptism, with profound humility, from the tongue, and
from the hand of a mortal man; himself being the King, and the God of men.

But the several spiritual aduices, which our Lord JESUS did give us by the
example of his high virtues, in this mystery, though they be in themselves of
great importance, toward the showing of his love, yet do they lessen, when
they are compared to that maine drift which he had, in this holy Baptism of
his. For his prime The principal scope which it seems that Christ our Lord
had, in his being baptized.
meaning was, (upon the cost of his Humility, and Charity, expressed by his
being thus baptized) to institute a more high, and sovereign Baptism, in the
nature of a Sacrament. By the grace whereof, all souls might be washed, and
cleansed, from sin; as certainly as any body is from spots, upon the
application of common water.

O boundles sea of love, which no ba^cks of our iniquity could keep in, from
breaking out over the whole world? His love it was, which made him undergo the
pain of putting his pure naked body under water; and of shame to be thought a
sinful creature. That so, by the merit of such love, as water washes other
creatures, himself might wash even, the very water; yea and sanctify all the
water in the world, toward the beautifying of souls, by the means of his
precious merits. How clearly does it show, that Christ our Lord is an equal,
and incomparable kind of friend to all; for he placed the remedy of all the
Original sin of little children, and both of the Original sin, and
actual, of such as are already converted and baptized to the faith of Christ
our Lord, when they are of years, not How good cheap a Christian man be
Baptized.
in the taking of generous wines, nor in the application of costly Bathes, nor
in the drinking pearls, and precious stones, distilled into some precious
liquor; but only in being touched by a little pure simple water, wherein the
beggar; is as rich, as the King.

And howsoever his holy Church, which is inspired and guided by his holy
spirit, has ordained in the exercise and use of Baptism, that ordinarily, it
shall be administered by her Priests, and in her Churches; and solemnized with
her sacred, and most significant Ritual. Roman.
Ceremonies; as namely the sign of the holy Cross, Exorcisines,
Insufflations, Inpositiou of hands, together with salt, and holy Oil, (with
diverse others, which are thought fit) to accompany an action of so great
importance; and the figures vvherof were delivered and recomended by Christ
our Lord himself, (as S. Ambrose notes) when he cured that person who was
possessed by a devil both dumb and deefe, by putttng spittle upon his tongue,
and thrusting his fingars into his ears, and saying Ephata, which is, Be
opened, (at most of which Ceremonies, though Sectaries will take liberty to
laugh and scoff; we Catholics will not be ashamed to reveal them as we
are taught to do; not only (though chiefly) for the authority and custom it
self of the holy Church, but partly also, because we see in the vvritings of
most ancient, and holy Doctors, Vide Bellar. de Sacram. Bap. l. 18. c. 26.
both frequent and venerable mention to be made thereof;) Howsoever I say all
this be true, yet nevertheless, it was the gracious pleasure of our blessed
Lord, and it is the practice of his true Spouse, the holy Church, in case that
the person to be baptized be in any extremity of danger, to forbear all those
ceremonies which cannot then conveniently be used. And it suffices for the
eternal salvation of that soul, that the water be applied, and those fevv
sacred words pronounced, which are prescribed. And this in those cases, may
be done, not only by lay men, but even by women; and all, in the virtue, and
through the love, and by the merit, of the Baptism of Christ our Lord. Lib. 2.
in Luc. Tom. 5. ser. de Baptismo.
For one man was went (as S. Ambrose says) but he washed all the world. One
man descended, that we might all ascend. One man took upon him the sins of
all, that so the sins of all, might dye in him. Our Lord was baptized, not
meaning to be cleansed by those waters, but to cleanse those very waters; that
so they being washed, by the flesh of Christ our Lord, which knew no sin;
might be intytled to the right of Baptism. Ser. de Temp.
And S. Augustine does also say, A mother there was, who brought forth a son,
and yet she was chaste; the water washed Christ, and it was made holy by him.
For as after the birth of Christ our Lord, the Chastity of the B. Virgin was
glorisied; so after his Baptisine, the sanctisication of the waters was
approved. To her (says he) afterward was virginity imparted, and upon it,
fecundity was bestowed, as we shall instantly and clearly see.

The discourse concerning Baptism is continued; and the great Love of our Lord
in the institution of that Sacrament is more declared.

CHAP. 22.
THIS Baptism, instituted thus by Christ our Lord, is both a mistical kind of
death, and withal, it is a new begetting of a soul to life. The first Adam is
put to death, that Christ our Lord, who is the second Adam, may be formed in
us. The whole world lay drowned, till thus it was fetched from under water. The
holy Apostle speaks of Baptism, as of a kind of death. Cap. 6.
For he tells the Romans, that they, and he, were washed, together with Christ
our Lord, by Baptism, unto death; that is, to sin, which is the worker and
cause of death. That as our Lord rose from the dead, by the glory of his
Father, so we may walk in newnes of life. And shortly after, whosoever of us
are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized to his death. And again, to the
Colossians, you are buried, together with him, in Baptism, in whom you are
risen to life. This Baptism is also a Regeneration, whereby we are made the
adopted sons of God, and the brethren, Coheires, and living members of Christ
our Lord. And the same Lord says: Joan. 3.
Unless you be borne again of water, and the holy Ghost, I. Pet. 1.
you shall not enter into the kingdom of God. And besides, he has regenerated
us into a living hope. This joint Resurrection with our Lord, is made to that
newnes of life, whereof the Apostle speaks else where: Colos. 2. Romans 6.
For by this Lauer we are renewed, by which we are also borne again. So that,
we see how this Baptism of Christ our Lord, according to the several parts
thereof, was a figure, in the exterior, both of the burying of our souls from
sin and of the begetting thereof to grace; his descending into the waters,
signifying the one, and his return out of them the other.

This Sacrament which was procured for us by the labor and love of our Lord
JESUS in a most particular manner, does imprint a Caracter upon the soul,
which is indeleble, for all eternities; and whereby we are maked and known, to
be the sheep of Christ our Lord. It is the gate or entrance of all the other
Sacraments, and auowed to be such, by the Council of Trent. Council. Trident.
sess. 7. Can. 9. de Sacram. in genere.
It is a necessary means, for the taking away of Original sin; and for
clothing the soul, with the primitive stole of Justice. In former ages, they
who were baptized, were called Illuminated persons; and baptism it self, was
called Illumination; and the Sacrament of Faith. Yea baptized persons, are said
to be Illuminated by the Apostle himself. It takes away both the sin, and all
that penalty, which may by due to it. It fills the soul, which grace and
virtue, and it is both necessary to salvation, and it guides to it.

The weight of which word What thing, the word Salvation does import.
Salvation, whosoever does consider well; and withal, that it is applied to
us, by such an obuious and familiar means, as this, will not be so apt to
snarle, and quarrel at the Ordination of God, as if it were a point of
cruelty, to separate such persons from himself, as reach not Baptism (through
his inscrutable judgments, for the sin of Adam, to which the whole race of
man is subject) as they will be to admire his mercy, and adore his Charity, for
chalking out such an easy way, whereby so many millions of creatures, might with
great facility decline the everlasting torments of hell, and be entytled to the
eternal joys of heaven. For this is the happy case of all them, who dye, in
their infancy, after Baptism, having formerly been subject to Original sin,
and the curse thereof which is double death; although afterward, they were to
have had no effectual means, of ever producing so much as any one good
thought. For these souls are instantly to be translated by the only means of
this holy Sacrament, to the habitation and possession of that celestial
kingdom. And there do they feel, and there do they taste, the incorruptible
fruit of that incomparable love, wherewith our Lord did make the way thither,
so easy to them.

We may well be assured of the truth of that testimony of S. John Baptist, when
he said, Ma.
That he who should baptize after him, would do it in the holy Ghost. And we
may safely say that it was the holy Ghost, which could eleuate such a poor
piece of nature as common water is, to an immediate instrument, as now we find
it, for the washing and sa^ctifying of all our souls. For instantly after the
Baptism of Christ our Lord, and the prayer which was made upon it; he saw that
the very heavens did open, which had been shut till then, by the sin of
Adam; Ibid.
and the holy Ghost descended on him, in a visible form. Which our Lord JESUS
obtained not for himself, who was already full of it, Joan. 1.
beyond all measure; but he obtained it for us, for, of his fulness we all
receive: and so there is none of us baptized, whose soul is not highly
visited by the holy Ghost. And no marvel, if (heaven having never bin seen
open before that time) such an abundance of the holy Ghost, were then
communicated to the world, which till then was little known. The promises
and blessings of that old law, were temporal, and terrene; and a land
slowing with milk and honey, was The servile condition of the people of God
under the old law.
the fairest Lure, vvherby that Carnal people could be made to stoop, to any
obedience, to the commandments of God. But now the earth was grown too
poor a token for his divine Majesty to send to then, who were so beloved by
his only begotten son; that son who in contemplation of their good, had
performed such an act of heroical call virtue in this holy Baptism of his.
And therefore heaven was set open, and the most precious treasure thereof,
Confess. l. 13. cap. 7.
sent down, to dravv men up. For the uncleanness of our spirit (as S. Augustine
says) dissolueth it self downward, through a love of cares, and the sanctity
of Gods spirit does raise us upward, by a love of secure repose. That so our
hearts may ascend up toward thee, O God, where thy spirit is carried over the
waters; and that we may arrive to that supereminent rest, when our souls shall
have passed through these waters, whereupon we can ground no rest.

But even in respect of Christ our Lord himself, though his soul were then
already so full of grace, as not to be capable of addition; yet was it most
agreeable to the usual style and the infinite just goodness of God, that the
humility of this action, should be ansvvered and acknowledged with unusual
glory. And therefore that he, who had so abased, and even (as it were) buried
himself up, in water, Joan. 1.
and submitted his head to one who was not worthy to vnty his shoe, should be
auovved from heaven with the Curtains open drawn, To be the beloved son
of God. Matt. 3.
And so, a certain and solemn instance was given, of that truth, which may
go for the daily and standing miracle of the Christian Catholic Church: That
as soon as a soul shall have truly humbled it self for the love of God, even
then it receaues and feels, a revvard from heaven which fills the heart full
of joy.

Glory then I say was due to his humility; and for as much as nothing can pay
love but love, the attribute of Beloved was also due, and best deserved by his
love. And because his love for the love of God was so immense to man, the holy
Ghost it self, (which is the al, and only infinite love) was sent down upon
him, in a visible manner, by whom it was afterward to be conveyed to men. And
even the very shape, wherein God was pleased that it should appear, may serve
to make us know, that all the actio^ did begin and end in love. For it was of a
dove; The fruytes of the holy ghost, are figured fitly in a Dove.
and what creature is more apt for love then this? What creature is more
fruitful, more speedy, more sweet, more strong, more honest, and yet more
amourous then this; Deteyning her mate when he would depart with more desire;
and expecting him, when he is absent with more joy? The dove was therefore the
sign, of the holy Ghost, which descended upon Christ our Lord; as soon as he
was baptized; to show that his heart was overwhelmed with love, both to God and
man. Whilst for the pure glory of the one, and the perfect good of the other,
he submitted himself to pain and shame; and for the sanctifying of sinners,
and that by a most sweet and easy means to us, he cared not though he were
accounted one himself. Yea not being content to be only thought so here by
men, the restlesnes of his love did work so fast upon him, as to make him not
disdain, to be mistaken therein, by the devils also; and to be tempted in the
wilderness by the Prince of darcknes, as the next discourse will declare.

Of the unspeakable Love to us which our Lord Jesus showed, in his being
tempted in the wilderness, by the Devil.

CHAP. 23.
IT is full of truth which has been said: Omnis Christi actio, vit^e nostrae
est instructio: Every action of our Lord may serve for an instruction to us, in
this life of ours. Or rather it is most true, that there is no action at all of
his, which instructs us not many ways, All the actions of Christ our Lord are
as a hidden Manna to our souls
and which is not a kind of hidden Manna, delivering to every hungry and
thirsty soul, a taste of that particular virtue, which it needs. That Christ
our Lord would be baptized, was to be enroled in the list of sinners, according
to the judgment of men; but in sine they were men, who would make that
judgment; with men, he loved, and he was come into the world to procure their
good; and at last, he knew, that he would deliver them from that error. But,
for the son of God, who was also God, to abase, and as it were forget
himself, so far, as to submit that superexcellent soul of his, which was
adored by all the Angels of heaven, to be subject (for the manifold benefit of
man) so far, as to be tempted by that damned spirit, does betoken such a
strange love to us, as puts all discourse to silence; and the best created
understanding that ever was, may be half excused if it shall loose the very
wits with wonder.

If the difference be great, between one man and another, even amongst good
men, homo homini quid praestat; if it be great between a good man and a bad, if
it be yet greater between a most wicked man, and a most glorious Saint; what
difference shall we think there is, between God, and the devil? And what
scales can have the strings long enough, to give scope that one of them may
ascend as high, and the other descend as low, as the things deserve. And yet
the love of our Lord JESUS, was so omnipotent, as to make them able to
encounter; yea and he, being the very top of altitude, did become in some
sort inferior, and did put himself below that other, whose habitation is
amongst the Princes of darkness, in the very bottom of hell.

So immense was his desire of showing love to man; that rather then not to
procure it, in the most obliging manner that could be thought, he was content
to let his greatest and most declared enemy, that inueterate rebel, the
Devil, to please himself with an imagination, that he was no more exempted
from his power, then other folks. And he suffered O miracle of love which
could induce Christ our Lord to be carved by that devil in the Air.
himself; with a strange kind of exinanition, to be carried in the air and
tossed from place to place, by that tempter; as some chicken might be, in the
claws of some cruel Bird of prey, for the space of as many miles, as it was
from the wilderness to the Temple.

If we ask what it was, which conducted him from the river of Jordan, to
the wilderness, which was the place of his Temptation, the holy Scripture
tells us, that it was his spirit, which is his love that led him thither. And
to show that he went not with any ordinary pace; but with a kind of
vehemence of impulse, though by one of the Evangelists it be said, that he was
led; by another it is affirmed, that he was no less the^ driven to the desert.

In all the actions of our Lord, there is a double kind of love, inuolued, as
if it were both the meat and sauce, upon which the soul of man may feed. The
actions themsclues, I account to be as the very meat; but the intention which
reigned in that enamoured heart of his, is as the sauce, which gives it grace
and savor, and keeps the appetite full of life. We see here, in our Lord, a
love of solicitude; an application to contemplation; that he thought the very
beasts, to be company good enough for him. And even whilst he was ingulfed,
in the very bosom of his eternal Father, he would yet endure to be A strange
indignity, most stra^gely endured, by the stre^gh of love.
taken in the arms and tempted, by that wicked spirit. We see how he gave
himself to prayer, and fasting, for the space of Forty days together. And
that, howsoever, through the advantages vvhervvith he did abound, it was in
his hand, whether although he fasted, yet he would be hungry yea or no; he
made choice at the end of that long fast, to feel the pain thereof for us.
And then we may well be sure, that there was never so great pain inflicted by
hungar as that. Both for the large extent of time, into which that fasting was
produced, (being of forty continued days and nights) and through the exact
proportion of his constitution, which endured not the least excess of any
superfluous moisture, or peccant humor, which, in many, is wont to make the
weight of hungar, much more tolerable.

But then, if we consider, that withal he was without the comfort of any of
his reasonable creatures; passing his time (as the holy Scriptures say) amongst
the beasts; That he could not but feel excessive incommodity by lodging so
long upon the open ground; That he winds and raines, in the space of forty
days, and nights, would be sure to blow hard, and to fall heavily upon him;
That his garments were loose, and consequently could not defend him from that
pain; we shall perhaps have cause to conclude that this time of his being in
the desert, gave him as exquisite a kind of affliction, as ever was endured
upon earth. These I say were his actions and passions in this mystery of his
temptation, but the intention of our good, which for love of us he had; and the
sovereign doctrine and address which he directs us, by his holy spirit, to
fetch from thence, in all occasions, is that for which we are more, if yet we
may be more, obliged to him.

The excellent examples and instructions which our Lord Jesus gave us with
great Love, in this mystery of his Temptation.

CHAP. 24.
CHRIST our Lord himself, was far from being able to grow light or vain,
upon the supernatural favors, and visions, wherewith he had been enriched from
heaven, after the humility and charity, which he had expressed to God, and us,
in his holy Baptism; and therefore, most safely he might instantly have put
himself into conversation with men of the world. But That spiritual men must
arm themselves well against vanity, and leuity. of heart.
yet because he well knew of what so^ding metal poor man is made; and that
his navigations through the tempest of this world, is found to be so dangerous,
by his carrying so little balast of solid virtue, in the bottom of his soul;
and so great a sail of self co^ceite tied to the mast of his giddy head; and
for that upon the feeling of divine comforts, men use sometimes, to make
effusion of those treasures which yet were given, but that they might be
improued, or at least laid in, against the coming (as I may say) of a dear
year, or time of tribulation; it pleased his divine, wise Goodness to show, and
that not only by words but deeds, how we were to carry our selves, in such
cases. And that when such precious liquor of extraordinary grace is conveyed
into our hearts, by the hand of God, we must procure to converse, so much the
more, within; and to stopp the bottle with extraordinary care, least else the
spirit fly a broad, and the soul remain in misery at home.

Nor was our Lord in any necessity of preparing himself, by making such a kind
of spiruuall exercise, or recollection as this, before he went in mission, for
the wynning of souls to his eternal Father; in the virtue whereof, he might
co^tynue more united with God; and that as conte^plation was to give nobility
to actio^, so action might give fecundity to contemplation. But Men are taught
to recollect themselves, before they enter, upon conuersing, and treating much
with others.
for our instruction he showed us, in himself, what we were to do; and that
before men must trust themselves, with procuring, by conversation, and
exhortation, to do good to others; they must in silence, and solitude make
upon their own accounts, in the sight of God. Casting off their sins; taking
leave of all occasions thereof; making observation of their errors past;
renewing good and particular purposes for the time to come; and in fine,
preparing themselves for the doing, and suffering with a sirme and faithful
heart, whatsoever they shall find agreeable to the holy, and wife, and strong
will of God. And because a man who is to be truly Apostolical, must by the
goodness of God procure to be fit to encounter with all the difficulties, to
which man is subject; and for that the charity of man, (as man) is so very
could, as not to look upon the miseries and calamities of others, with that
compassion which becomes the fellow creatures of so good a God, (unless first
they have tried the variety of Temptations in their own persons, and because
it is not possible for a man (without a more extraordinary grace then can be
expected) to apply fit remedies to such souls as shall be subject to
Temptation, unless himself have been sick of the same, or the like disease;
our Lord is therefore They are not good Physitia^s of others in spiritual
diseases who have not been sick themselves.
wont to suffer even his best servants, and such as he means to employ most in
making war against vice and sin, to be infested in this kind, with the
assaults of the enemy. But yet so, as that he enableth them withal (by his
grace, if they will not be wanting to themselves) to return victorious out of
the battle. And not only by these skirmishes, to abate the fury of their
foes, but to eat out the rust, which their souls had contracted by their own
former sins; and instead thereof, to fill them full of merit in themselves;
and to make them expert, and safe guides of others; and in fine, by such knocks
to hammer out, and to build up, and most richly to furnish such a house in
their hearts, as wherein the God and King of glory, may not only be co^rent, but
even glad to dwell.

They are therefore deeply in error, who think it be a sign of Gods
disfavor, if he suffer a soul to be much tempted. The argument is rather good
on the other side, to prove that it is a token of his love. For we see how
Christ our Lord himself, would be used heerin; to secure us thereby, that it
was a happy state, since himself did choose to be possessed thereof. Especially
The example of our Lord Jesus in this Temptation of his does both sanctify
Temptations to us, and strengthen us, against them.
considering, that by going so before, through his Temptations, he has broken
the heart of such others as should afterward lay hold on us; besides that he
instructs us how we are to carry our selves therein, even whilst they last. And
infallibly the love of our Lord to us, is so very tender and so pure, that by
the merit of this Temptation of his, he would have obtained the destruction and
death of all Temptations; if he had not forseene, that they should survive, for
our greater good, in case that we would use them well. And we may justly
believe, that since God refused to grant the suite of the holy Apostle, when
he had begged thrice, that Satan might no longer, buffet him with the motions
of sense, 2. Cor. 12.
it was only for the preserving him in humility, and way of provision of
greater glory; and he made him a promise of sufficient grace, whereby he should
triumph after victory.

Besides this assistance of the grace of God (which yet alone ought to be
anchor enough, for the soul of man in any difficulty whatsoever, so that the
man for his part, do concur therewith as his frailty will permit) it is
certain that his divine Majesty is so indulgent a Father to his dear
children; and does so thirst, not only after their solid good in the next life,
but even after their comfort and joy in this; that ordinarily when he
permits them to undergo any grievous Temptation of the enemy, he either
armeth them before hand, with some extraordinary comfort by way of preparatiue;
or else he visits them afterward, in some most gracious manner, by way either
of remedy, or reward. We see that it is just so in this Temptation of Christ
our Lord, and that before it, in his Baptism the heavens were opened to him;
and the holy Ghost did visibly descend upon him. And after it, the Angels did
make court about him, and do him homage; and did serve at his table, when the
fast was ended. And we also, as miserable as we seem to be in this life, have
a promise from truth it self, in another part of the holy Gospel, Luc. 22.
that they who shall have remained faithful to him, in his Temptations, (that
is to say in such afflictions as God does either send or suffer) shall both
eat and drink at his table, in his Kingdom of eternal glory. And to the end
that this might happen to us more completely, it was the gracious pleasure of
our Lord to permit himself to be assalted The several kinds of Temptation
which were offered to our Lord Jesus.
by three several ways, wherein, all kinds of Temptations might be lodged; or
to which, at least, they might be all, reduced. That so, in them, we might be
instructed and enabled to overcome in all, by his example and help, as we
shall see the Chapter following.

The Temptations which the Devil did seeketo put upon our Lord Jesus, are
declared, and opened

CHAP. 25.
THE first The 2. Temptation was delight or pleasure. Matt. 4. Luc. 4.
was a Temptation of delight or pleasure where the devil moved our Lord (by
occasion of that cause of h^gar wherein he found him) to turn stones into
bread, if it were true, that indeed, he was the son of God. But our Lord, who
knew that the Feend of hell would reap no proffit by the manifestatio^ of his
divinity (for as much as he was confirmed for all eternity in malice, upon his
first fall from Grace) would not work that miracle to no purpose; and
especially at the discretion of the devil. Or rather he would not (through his
dear and tender love to us) work a miracle, whereby he was to be freed from
suffering the pain of hungar, which he felt afterward for our sakes. But
whilst he In what kind our Lord was feeding whilst he was fasting.
fasted in one kind, he was feeding upon a banquet in another. For the food
which gave him exquisite delight, was to be doing the will of his eternal
Father, and suffering for the deliverance, and good of men. And from corporal
food, he would abstain in this first public act of his, if it were but to
reuerse that misery, which was come into the world by Adam; when he fed, with
inordinate appetite, upon the forbidden fruit of Paradise.

In the mean time his refusal to make bread, whereby he might have been fed in
that wilderness, was liberally rewarded to our Lord by his eternal Father
afterward, even in the same very kind, and in the self same or like place, of
his so great merit. For in a wilderness, as he would needs suffer hungar, he had
means afterward to multiply a few loaves, and fishes to such a quantity as
served to seed, and ouerseed thousands of men, besides women and children. To
show, that as according to that divine saying of S. Augustine which (since it
is so highly and clearly true) I would to God it were written, and worn about
the necks, Aug. Co^fes. lib. 1. cap. 22.
and in the hearts, of all the world: Iussisti Domine and sic est, vt poena sua
sibi sit omnis inordinatus animus. Thou have ordained it, O Lord, and so it is;
That the very inordinate affection it self, of every one, should be an
affliction to him that has it: so the merit of every action, which is purely
undertaken, and faithfully performed for the love of God, especially if it have
any thing in it of the heroical, will be sure to affect the mind, with a
particular kind of remuneratio^; yea so particular, as that the soul shall
know, it is for that.

The second The 2. Temptaon, was riches power. at. 4. c. 4.
Temptation wherewith this inueterate liar, did tempt our Lord, was by offering
all riches and power, which he showed him from the Top of a high mountain, and
he promised to give him the whole world, if he would adore him. A liar, I say
he is, and so he was, from the begin ning. But yet amongst all his lies, he
never told a greater then this, That it should be in his power, to give the
whole world away, he who is not the owner of one leaf which grows therein; nor
is able to move the least indivisible grain of dust upon the earth, nor any
moate in the air, without the particular leave of our Lord God. All power is
of God, and all pleasure is of him, and in him. And whatsoever is in creatures,
is but a poor participation of the infinite, which in him is found. And that
which the devil can do, is only to tempt us to steal it from the true owner.
Wheruuto, when he has induced us, and that we once return into our selves,
that which he leaves behind in our souls, is nothing but a miserable remorse
of mind, and an experimental knowledge of extreme calamity, and penury
instead of plenty; and of infamy instead of glory; and of consuming pain,
instead of any pure and perfect joy. Confess. lib. 4. cap. 12.
And most justly (as Saint Augustine says) does that, which in it self, is
sweet, grow bitter to thee, if thou commit such an act of injustice, as upon
the reason of that sweetues, to forsake and ossend our Lord who made it sweet.
And thou come (as he divinely expresses in another place,) To turn and
toss thy mind, Confess. l. 2. cap. 2.
up and down, superba deiectione, and inquieta lassitudine, with a proud kind
of baseness, and a resiles kind of wearines. This is that bargain to which the
devil, if we hearken to him can bring a soul; but to give it one hairs bread
of happiness, is neither in his power, nor in his will. For his envy and his
hate to us is such; as that the small and counterfaite pleasure which we find in
the act of any sin, is no small vexation and grief to him. And if it were in
his hand to make us sin, without taking any corporal delight at all; and to
toss us from torments in this life, to torments in the next; he would find
malice enough, for that purpose, and we should be sure never to taste any one
drop of joy, by his consent.

But where was it, that our Lord found patience and The incomprehensible
meeknes of our Lord Jesus.
meeknes enough, to keep him from rebuking that impure spirit; and from
creating a new hell of torments, into which he might have been precipitated,
for desiring to be adored, by one whom he suspected, and ought to have known
to be the son of God? where did he find it, or where could he find it but in
his own precious heart, which is a profound Sea of love, to all such as will be
capable thereof; and of pity and patience even to such as hunt after nothing
but his dishonor. 1. Pet. 2.
For when afterward our Lord was reviled, he answered not; and when he was
cursed, he prayed for them, who cast their curses upon him. And when now he was
tempted, he did not so much as turn against the devil himself; but stood
only fast in his own defense, against that Prince of the Rebellious Angels;
who was still following his old maxim, of believing that he was fit to be
adored, and will never be taught to change it, even by the experience of those
pains of hell which he has tasted already for so many ages, and is to do for
all eternities.

So spiritual, so stiff, and so tough a sin is that of Pride, which as it
will nouer be forsaken by those devils, so also is there none, to which the
misery of man in this life, is more obnoxious. The devil knowing this (at the
least, as well as we) did reserve the Temptation of The 3. temptation was to
Estimation and Honor.
Honor, for the last place; and he drew it, as the most dangerous, and deadly
wounding arrow out of his quiver, vvhervvith he hoped to fasten, upon the
soul of Christ our Lord. He took him therefore out of the desert, and carried
him to the pinnacle of the Temple; and placing him upon the top thereof, he
would feign have induced him, to cast himself down through an insinuation of
sanctity, which might be in him. For (says he) If thou be the son of God,
thou may safely do it: for it is written, that he has given his Angels
charge over thee; and that in their hands, they shall bear thee up, Matt. 4.
least perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stoue. The devil is no fool,
or babe, but he knovves, and it is most true, that if any thing be able to
shake a virtuous soul, it is a Temptation of Pride, and an ambition of Honor,
for the sanctity which is imparted to it, by our Lord God, because through any
yiedling to this Temptation, both that sanctity is lost, and God with it.

With how pestilent success, has he put this trick upon whole multitudes
of me^ at several times; who at those times were faithful servants and
Saints of God. But this blast of vanity, did so undermine their souls, as that
they fell down, and rotted, and did but serve to make a fire, vvherat the
devil might vvarme himself. But here he mist his mark; and although be
brought the ground of his Temptation of Christ our Lord, out of holy Scripture,
levvdly applied, (the only true sense vvherof the spirit of Christ our Lord did
know, and after his Ascension the holy Ghost has still imparted it to the
holy Catholic Church, where the spirit of God does yet only rest, (and
vvherby it is able to interpret truly, that holy Scripture) yet our Lord was
easily able to give him such an answer out of the same Scripture, as made him
depart with shame enough.

It is showed how we are to carry our selves in the use of holy Scripture; and
we are instructed concerning Lent; and we are encouraged toward the use
Penance; and so this mystery of the Temptation is concluded.

CHAP. 26.
BUT although our Lotd did what he did with divine wisdom, and that the
same course may be taken, by the Doctors and Pastors of his Church, to
answer, with holy Scripture, to the objections which shall be brought out
of Scripture, either by the devil, or by his servants; yet this course is not
so safe, for every ignorant and ordinary man; but rather to remit himself to
the belief and practice of the holy Catholic Church; or at least, to the
judgment of such learned Priests as are next at hand. And as for dealing with
the devil himself, it is no point, either of wit or grace, to chop Logic
with him. And we see that Luther got nothing by him, out of the arguments,
which the Devil pretended to bring out of holy Scripture, Luth. de Missa
Angulari. Tom. 7. printed at VVitemberge Anno 1558. fol. 228. and 229. D.
Bernser. 15. supra Psalm. Qui habitat.
against the Sacrifice of the Mass; for hereupon did Luther, (as himself
does plainly confess) impugn and detest that holy Sacrifice. Besides it is
the devils custom (as it is also of his disciples) to falsify the text, as S.
Bernard notes him to have done in this very place. For it says not, that the
Angels had charge over him to bear him up, that he might not knock his foot
against a stone; but that they might keep him, in all his ways. Whereupon the
Saint does challeng the devil in these terms. Quid malign etc. What is that,
O thou malign spirit, which he commanded his Angels to do? It was, that
they should keep him in all his ways. Does he peradventure say, In his
precipices? What kind of way was that, to have cast himself down, from the
pinnacle of the Temple? This is no way, but a ruin; or if it be a way, it is
no way for Christ our Lord, but for thee. Thus says Saint Bernard.

Now in this manner of cyting Scriptures, the devil is but too faithfully
imitated in his infidelity, and so has he been, by the Sectaries of all ages.
Tom. 2. Hom. 31. in Lucam.
Whereupon Origin says of the Heretics of his time: As the devil alleged
the Scriptures; so does Marcion, Basilides, and Valentinus, allege them. And
then he gives this advise. If at any time thou here a man allege a
testimony out of Scripture, be sure thou do not insta^tly approve, in thy
mind, what thou hear himsay, but first consider, who it is that speaks, and
what his judgment and belief is; least else he may counterfeit himself to be
that Saint, which he is not; and least, being infected with the poison of Take
heed of heresy how saintly soever it may look.
Heresy, he lie hidden like some wolf, in a sheeps clothing; yea least it be
the devil, who speaks to thee, of out Scripture. Now the same, which Origin
said of those Heretics of his time, is to be said, with as much truth of many
others, in this age of ours. And we are nether to believe what they say therein,
nor yet greatly to wonder at their boldness and deceit in this kind of
proceeding, since the devil, whose cause they plead, did point the^ out to it
so long ago.

The study therefore of holy Scripture, to the end of answering and consuting
the adversaries of God and his Church, must chiefly be used by them, who are
called to the office of instructing others; and for the present, we will
consider what else is taught us here, by Christ our Lord. Our Lord JESUS
fasted forty days; and although there have been Saints in the Christian
Church, who have miraculously been enabled to produce their fast into the same
length, yet does it not belong to us to imitate the same, whose forces either
of body or mind will not reach so far. But yet by that excess of our Lords
fast, we are obliged to do, what we can therein; without great prejudice to our
health, which we are bound to keep for his service.

It will become us to do this, so much the more, as Our whole life is a
Temptation.
it is certain that all this life of ours, is neither more nor less, then a
contynuall subjection to Temptation. And even in the case of Christ our Lord
himself, it is said of the Devil, when he was confounded by the answer of
our B. Savior, that yet he departed not (as one may say) for good and all; but
only for a time. And therefore Christians must make account, that they are ever
to stand upon their guard against him. For if the danger be still at hand; it
is against all reason, that we suffer the preuentious and remedies to be Far
of. And since our heavenly Master, has made us with so much love, see what
they are; we have no more to do, but to consider, and work after his example.

And though for as much as concerns fasting we must ever be using it, at
least as far as we are bound by the ordination of the holy Church; yet it
seems that this action of our B. Lord, does oblige us, in a more particular
manner, to be exact and devout, in the fast of Lent. For as much as (according
to the tradition of the Church, and the express declaration of the holy Diuus
Hier. l. 2. con. loui. c. 11. D. Max. de leiu. Quadras. D. Ambr. ser. 34. D.
Aug^epist. 119. c. 15.
Fathers) his fast in the wilderness, by the space of Forty days, did
dedicate, and sanctify, and consecrate, and auow, the fast of Lent by divine
authority. And so also in the Hier. Ep. 54. ad Marcell. Leo. ser. 6. de
Quadragis. lgna. Epist. ad Philip.
Fathers, there is abundance of proof; that as the institution of this fast,
is recomended to us by the sovereign example of our B. Lord, so the precept
thereof, and the appoiting of the time, with other circumstances, was derived
down to Christians, by no less then the Tradition of the Apostles.

But why should a heart which is truly and nobly Christian, need the spur of a
commandment, to do a thing which redoundeth so expressly to the honor, and
ought to be embraced in imitation of such a merciful, and loving Lord? It must
suffice us to know that he is gone before us, by the way of penance; and that,
howsoever his Law did not oblige us to follow him, yet his Love would. A
generous soul will not endure, to spend the days and nights in dalliance,
when such a friend and benefactour, such as omnipotent creator, and bountiful
redeemer, is keeping so strict a watch, or rather is passing the very pikes,
and entering the breach, and that not for his own, but for our good. For, our
good it was, which Christ our Lord did seek; in all our ignorances, which he
took care to instruct; in our miseries, which he applied himself to remove;
and in our comforts which he endeavored to procure and increase. And if this
have appeared in the mysteries of his holy Baptism, and Temptation it will
do so no less, if not rather more, in that which now shall present it
self, concerning the vocation of his Apostles, and Disciples to his service.

Of the great Love which our Lord Jesus showed to mankind in the Vocation of
his Aposiles.

CHAP. 27.
IT is not strange that God should show himself like God; nor consequently,
that in all the actions of Christ our Lord (who as man was Gods most excellent
instrument) his sovereign power, and wisdom, and goodness should much
appear. This is true in them all; and especially is it so, in this of the
Vocation of his Apostles, wherein he does admirably declare, quod disponat omnia
suauiter, and pertingat a fine vsque ad fine^, fortiter. That he disposes of
all things sweetly, and yet reaches, from one end to the other, with a hand of
strength. His The end of the Incarnation and Passion of Christ our Lord.
business in this world, was to redeem it, by his precious blood; the merit
whereof was to be applied to men's souls by faith, and love; and that was to be
rooted in them, by the preaching of his doctrine, and the administration of
such Sacraments, as he came to institute, in that Church which he meant to
plant. And because himself was to return to his Father, and the
reconciliation of mankind to God, was to continue in acting, till the end of
the world; he resolved upon ordayning and sending Ambassadors into it, for
that purpose. 2. Cor. 5.
As Saint Paul affirmed afterward: Pro Christo ergo legatione fungimur etc. We
Apostles and all Apostolical men, are Ambassadors sent into the world, by
Christ our Lord, for the reconciliation of it to God.

The Hypostaticall Union, whereby the Divinity of the second person of the B.
Trinity was united to the humanity of Christ our Lord, gave him power to do
what, and when he would. And he might have called his Apostles either in his
infancy, or afterward by only invisible inspirations; or else, as foone as he
meant to appear in the office of teaching. But to give us example how to carry
our selves in all our actions, and especially in such as concern the glory of
God, and the good of souls; he would not enter upon this business, till
himself had visibly been baptized, and auowed by a voice from heaven, to be
the well-beloved son of God, in reward of that deep humility, which he
exercised by such an act as that. He also differred, to call them instantly
after he was baptized; because at the first, they would not have been fit, to
accompany him in such austerity, as he resolved to endure, in the desert.
Whereby he also gave us a lesson, both to use prudence and charity, when we
have cause to serve our selves of others. He was never in any danger of being
distracted from God, in any one moment of his life; neither yet was he in
doubt, but that he should call his Apostles in such sort, as would be most
agreeable to the divine will; but yet, before he would undertake it, Luc. 6.
he retired himself into a mountain all alone. And that blessed soul, spent
the whole night in prayer, and The sovereign excellency and use of prayer.
thereby he gave us an example, how in all things we were to have recourse to
God, by that most holy exercise, as the means, whereby we might both get light
for our understanding, and heat and strength, toward the acco^plishing of his
most holy will, by the obedience of ours.

The same Lord God, who was the Creator of man, would needs also be his
Redeemer. And for as much as he, had made him, and did well discern all the
windings and turnings of his soul; he was able with admirable facility; and
felicity to guide him according to his nature. With that skill he proceeded in
the Vocation of his Apostles; some of whom he called by himself, and some were
brought by others, whom formerly himself had called. Some he drew to him, by
the force of some short and single speech; and others, by discourse, or
dialogue, of greater length. And of S. Peeter it is said; in holy Scripture,
that when S. Andrew had brought him to our Lord, he looked upon him, which is
not said of any other. Joan. 2.
Intuitus autem eum Jesus, dixit, Tu es Sinion, filius Ionae, tu vocaberis
Caephas, quod interpretatur Petrus. Thou art Simon the son of Jonas, thou
shall be called Caephas, which is, by interpretation Peter. Ibid.
Which word in Syriacke (and that was the language with our Lord did speak,
and the only language with S. Peter understood at that time) does signify as well
a Rock as the name of a man. And the word Intuitus est, does implye that our
Lord did enuisage, and look in earnest manner, upon his face. Which I hope we
shall not think, but to have been, both done and said, upon some reason of
great mystery; especially since we see, that he bespeaks him for the office of
being a Rock, whereupon next to himself, he would build his Church. In
co^formity of which divine purpose he affoarded him many most particular
favors; he cured his mother Luc. 4.
in law, in his house; he Luc. 5.
would needs teach men out of his ship; and (to omit those passages of holy
Scripture, whereby Matt. 16. Joan. 21.
he invested him with that highest dignity in his Church, in express terms)
he Matt. 17.
fetched a miraculous tribute, out of the fishes belly, which he paid, not only
for himself, but for S. Peter also, as for the heir of his house.

It had been easy for him, to have employed Angels in that ministry, to which
he vouchsafed to depute S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles; but the The
sweet providence of our Lord.
sweetness of his providence, did exact, that men, should govern men. The
Angels who were impeccable, would never have been so attractiue of sinners to
pe^nance; for we should have feared to approach to such humility and purity as
theirs, with such frailty, and pride as ours. But our Lord was pleased to
govern us by men, who were obnoxious to our infirmities. That so, by the
experience of what had passed in their own souls, they might have the more
compassion of ours; and so we might also with the more probability of
success, aspire to their practice of virtue. And they, in the mean time, were
to absolve us, not only for once, or for an hundred or a thousand times; but
for as often, as we should sin, if we grew afterward to be indeed truly
penitent.

But yet, at least, since he would needs dispatch the great business of gayning
souls, by the means of mortal creatures, a man would have thought (according
to all dictamen of humain reason) that he should have chosen, the most worthy,
and well qualified persons alive. Either for nobility and power, out of the
City of Rome, which was the Empress of the world; or out of the Provinces of
Greece, which was the Seminary of all morality and learning; or out of the
city of Jerusalem, which the opinion of sanctity, and the majesty of
Religious rites, did easily outstrip all other places. But Why our Lord made
not choice of the noble, wise, or learned men of the world for conversion
thereof. 1. Cor. 1.
he, who afterward did condemn the pride, and pleasure of the world, upon the
Cross; had before, in the choice of his Apostles, both confounded all
discourse of flesh and blood; and withal, he took care to magnify the
attributes whereof I spoke before, of his power, his wisdom, and his goodness.
By choosing (as S. Paul affirms) the mean things of the world, to confound
the noble; the weak, to confound the strong; and the things which scarce were
thought to have any substance, or being at all, to confound other things which
seemed, as it were, to beard and brave the world.

It is true, that he admitted of some few learned men for his Disciples, as
Gamaliel, and Nathanael. And of some fevv, who were rich, and noble, as
Lazarus, Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathia; that so he might not seem, to
disdain nobility, and learning; but yet his Apostles in a manner, were all,
obscure, and poor, unlearned men. Both because such persons are wont to go
more willingly after the call of Gods holy inspirations; and partly also, yea
and chiefly, to make the world confess, that when it should see whole
Provinces subdued to the faith of Christ our Lord, by the preaching of his
doctrine, out of such ignorant mouths as theirs were known to be; it might
be obliged to impute the same to no other cause, but the omnipote^t power, of
God the Father, the infinite wisdom of God the son, who is Christ our
Lord, and the inexhausted goodness of God, the holy Ghost, which was able to
do such wonders, by such weak instruments.

Now that How Moses, in some respect, was an extract of the Apostles 2. Cor.
2.
which was here fulfilled, in the person of the rude Apostles, under the
law of grace; was punctually prefigured under the written law, in the person
of Moses, who was but a shepherd, and a stammerer, and so could have no
grace, or gift of speech. But, Virtus Dei in infirmitate perficitur; The
strength and power of God is perfected and proclaimed in the weakness of man.
And Moses, could not be so vntovvard, either in fortune, or nature, for the
business which God employed him in; but the same God, could, with ease, do
those wonderful things, by his means, which he designed, for the delivery of
his people, from the servitude of Pharao. And this he wrought afterward in a
more admirable manner, by the ministry of his poor Apostles; in freing souls
from the tyranny of the spiritual Pharao, which is the devil.

The rebellious Angels, and our frail forefather Adam, were grounded at the
first, in great privileges both of grace, and nature; but through disobedience
and pride, they all fell headlong down. The Angels to hell, and Adam into a
deep dark hole, full of infirmity, and worldly care. But the Apostles, had
their foundation, and first beginning in poverty, ignorance, and simplicity;
and in fine, in a being nothing of themselves. And now as the pride of the
former, was abased; so the humility of these latter (as we shall see in the
Chapter following) was exalted by the holy and mighty hand of God; whose name
be ever blessed, for the glory which he gives himself, by his own goodness.

The incomparable Love wherewith our Lord instantly rewarded the speedy
obedience of the Apostles.

CHAP. 28.
SVCH men as these they were, whom our Lord designed to the Apostolate; which
yet was the most excellent, and most eminent office, in the Church of God. And
he vouchsafed to inuit them, with such strength, as well as with such
tenderness of love, that they came when they were called. They did it instantly,
and cheerfully, and absolutely. Saint Peter and S. Andrew, Marc. 1.
were casting their netts into the Sea, and immediately upon the fight, and
voice of our Lord Jesus, who bad them come and follow him; Matthew. 4.
they went, and left their netts, in the act of their falling into the water;
without staying so long, as might serve to draw them up again. And much less
did they delay, till they saw what draught they might chance to have. Ibid.
S. John and S. James, were in the act of mending their netts; and upon the
very first sight, and hearing of the voice of Christ our Lord, who called them
to him, they did not so much as fasten one stitch, or tie one knot; but
immediately they put themselves upon following him. Leaving not only their
netts, but abandoning even their very father, through the desire they had to
comply, at full speed, with the inspiration of God; which spoke more lowdly to
their hearts, then the voice of Christ our Lord as man, had done to their ears
of flesh, and blood.

S. Matthew (as is touched, Matt. 9.
both before, and afterward) was in the The admirable conversion of S. Matthew.
Custom house, in the midst of a world of reckonings and accounts; he was in
the very act of sinning; the company which he was in would not fail to
encourage him in doing ill; but yet our Lord had no sooner bid him follow him,
but he left all, at the very instant, without so much as saluting his friends;
yea this he did, with such excess of joy, as that, to show the comfort of his
heart, he feasted his new Lord and master. The world is full of men who can
write and read; but there are not so very many, who cast account so well, as
this B. Apostle knew how to do. Preferring God before the world, and the
treasures of divine grace, before the corruptible riches of this life; and
lending such a watchful, and listening care to the inspirations of almighty
God; in the obedience whereof, it was, but for our Lord to call, and him to come.

But neither he, nor those others, were in danger of Men are far from loosing
by giving much to God.
loosing any thing, by obeying the voice of Christ our Lord. To whom,
although, for the trial of their love, and for the increase of their merit, he
made no promise at all, when he called the^, (but only to those fishers, that
he would make them fishers of men) yet afterward, he made them know, that
they had to do with a liberal God. And for as much as they had left their
little commodities to follovv him, who seemed to have less; and for that they
had so generously contemned the care of friends and goods, for his love; and in
regard that they had put themselves instantly, and franckly upon his service,
(without asking any day; or desiring to be assured of any condition) he was
quickly pleased to show the very bovvells of his mercy toward them. They
were opened before, but then did he let them see, how he had lodged them all,
therein. For The unspeakable favor with our Lord lesus imparted to his
Apostles, in regard that they had left their little All for him.
he admitted them instantly, into his own divine conversation; he instructed
them by his heavenly doctrine; He gave them a dominion over devils, that they
might expel them out of the bodies of men. He made them know, that he would
leave them Ambassadors, in his place between God and the world. That they
should have power, to offer, consecrate, and consummate his own precious body
and blood. And to remit or retain the sins of men, according to that spirit
of wisdom, and the authority which he would impart to them, for that
purpose. And that so, they must grow to be Treasurers of eternal riches; and
administrators of all his divine Sacraments; and Doctors of the whole world.
And they being so frail, and imperfect men as we have shevved before, he
assumed them, to a kind of participation of his own Empire, over heaven and
earth; and to a spiritual kind of principality above all the Monarks of the
world. And that which more imports then all this, he declared, that they
should sit, together with himself upon his throne; and at the day of
Judgment, give sentence upon the Twelve Tribes of Israel, vvherby the whole
world is designed.

So How infinitely we gain, by giving al to God.
that here we have means to see, at how high a rate that money is put out to
use, which we present to God. I mean, what infinite gain is raised, by
making a deed of gift of the miserable little thing which we have, and are, to
that immense goodness of his. By harkening with a diligent and faith full heart,
to his holy inspirations, vvherby he vvoes us to become his; that in exchange,
he may be ours. It is true that he desires to have all, or none, and he has
reason. For if this soul of ours (with being so poor a thing as it is) be yet
of such capacity, as that nothing which is less then God himself, can content
and fill it; what a brutish thought, would it be in us to conceive; That our
God himself, could be contented to enjoy but a part of us, who are things of
nothing; and who were all created by him; and who are his, and only his by so
many tytles, that hell it self is a punishment, which comes not home to the
crime, of our dividing the soul, between him, and creatures. He being the sole
and supreme truth; and all All that which concerns creatures is a mere lie,
whenever it disobeyeth God, or draws us from him, Confess. lib. 10. cap. 22.
creatures, no better then a pure and perfect lie; in whatsoever they say they
are, or would seem to be, otherwise then as they yield obedience to the divine
Majesty. S. Augustine does excellently express this particular, when
(reuersing the wandering steps of his ill governed youth, in the way of
confession to almighty God) he delivers himself in this manner. Thou art
supreme truth, who presidest over all things. Loath I was to loose thee; but,
through my covetousness, I desired to possess a Lie together with thee. This
was the reason why I lost thee, because thou disdainst to be enjoyed, in the
company of a lie.

The Apostles therefore when they were called did instantly, and wholly give
themselves away, with all they had. And though the goods which they left, were
not a matter, in themselves, of any moment; yet they were esteemed to have
given much, because those happy men, reserved nothing to themselves. And with
the same affection, through which they had left that little, they were as ready
to have left a thousand worlds, for the love of Christ our Lord. And S. Peter,
afterward, was not afraid, to put our Lord in mind thereof; by these words, of
his innocent, and confident, Matt. 19.
ardent, tender love. Behold, we have left all things, and followed thee; what
therefore will thou do for us? He said not, that he had left his netts, or his
house, or his boat, or this, or that; but absolutely, that he had left all
things. And The infinite liberality of our Lord Jesus.
our Lord made him this answer, with no less then the bounty of a God: Amen,
Amen etc. (which declares a most serious affirmation or protestation) You who
have followed me, shall sit upon thrones, at the resurrection of the just, and
you shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And whosoever shall have left his
Father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or house, or land, for my names sake;
shall have a hundred fold in this world, and afterward, shall possess eternal
life.

Yea so liberal is our Lord JESUS, as to reward with no less then heaven, for
every instant of that time, which we dispose our selves to employ upon his
service. And yet his excellency is such, as that, even the very, only, doing
him any little service, is of so great happiness, to a faithful soul; as that
it, alone, is an ouer-pay foral the pains that can be taken in this life. But
to show that our Lord is scarce able to differ the recompense of such as
follow him, with a ready will; we shall see in the next Chapter, how he takes
some of them, as it were, into the joys of heaven, before their time. And he,
who Note here the excellent love of Christ our Lord.
would not have them present, when he was tempted, and solitary, and in act of
penance, because perhaps they were not so able to feed so soon, upon such
crosses, or hard crusts as those, did yet resolve that he would not have some
of them absent, when he was to be Transfigured upon the hill. But that, in
recompense of their beginning to do him service, and for the strengthening of
their Faith, and Hope, and Love in the process of it, they should taste a dropp
of that glory, wherewith they were to be inebriated in heaven.

Of the excessive Love which our Lord Jesus showed to man in the mystery of the
Transfiguration.

CHAP. 29.
THE Temptation, and Transfiguration of our Lord JESUS; are lively instances of
how hard things he desired to suffer, and how excellent things he desired to
do for us; which two, ^^e the most certain tokens True love desires, not only
to do great things, but to suffer hard things. Matt. 17.
of true love. We have already considered of his Temptation, and now this
Mystery of his Transfiguration is thus related, in the sacred text. That our
Lord took Saint Peter, S. James, and S. John, into the top of a high, and
solitary mountain, to the end that he might pray; That whilst he The manner of
the Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus.
was praying he grew to be transfigured before them. That his face did shine
like the sun: That his garments were as white as snow. That Moses and Elyas
appeared also, and were speaking with him; That their discourse was of that
excess of love, which he would show in the passion, through which, he was to
pass in Jerusalem; That S Peter was so rapt with joy, as to say: That it was
good being there; and to beg of our Lord that there, they might have still
remained; but that before he had ended his speech, a bright cloud came down,
which ouershadowed them; and this voice was thundered out from thence, This is
my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Upon the noise of this
voice; the Disciples fell prostrate upon their faces as being much a frayd; but
our Lord Jesus drew near, and touched them and said withal, rise up, and do
not fear; and when they looked up, they saw none but only Jesus. And as they
were going down the hill, he commanded them not to speak of that vision,
till he should be risen from the dead.

This glorious miracle did shine in the exterior of our Lord so vehemently, as
to send the beams thereof, to his Disciples; but it was the flame of love,
which (burning so hot in his divine heart) did break out much more upon them;
that so their souls, and ours by theirs might be set on fire. He had then
lately, been telling them, of his passion which was to come; That he was to
endure, many, and grievous things; That he was to be condemned by the high
Priests; That he was to suffer death, and then to rise; He had further said,
that for their good they must be imitatours of him; and that, howsoever the way
of the Cross might fall out to be hard, and stony; yet there was no remedy,
but they must run it through. And now, least their minds might have been
oppressed with inordinate grief; or else assaulted afterward with unbelief;
or, at least, discouraged by the difficulties of this life, which he knew was
to prove so painful to them, for the service of God; his A particular reason
why our Lord would be transfgured before some of his Apostles.
heart of love could no longer hold, from expressing it self toward the^, in
some such kind, as might, not only strengthen them against all fear, of future
harm; but might solace them also, in abundant manner, both with the present
sense of excessive joy, and an infallible expectation, of much more to follow
afterward. And when he had conveyed the notice of his passion, like a bitter
dose of pills into their minds; he did like a careful Physician, put a
spoonful of Conserve after it, into their mouths; least otherwise they might
chance, to have cast their Physic.

As generally in holy Scripture, so particularly, in this mystery of the
Transfiguration, and of the joy which was commuicated to the Disciples, by
means thereof, the expressio^s even of things which are very great, are yet
very positive and plain, as I shall also show elsewhere. And Saint Peter only
said, Bonum est nos hic esse. It is good for us to be here. But This seems to
have been but a small expressio^ of joy, but inded it was very great, and why.
though this may seem to be but a lean and hungry kind of signification of
his joy, for his having been made participant of that high vision; yet indeed,
it was such a one, as could not well be more endeared. To have said, that it
had been better, to be in the top of that high mountain, with Christ our
Lord, then to have been in the midst of all the treasures, and pleasures of the
world below; had been to allow a kind of goodness to these other things; though
infeririour, to that, which there he felt. For to say that one thing is better
then another, does leave a power in that other thing to be good. But by only
saying that this was good, it rather seems to follow, that whatsoever was
lower and less then this, would not be good. S. Peter was here, in a kind of
middle Region of the air, betewne ordinary grace below, and glory above. And as
he could not say, that his then present condition, was any more then good, in
regard that nothing of this life was so good, or indeed, that it was absolutely
good at all; so neither could he say, that it was any more then good in regard
of the joys which are felt in heaven. And therefore he said not, that it was a
sovereign, or an infinite good, which is only enjoyed in that next life, by
the sight of God. Exodus 33.
That sight, is that Omne bonum, which was promised, by our Lord God, that he
would show his servant Moses in heaven. This other, is that bonum, which now
was showed to his Apostles here on earth.

But though it were but bonum, in comparison of that infinite good, yet if this
(such as it was) had been set by the whole world of worldly pleasures, they
would all, have straight appeared, to be but dirt, and trash; and this, would
have shined like a second heaven of glory, in comparison of them. We must
therefore be far from thinking meanly of it; but rather we are to call our
wits about us, and to argue thus. If some What wonders the holy ghost does
work in the soul of man.
influence or visitation of the holy Ghost, whilst it does but slip into the
soul of man, be able to comfort him, when he was laid, though never so low in
the bed of distress, and desolation. If some extraordinary communication of
Gods Spirit, can eleuate the soul, not only above all other creatures, but
even above it self; so, as not only to disgust it, and that for ever, from all
humane hopes or fears; but to make it half forget, that there is any other
thing but God. If some true Revelation, or divine imaginary vision, (such as
our Lord does sometimes communicate to his friends and favorites in this life)
when, and why it pleases him (as we find recorded in their lives) does
sometimes so inebriate, and fix, and transform the^ into him; as they may
rather be said to swym and bath at ease, in a sea of comfort, then to travel,
and trudge by land, in a desert full of difficulties and distress; what effect
shall we think this vision of visions did work in the mind of the B.
Apostles? Who saw not what they saw, by imagination only; but they had, before
the eyes, both of their body and mind, the humanity of Christ our Lord, all in
glory, with Moses and Elias, doing him homage, in the name of both those
worlds, which lived either under the law of nature, or the written law.

The incomparable joy which the Apostles took through the love which our Lord
Jesus showed them in his Transfiguration: and how himself was content to want
the glory of it, both before, and after, for the love of them.

CHAP. 30.
THE sun does fall far short, to express the beauteous brightness of his
face: for if The beauty of all glorified bodies.
any one of the glorified bodies, shall be as bright as is the sun, then is
it certain that if all the stars in heaven should be so many several s^ns,
they would al be but as mud, or ink, in comparison of the sple^dour of Christ
our Lord; and of what brightness then, must his face have been? His garments
were said to have been as white as snow, Ibid.
and that no dyer upon earth was able to arrive to such a height of whitenes.
To show, that both art and nature, may have some little rese^blance, but are
able to carry no full proportion with things of the other world. They were
ouershadowed with a cloud, but even that very cloud was bright. For as the
brightness of this world is indeed but a kind of light-coloured black; so that,
which in the other, is least bright, does infinitely exceed whatsoever we can
here conceive, to be so, most. At the thundering of that voice, they were
indeed. stricken with fear, yet we may safely say, that they were more afraid,
then hurt. And They are happy and glorious frightes, which grow upon souls
upon such supernatural occasions. 2. Pet. 1.
howsoever for the time, the high Majesty of the mystery, did ouerwhesme them;
yet withal, it struck such a deep root of most reverent admiring love into
their hearts, as they never knew how to forget. And S. Peter and S. John, could
not fail in their several Epistles, to produce the Record of this
Transfiguration of our Lord, upon the holy hill, as a principal evidence of
his glory, and their joy.

I, imagine this terror of theirs to have been resembled in some sort, by that
state of mind, which the divine S Augustine had found in himself (though
incomparably after an inferior manner) when he spoke these words; Confess. l.
11. cap. 9.
Quid est hoc quod interlucit mihi, and percutit cor me^ sine laesione? and
inhorresco, and inardesco. Inhorresco in quantum dissimilis tui sum; and
inardesco in quant^ similis tui sum. What is that, o Lord, which so brightly
shootes in upon me, and which strikes my heart through, without hurting it? And
I tremble with horror; and yet I burn with love. I tremble, for as much as I
am unlike thee; and for as much, as I am like thee, I burn with love. So did
the Apostles tremble; and so, and much more then so, did they burn with love,
through the fire wherewith our Lord had inflamed them first.

But the same love which wrought upon them in this mystery, by way of hear;
might also work upon them in that extaticall joy which they received thereby,
by way of light, to make the^ see of how sublime glory he was content to
deprive his sacred humanity for love of them; both from his holy Nativity, till
that time, and from that time, until his death. For the superior part of his
happy soul, from the very first instant of his conception, and even in the
bottom of his bitterest passion, did continually, and as certainly enjoy the
Our Lord Jesus was still endued with the Beautificall vision.
Beatificall vision of God, as now it does, at the right hand of his Father. So
also, did it in Justice, belong to his sacred flesh and blood, to enjoy all the
privileges of a glorified body, as Clarity, Immortality, Subtility, and
Impassibility. And because these indowments were incompatible with those
dolours and death, which he designed, through the excess of his love, to
suffer for our more copious Redemption; he did therefore suspend those
influences of glory, upon his humanity. So, that the miracle falls out to be,
not to find him thus, for a short time, transfigured toward glory, upon that
holy hill; but to find him, in this valley of misery throughout all those three
and thirty years of his life transfigured, toward humility, and contempt, and
pain; him I say who ought in right, to have regorged in complete glory.

The inferior part of his soul (that is to say the sensitive appetite thereof)
ought also to have been glorious entirely, and at all the instants of his
mortal life. And yet for love of us, he suspended also the glory due to that;
to the end that in his love he might have the larger leave to suffer for us.
And that he might feel, all those afflictions of mind for our sakes; and for
the propitiation of our sins; and for the purchase of grace from God which we
find him to have endured, throughout the rest of all his sad days, and nights,
and particularly to have cost him once so dear, as to have made him pay a
sweat of blood. Yea and for as much as concerns this feeling part of his
soul, we are not so very certain, that it was not suspended in him, Luc. 22.
even for this short time of his tra^sfiguration. Nor was it necessary that it
should feel the same joy, for those reasons, upon which his body was
tra^sfigured. But of this we in the midst of that glory the love of our Lord
carried him to speak of his passion, with Moses and Elias.
are sure, that even then, his speech was of the passion, and he was in
contemplation of the causes, why it was to be endured; and that might well
affect his mind with great sense of grief.

Nay even that very glory, which his B. body might the^ enjoy, may rather, in
some respects, go for a surcharge to him of misery, then for any access of
felicity. For that ease in suffering disgrace, and difficulties, which if he
had would, he might have gotten (as a man may say) by the long continued
practice thereof; was now removed, by this glimse, and taste of glory. And he The
grief which our Lord felt afterward must needs be the more paynfull to him,
for his having felt this glory, soon before.
was after it, to begin the same lesson of feeling grief again; as if he
had never learnt it before. And if a Prince, falling into extreme calamity,
would feel it incomparably the more, through that riches and abundance, wherein
he had lived till then; how much more painful to our Lord must those
afflictions and persecutions needs be, which came to him after his
transsiguration, then if the Transfiguration had never been? So that, upon all
these reasons, and by all these means, he does admirably express his tender
love to us, for as much as he would not only live so long without that glory,
which was his due, but moreover because when he would enjoy it, yet he would
do it but for so short a time; and again because he sought our joy and
comfort, and not his own therein. Nay for as much as concerned himself, his
then future pain and scorn, was perhaps to be felt by him with a quicker
sense, then if never he had admitted of that glory, and joy.

The most excellent instructions which our Lord, through his love did give to
man, in this mystery of the Transfiguration.

CHAP. 31.
I Should enlarge my self too much, if I would particularize and press those
instructions, which our Lord did give to all his disciples both living then,
and succeeding afterward, in that silent sermon of his Transfiguration; and we
have reason to take them all, as so many tokens of his tender love to us. But
because they may seem so, rather by inference and reflection, then by way of
lineall and direct expression, I will content my self briefly to point them
out.

In the first place we are told, that he assumed those holy and happy disciples
of his, up the hill; and thereby we are taught, that we cannot clymbe, but when
he takes us by the hand. By telling us also that he would not be transfigured
before them, but upon the hill; he tells us, that unless she aspire toward No
solid and sublime gust in God with out a serious study of perfection.
Perfction, we must content our selves, without tasting the delicious fruits
of Conte^plation. Again we are here expressly told, that Christ our Lord went
up to pray; and that whilst he was in prayer, this rapt of Transfiguration came
upon him. So that, as it was by prayer, and conversation with God, that Moses
came down from the hill with such a deal of light in his face; by prayer also
it is, that we may receive innumerable graces; and may grow to be transformed
in mind, which imports us more, then to be transfigured in body.

By letting us know that he was transfigured only, for that time; he gives us
to understand, how he hid his excellencies both till then, and ever afterward;
and thereby he proclaims to us, by a loud voice, how The more we hide our
selves from the view of men, the more open shall we be to the gracious eyes of
God. Ibid.
careful we must be, to hide our fa^ours and privileges from the eyes of men.
And the same was also taught yet again, when our Lord JESUS commanded
afterward, that they should not speak of that vision, till he were risen from
the dead. By mentioning the Passion, when he was in the midst of the
Transfiguration, we are instructed how to carry our selves in the varieties and
changes of this life. For in the winter of distress, we must keep our selves
alive, by the memory, or hope of some consolation either to come, or past. And
in the spring, or Summer of spiritual joy, we must free our selves from
growing vain, or giddy, by thinking of some approach of desolation.

By the fear of the holy Apostles, we may see the misery of man's nature;
Confel. lib. 11. cap. 9.
which was so ill dressed by Adam, that as S. Augustine says: Sic infirmatus est
in egestate mea vigor meus, vt non sufferam bonum meum: So is my vigor taken
down in this infirmity of my condition, that I cannot, so much as endure mine
own good; as here the Apostles were frighted even by the fight of so much
glory, as attends the speaking of a word from heaven. And how then must we
reuere, with a most profound internal awe, that God of inaccessible light, and
infinite Majesty, (whose essence is wholly vnconceaueable) since his words
cannot be heard, without extreme apprehension, by such worms of misery as we
are. By the coming of that voice, which was so soon to break off the vision,
whilst they were in the midst of those celestial joys (by which voice our B.
Lord, was declared to be the beloved son of God, and that they were commanded
to hear him) they, and we are made to know, that we are not, in this world, to
look for a state of contynuall inioying, but of laboring. The This is a world
of sowing and the other of reaping.
seeing of God, and the being to do so eternally, belongs to heaven; in this
life, we are not to look for seeing, but we must attend to hearing, and (which
is meant thereby) to obeying.

Heerby he also tells us, that we must not demurre, even in the most spiritual
gusts, which we may have; when obedience, or charity, commands the contrary.
Especially since our Lord himself, made such have to give over his
Transfiguration, that he might descend, and so proceed, first to preaching, and
then afterward, toward his pasion. For there was his heart, because his love
was ever looking toward us; and had not that same very love of us, obliged him
to be glorious at that time for our sakes, since the members could not partake
of any such influence, which came not first from the head (yea and even if they
could have done it, yet would it not have been so full of savor to them,
unless first it had passed from him) it appears well enough, both by the
antecedents and consequences of his sacred life, that he was not either greedy
after pleasure, or weary of taking pains for us.

Love, and pure love it was, which kept his glory, all that while in silence.
Love it was, which made him mortify himself (as a man may say) with taking
into his mouth, that only taste of joy. And lastly an everlasting love it was,
which carried him, in such have, from Mount Thabor, to Mount Caluary; where he
was, to be transfigured a feco^d time, but after a far other manner. For How
our Lord Jesus was Transsigured the second time upon mount Caluary.
instead of glory, he was to be all clad with a kind of Leprosy. His face was
not to be resplendent, but laden, partly with impure spittle, and partly
with his own pure sweat, and precious blood; which made a strange kind of
marriage together, in that sacred and most venerable Temple of the divinity.
His garments were no more to be white, but spotted with dust and filth; and the
soldiers were to dispose of them, by lotts. He was not to be placed between a
Moses, and an Elias; but to give him the more solemn and bitter scorn, he
was to be lodged between two murdering thecues. No bright shyning cloud was
there to appear, to do him honor; but the Sun would be ashamed to behold
the son of man so lewdly treated; and darkness would cover the whole earth.

Since therefore we see such deadly signs of love in his precious heart toward
us; and we may have the honor to be taught by him, how to guide our lives; let
us dispose our selves, with supreme reverence, to give our ears and hearts,
Our Lord Jesus is declared our Doctor from heaven.
to the divine words of his mouth; since he is made our Doctor, by no less
then a voice which comes from heaven it self; and that, in the name of the
eternal Father, saying, That Christ our Lord is his beloved son, in whom he
is so highly pleased, and that him, we must be sure to hear.

We will besides adore him, for presenting us, with this admirable vision,
whereby he has so abundantly enriched his Church. Whose faith he has
strengthened; whose hope he has revived; whose charity he has inflamed; whose
holy fear and reverence, he has rooted deeply by means thereof. Instructing
us (as Father Salmeron does excellently observe) concerning the B. Trinity The
Father the Son, and the holy Ghost.
in the voice; in the son; and the cloud. Concerning the Incarnation of
Christ our Lord, his Doctrine, and Preaching, by the address which we receive
of harkening to him. His pasion and death, by the excess which he was to
fulfill in Jerusalem. The certainty of his Resurrection, and glory, and
consequently of our own. The abrogation of the old law, through the
establishme^t of the new, by the Fathers voice, concerning the son. It taught
them of Lymbus, from whence the soul of Moses came. It taught the
Terrestrial Paradise, where Elias is belceued to repose. It taught the
militant Church in the person of the three B. Apostles. But let us, (as I was
saying) give ear to Christ our Lord, whose doctrine, his heavenly Father and
ours, has assigned us to. For he it is, who will teach us, both these, and all
things else, which it may any way import us to understand, as I will instantly
begin to show.

Of the unspeakable love, which our Lord Jesus showed by deliueriug to us his
admirable Doctrine, and of the manner which he held in teaching us.

CHAP. 32.
OUR Lord Jesus came into the world for three maine reasons, amongst, and above
many others. To teach us the way to heaven by his divine Doctrine; and to guide
us by his admirable example; and to redeem us by his most precious blood. But
as we should be nothing the better for knowing the way to any place, Ser. de
Ascen. Dom. 4.
if still we were deteyned in some prison; so neither (as S. Bernard says)
should we be the better for knowing our iorneyes end, if withal we knew not
the way which leads thither. It pleased therefore our Lord Jesus, to declare
his doctrine to the world. And because, according to Aristotle, Doctio and
Disciplina, are Relatiues, for as much as he is become our Doctor, we are
already made his Disciples if we will. The same Aristotle, was Alexanders
Master; and his Father Philip King of Macedon, did esteem it for no small
part of his own happiness, that his son was borne, in a time, when he might
be instructed by so worthy a person. And yet that worthy person, was a mortal
wicked man; whose understanding (though very eminent) was yet full of error in
many things; and his will more full of disorder. Whereas this divine The
difference of Christ our Lord from other Doctors.
Doctor of ours, was both truth, and sanctity it self.

A Doctor he was, and that most excellent and complete, without ever having
been any man's Disciple. Such others, as have never been Disciples, do no more
use to prove good Doctors, then men prove good Captains, who have never been
soldiers; or good superiors, who have never been subjects. I deny not but
some have been good Doctors who never were the disciples of men; as for
example, Moses, and the other Prophets. But besides that, all they, were
instructed by the wisdom of God, in supernatuall manner, yet neither did they
teach, in such perfection as may be compararable, by innumerable degrees, to
this, of our divine Doctor. Nor yet did they give, the hand, together with the
torch; nor the wood, together with the coal of fire; nor strength to execute,
together with the direction, of what men were to do. Whereas The great efficacy
which only belongs to the Doctrine of Christ our Lord.
Christ our Lord, together with those divine words of his own sacred mouth, did
make such a high way, by the sweet gracious breath of his holy spirit, into
the hearts of such as heard them, (though yet sometimes they were deaf enough)
as made then receive them, and lay them up; and in conformity thereof, to
perform things, in a short time, of extreme difficulty, and contradiction to
sense, with excessive gust.

How infinitely therefore are we obliged to this Lord of ours, who was
designed, from all eternity, and did accept that himself would An
unspeakable mercy that Christ our Lord would teach us by him. self.
teach us, by himself. For there was no remedy; his love could not be
satisfied, with doing less then all. Nor would he permit that any Doctor,
who was less then his very self, should have the chief instructing We are
also taught by meant but that is only, as by the instruments of God.
of our souls. Now his Doctrine being his, must needs be infallible, because
he is God. And to the end that it might not be too high, or hard for our
capacities, he resolved, as it were, to tame that divinity of his, and to take
it, and tie it up, in the nets, and toils, of flesh and blood. And so, being
incarnate, he vouchsafed to converse amongst us; and as it were to vvatch his
times, (those mollis fandi tempora) vvherin we might be likeliest to receive
that treasure of divine knowledge, which had power to remove our gross
ignorance.

They who travail up and down the world, know by experience, how glad
they use to be, if, vvandring out of the way, they meet some man, who sets
them right; though it be but toward a nights lodging, in a poor Inn, which
sometimes is incomodious enough. And such as give themselves to study, and are
either ignorant of what they would feign understand, or perplexed otherwise
through any difficulty which may occur; are wont to accompany and attend
with extraordinary reverence and affection, those teachers under whom they
were brought up, and by whose means they acquired knowledge. Which They are
very ungrateful who perform not great respects, to such as have been their
teachers.
kind of gratitude, is so deeply rooted in the minds of such as are ingenuous,
that as long as they live, they retain the memory of that benefit; and there
is no strangenes, or small unkindness, which can blot it out. We must therefore
beseech our Lord JESUS to make us thankful to his divine Majesty in a high
degree, for his vouchsafing to exercise the office of a teacher over us. Not
through the care he has, to keep us only from vvandring between town and
town; or to work through the difficulties of human knowledge, which
unless it be well used, is better left then had: Nor only does he this, for
some certain time, vvherin a course of study may be ended: but he teaches us
spiritual things, which are to be as long loved as eternity it self; and
instead of discharging, by any later negligence of his, our former obligations,
to love and serve him for it, he is ever calling upon us with new favors.
And instead of absenting himself from us, his essence, power, and his grace
is present to our souls, yea so present (and especially to such as serve him
with care) that although he be as S. Augustine says, superior summo meo;
Confess. l. 3. cap. 6.
yet vvithall he is interior intimo meo. And in another place, Though he be
omni luce clarior etc. Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 1.
yet he is omni secreto interior, superior to the highest part, and yet he is
more interior, then the most inward part of us; Cleerer then the clearest
light, and yet he is more internal, then the most hidden secret. Illuminating,
and teaching by particular favors, those souls which listen to him with
particular attentio^; according, to the good counsel of the same S.
Augustine, Audiat te intus sermocinantem, Confess. lib. 11. cap. 9.
qui potest: Let him that can be so happy, give ear to that, which thou, O
God, art saying to him, there, within. And instructing all such, as are
desirous to save their souls, by doing him service, not only with a
sufficiency, but even with an oueraboundance of his divine grace.

Of the tender love which our Lord Jesus showed, by the incommodity which he
was subject to, whilst he delivered his Doctrine, to us; and of the surfeit
which some are sublect to, if we take not heed, by the abundance of his
blesings.

CHAP. 33.
THE Doctors and Teachers of this world, use to be at their ease when they
give their lessons; and for fear least crowds should come in upon them, they
are separated and secured, by chaires, or pulpits. Many of them, teach for
hire; many, for ostentation; and few for mere love of God, or of his
creatures, and the pure desire of their profit in virtue and learning. And as
for those Religious men who undertake the troublesome task of doing good to
the world in this kind, for the love of our Lord; that love of theirs (though
The great ser^^ce which is done to God and the world, by such as instruct youth
in virtue and learning, for pure charity.
of most excellent service to God and man) is but a spark which has conveyed
it self, out of the furnace of the love of Christ our Lord, by the merit of
his Magistery; who is the only original master of all mankind. And he it is,
who obtained grace for those others, to become, and to be such, as by his
goodness, we see they are. But yet by the great mercy of God, it is made a rare
case with these his servants, to be put upon those extreme difficulties,
(unless it be amongst Heretics, and Pagans) in the exercise of this function,
from which his ardent love, would never give him leave to be free. For even
from his first, to his last Baptism, (that is, from the Baptism of water in
the River of Jordan, to the Baptism, in the blood of that Imaculat clambe,
which was himself, upon Mount Caluary) he went, teaching up and down the
world, in a kind of perpetual motion: And was subject to a most unkind
continual persecution, by the most part of them, whom he did most
particularly apply himself to instruct, and teach.

It is true, that his Apostles, and Disciples, did follow him throughout, with
extreme affection and admiration; but yet withal, they were so very ignorant
and unlearned, as could have given no pleasure in teaching them, to any other,
but to Christ our Lord. What It is a great mor tification for a wise and worthy
person to betyed to the continual conversation of ignorant rude people.
greater mortificatio^ can there be, then, for a wise, and worthy, and noble
person, to be perpetually conuersing with certain course, unpolished
creatures; without fashion, without learning, without means, and without so
much as aptitude to be the better by it. And yet our Lord JESUS, was daily in
conversation with such as these. Who knew not how to gather the fruit of that
tree of his divine wisdom; though the weight thereof, did make the branches
stoop so low, as that they might be, within their reach. How The great meeknes
of our Lord Jesus.
meekely did he live in their sight; which was a kind of most effectual
Doctrine. How continually did he accompany them, how carefully did he defend
them; how sweetly did he allure them; and how strongly did he convince them.

And all this he did, in the midst of a thousand corporal incomodities, of
labor, and hungar; when after the day was spent in continual penance, the
nights would lay hold on him without a lodging. The Foxes had holes, Matt. 8.
and the birds of the air had nests, but the son of man, the son of that
all-Immaculate woman, that virgin mother, that type of purity, that torch of
charity, had not a place where to lay his divine head. But (to the consusion of
impatient men who are angry even with their best friends, when they change to
be) pinched otherwise, he was far from caring for any other habitation; but
only that he might dwell in the hearts of men by love.

Of his Apostles we read, that once, when they had wherwithall, they went to
Sichar to buy meat; and returning, they invited our B. Lord to eat thereof.
But he excused himself by saying, Joan. 4.
that he had another invisible food The principal food our Lord Jesus, was the
glory of God and the good of man Ibid.
which they knew not of; and that was the performance of his eternal Fathers
will, and the perfecting of the work of the good of souls, by the words of
his divine mouth. And after this food, he had so fierce an appetite, that he
ran panting toward it; and that so very fast, as to make himself weary though
he were God; and to be glad to make a seat of that well side, to which the
happy Samaritane came for water.

It is also true, that Christ our Lord was often invited to eat with others,
and he accepted thereof; nay, and he was not invited so much by their desires,
as he was by his own love to their souls; and for their good, he made
himself all, to all. For he did eat with them to the end that men might not
want the Doctrine of his divine example, both in the point of Temperance and
Patience. But many of those meats were otherwise of much more mortification to
him in several kinds, then the want thereof, could have been; Since it was not
in the power of that heavenly wisdom to continue untouched by those teeth of
malice, which upon all warnings were gnashing toward him. But The wicked use
which the jews made of our Lords benignity toward them. Matt. 11.
from his facility of descending into their company; and the resolution, that
(whilst he was there) he would not show any singularity, they did with the hand
of their ca^kered mind, fetch reasons why they should sell him, for a glutto^
and drinker of wine. This seems even to have pierced the tender heart of our B.
Lord with unkindness; and it drew him in effect to say; John the Baptist, came
to you in abstinence and show of pe^nance, and you said he had a devil; my
self am come to you without any show of such austerities; but I have applied
my self to your conversation: And now you say, that I am a glution. I would
feign win your love, but I know not how. I would feign inflame you to the
service of God, but your powder it so wet, that no coals of mine can give it
fire.

And I would to JESUS, that through our sins, we did not see this verified
also at this day; when the Sectaries, and Politiques of the world, are so
fastidious, as that they make faces at his Doctrine, whatsoever it be. Nor will
they be convinced, either by the exemplar, visible austerity, and penance of
some of our holy Religious Ordes, which were consecrated in the person of S.
John; nor by the applyable learned, prudent, humble, and charitable endeavor
of some other Institutes which hide their mortifications, for fear of
frighting men's weak minds; and which were designed, and recommended, by the
lively example and express Doctrine of Christ our Lord, and his Apostles. But
woe be to them, who in case of temporal infirmity, have so ill a
constitution, as to convert their Physic, into Poison. And This disease both
of body and mind is very dangerous.
vvoe will be to these others, in the last day, who in cases which concern
the soul, do from truth, take an occasion of continuing in error. Or rather
I beseech our Lord JESUS, (even by the memory and merit of that Doctrine,
which with so ardent love he delivered here on earth) they may at last find
themselves convinced by it; and that embracing it with their will, they may
escape all vvoe.

The same discourse is continued, concerning the great love, which our Lord
Jesus expressed in his Doctrine.

CHAP. 34.
I Have willingly entertained my self upon the consideration of some
circumstances which concern the advantages of this divine Doctor of our
souls, beyond all the Doctors which are, or ever were, or are to be.
Because though no argument should be drawn from the very Doctrine it self, to
prove the love of him that taught it; yet his person alone, and the very manner
which he held therein, was such, as ought to oblige the most rebellious minds
that live, to all obedience.

Our Lord JESUS himself, (notvvithstanding that he had incomparably the
greatest humility that ever was possessed by any soul) did yet well
understand, and justly prize the dignity of his own person so far, as to
know, that he took no authority from his Doctrine; but that his Doctrine
took it all from him. Yet so great was his goodness, that although he were as
perfect God, as he was perfect man, he The sectartes will be believed upon
their words; yet Christ Lord, would not exact so much of the Jews.
would not yet oblige us to believe it, unless first he had proved it, by
infallible testimonies. But that being once done, he was not to indignify, and
diminish any one word of his Doctrine and decrees, by alleging reasons and
proofs; but only and simply to affirm it: This point I touch diverse times,
because occasion is ministered very often; and even Popes and Princes (who are
but dust, and ashes) do hold this style, and are wont to send out their
decrees, and to make their Edicts, in a positive and express form. And
whatsoever earnest asseuerations or reasons should be added for the grace and
strength thereof, would many times be, but as a contrary means to that end.

So that the Even the play nnes of the delivery of the doctrine of Christ our
Lord gives it great authority.
plainenes of the delivery of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord, is a vehement
proose of the diuinenes of it. Since, being void of all those helps of art (in
the arm whereof, all other Doctrines put their hope) this alone is a Doctrine,
which dares expose it self plain and naked. And in despite of the whole
wicked world, it lives, it breathes, it gathers ground, and strength amongst
all the venomous weeds of the world. And in despite of ignorance, sensuality,
and sin; it strikes at the root, not only of all things, which are contrary
to God and goodness; but even of all things, which are less good and perfect.
And it The Trophies which the Doctrine of Christ our Lord erecteth in the heart
of man.
erecteth Trophies, and keeps tryumphes in the profoundest part of the hearts,
of the ciuilest, the worthiest, the learned, the wisest, and the holiest
people of the whole world.

The more sublime authority this Doctrine has, and the more advantage
otherwise; the more infinitely are we Catholics, bound to that divine goodness,
which with an eternal love, did make choice of us, as the disciples thereof.
And to the end that we might the more easily conceive it with the
understanding, and the more faithfully retain it with the memory, it pleased
that altitude of divine wisdom, to abase it self to our mean capacity. And
(when the Doctrine of it selse, would not perhaps have been so well received)
to set it out, by allusions and Parables; yea and many times even they, are
borrowed, but from the figures of mean bodies; See every where in the holy
Gospel.
as of Plowes, of Corn, of Netts, of Fishes, of Leaven, of Mustard Seed, and
the like. Establishing, by that familiar and easy means, a kind of commerce
and traffic between things divine and humane, in the minds of men.

And indeed if this Doctrine had not been brought by the sweet hand of God, to
carry a great proportion to man's nature, assisted by his holy grace; what
possibility had there been, that it could have wrought such wonders in the
world? Making The divine wonders which the doctrine of Christ our Lord has
wrought in the world.
so many Kings and Queens for the love of Christ our Lord, become voluntary
beggars. Making youth become chaste; old age obedient; knowledge humble;
austerity so sweet and pleasant, as that there are, and have been millio^s of
people, in the Catholic Church, (and our Lord be ever blessed and praised for
it, and he knows that it is true, (whatsoever any Soctary shall either say or
think to the contrary) who instead of fine lynnen, have enclosed, and
claspedthemselues, within Girdles of wy^e, and shirts of hair; Instead of
delighfull bathe have taken frequent disciplines in blood; Instead of curious
and costly beds, have spent their whole nights upon the hard ground; Instead
of sumptuous banquets, have entertained themselves in rigorous fasts. And
lastly instead even of lavvfull pleasures, have exercised themselves, with
great attention, in the mortification of the faculties, and senses, both of the
body and mind.

This I say they do, and they have done; and that, with all the secresy they
could; and only, in conte^plation of the love of our Lord Jesus; and in
conformity to his divine life and Doctrine, which requires men to look upon
his example, and to live thereafter; and which proclaims to all the The
abnegatio^ of ones self which is required by the doctrine of Christ our Lord.
Luc. 14. Joan. 12. Joan. 6.
world (as instantly I shall touch again) that, If any man would come after
him, he must deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow him. For he that
would save his life, should loose it, and he that would loose his life for him,
should save it. If a sectary or libertine shall hear this Doctrine he vvil be
sure to say that it is Durus sermo. A bit which has a bone in it, so big,
as that he knovves not how, either to chavv, or swallow, and much less
digest it. And yet this very bit, this bitter pilwhich is so unsavory to the
man, who is all made of flesh and blood, being vvrapped up in the golden
words of our Lord, does in the taking it down, grow so full of delight and
gust, (through the puissance which it has over the souls of such as do
seriously and sincerely love him) that no penance in this life, could be so
grievous to them, as if they should be bound from doing penance. And see now by
this, whether the Doctrine of Christ our Lord be not of strange power, and
strength; and whether his divine Majesty, have not infinitely loved us, who
has made weak men so able, and so willing to embrace it for the love of him.

This This doctrine as it is on the one side effica cious and strong; so on the
other it is smooth and sweet.
strength, wherewith the Doctrine of Christ our Lord abounds, is no rude or
course kind of strength; but rather it is like some one of those most excellent
Mineral Phisicks, which is exactly well prepared. For together with the
discharging of peccant humors, (which uses to carry with it, a kind of pain)
it is a cordial withal, and it comforts the very substance of the soul,
incompably more excellently then that other Physic can, the nature of the
body. Besides, there is not here, any one receipt alone for the cure of
souls; as there be Empericks enough in the world, who (withal their bragges)
have but some one medicine or two, for the corporal cure, of as many patients
as they may chance to have. But here, are fully as many helps, as there can
be motions in the mind; and this Doctrine is fit to work upon them al. For
who sees The several ways, whereby the heart of man, is helped by that Doctrine
of Christ our Lord.
not, how it abounds with exact commandments; express prohibitions; high and
holy counsels; heroical examples; a clear notice of benefits already
received and faithful promises of more; sweet admonitions; severe
reprehensions, and terrible threats. To the end that no man may be able to
defend, or even excuse his disobedience, with any appearance of reason; but
that every one may, as he ought, submit himself.

What misery can that be, whereof here he may not find a remedy? what doubt,
whereof he may not find a solution? What pious affection, whereof he may not find
an inflammation? What virtue would he obtain, or what vice would he avoid,
wherein he shall not find a world of counsel and address? And in a word, what
thought of God, or of himself, can he have, with any relation to his comfort,
either for this life, or the next, which being a good student of this Doctrine
of Christ our Lord, he may not easily apparaile in that rich and choice
wardrobe of his, with iaculatory prayers and aspirations. I say not only
significant, but which have withal, so much of the ardent, of the great, and
of the noble, as it will become the ears of God to hear, and will not become
his merciful heart not to harken to.

The incompar able purity of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord: and with how
great love he helps us toward the practice thereof.

CHAP. 35.
THIS divine Doctrine of our Lord JESUS does no way abrogate the moral law, or
ten commandments; but it does auow and ratify the same. Though, for as much
as concerns the Judicial and Ceremonial laws, (under which the people of
God did live, before the coming of our Messiah) it perpetuated only the real
verities, which were contained therein; and it did destroy and bury (though yet
with honor) those parts thereof, which were but figures of the coming of
Christ our Lord. We say therefore most properly, that to be the Doctrine of this
divine Doctor, whereby either some Truths were revived, which through the
wickedness of men were neglected, and laid to sleep, before his coming; or else
whereby some others were published to the world, which in perfection did exceed
the former, and many of them were not so properly enjoined in the nature of a
commandment, as they were taught us, by the counsels of Christ our Lord.

This Where and how the body of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord is delivered.
Doctrine of Christ our Lord, is partly delivered to us, by the Tradition of
the holy Catholic Church, as we shall see afterward, and partly in holy
Scripture. And in this holy Scripture, most of those particulars are contained
and expressed which show the perfection and purity of his heavenly Doctrine.
This is done after a most particular manner in that divine sermon, whereby his
Disciples and we in them (if we also will be his Disciples) Cap. 5.6. and
elsewhere, in all the parts of the gospel.
were instructed upon that hill; and S. Matthew delivers it by the words of
our Lords own sacred mouth.

He proclaims the eight Beatitudes; where he annexeth not felicity to the
commodities and pleasures of this life: But to poverty of spirit, meekenes,
mornefulnes, hungar, and thirst after Justice, mercifulnes, purity of heart;
Peace making; and to the being persecuted, and reviled for the cause of Christ
our Lord. He lets men know, withal, that for no respect they must break the
least tittle of the law of God. That men must not be angry, nor give any
injurious word to others. That we must not consent, to so much as the least
dishonest thought. That no man or woman must be divorced, upon the committing
of less then Fornication; and that neither of the^, shall marry again till
the other dye. That we must not sineare at all. That we must not so much as
resist oppression. That we must love even our very enemies. That we must give
Alms, and fast, and pray, without ostemation. That in all things, we must have
a most pure intention. That we must cast away all solicitude, concerning our
selves, and leave all, to the good providence of God. That we must reform our
selves, but not so much as judge, any other man. That we must cut of, and cast
away all occasions, and causes of scandal and sin; how near, or how dear
so ever they may be to us. That we must strive to enter into he auen, by the Of
mortification and penance.
narrow gate. That we must aspire to chastity, though every one will not reach
so high. That we must be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect. And that
whosoever ever will be so, must sell all that he has, and give it to the poor,
and follow our Lord; and that such a one, shall have his treasure in heaven.
That if any man would come after our Lord, he must deny himself, and take up
his Cross and follow him; For he that would save his life should loose it, and
he that would loose his life, should save it. That his disciples must go in
Mission for the conversion of souls, without depending upon the having of any
viaticum; or the wearing so much as shoes; or carrying a wallet with them for
any provision. That they must look persecution, and even death it self, in
the face, and not so much as premeditate what they are to say for themselves,
in those occasions.

These are the most fragrant flowers, whereof that rich garment is wouen, or
rather these are the most choice Jewels, whereof that precious Crown is
composed, which Christ our Lord, brought down from heaven. With intention to
put it upon the heads of all such persons, as meant to be disciples of his
Doctrine, and to become Graduates in his school of Perfection. And The
faithful practice of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord, makes men happy even in
this life.
verily even in this life, the study, and practice of this Doctrine of Christ
our Lord, does make men happy, after a sort, and put them here into a kind of
taste of that felicity, whereof they are to take the whole daughts hereafter in
the kingdom of heaven. For so great is the purity and power thereof, as to
lodge a man out of the reach of humane things; by making him place his felicity
even in Crosses, both of pain and shame; whereof, in such a world as this, he
shall be sure to have no want. And to make him see, that his misery co^sists in
nothing, but in swaruing from this way to his felicity. Happy is he, who feels
the truth of this in his soul; and most miserable is he, who although he feel
it not, will not yet believe that the thing is true. For he who believes not
this truth, will never seek it; and he that seeks it not, will never find it.

It cannot Considerations which facilitate the practice of this Doctrine.
be denied, but that this Doctrine requires hard things at a man's hands. But so
it must be considered, that he who teaches it, does withal, give much grace,
wherewith to learn it. A burden is more or less grievous, according to the
strength more or less, which he has, who is to bear it. And it is no heard
matter, for one who is of infinite power, to give us strength to carry
according to the weight of that which is to be imposed; and especially, if that
power be accompanied with a goodness which is as infinite. Indeed, it we
consider the Doctrine as it is in it self, we may say, it is not only hard,
but impossible; and especially it will seem so then, when we accompany that
thought, with a deep consideration of the miserable frailty of our nature; the
strength of our passions, and the importunity of sensible objects, which
solicit and haunt us, even to death in every corner.

But yet, on the other side, we shall believe it, to be both possible and easy,
if we remember, as I was saying, the omnipote^t, wise love of Christ our Lord,
the abundant grace, which is derived to us from the merits of his holy life
and death; the example of many Saints, who having been made of the same metal
with us, have, by the favor of God and their good endeauours, translated, as
it were, their souls, out of this wilderness of beasts, into the paradise of
Angels, even before they parted from their mortal bodies. And not only has
this been performed by Sains deceased; but we do most certainly know, and
converse with so good servants of God, as that, in great measure, they ariue to
it also in this life.

So that we have all reason to be full of hope, that by the same means we may
follow, whither Wear left without excuse, it we do not follow, where so many
are gone before.
they have gone before. Or at least we are to confess, that the fault is no
bodies, but our own, if we do it not. For if it be a burden, Christ our Lord
will make it light; and if it be a yoke, he will make it sweet. And he who
thirsts after comfort, is inuiced by the loud cry of Christ our Lord, to go
and drink thereof, at that living fountain of his grace. And a promise is made
to all the world, Joan. 7.
that whatsoever shall be asked of God in the name of Christ our Lord, shall be
granted. Matt. 11.
And whosoever is either laden with sin, or does labor, under those
punishments, which, as the relics of sin, do hang upon him; is allured by
the voice of Christ our Lord himself to repair to him, that he may be
refreshed.

And indeed, what refreshing or comfort is there to be had in this life, till
selfeloue be laid down, and the pure and perfect love of Christ our Lord be
taken up, in the practice of his divine Doctrine: selfeloue, and selfewill it
is, which puts us to such pain in this pilgrimage. For these are the roots of
all our inordinate affections, which place us as upon a beacon, where we are
subject to all the winds of perturbation and passion, which can blow; either
of desires, or hopes, or fears, or any other care whatsoever. Yea, and if we
watch our selves well, we shall find sometimes, that even concerning the same
persons, or things, we are, in effect, at the This is most true how strag
soever it may seem
self same time, both in hope, and fear; in love, and yet in hate; in a
burning kind of little envy against them, and yet upon the main, with an
arde^t desire of their good. And in fine, we know not sometimes, what our
selves would have, nor what we ayle.

What marvel is it then, if we be often unlike, to what we had resolved to
be, and that we are so extremely unequal, so mutable, and so miserable? How
can we choose, but be perfect slaves, if thus we tie our selves to self love,
which gives the plague and death it self to al true liberty of spirit,
professed and imparted, by the practice of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord,
which is only able to make men free. This is not that profane supposed
liberty, to The lewd liberty of the Gospel of sectaries.
which the sectaries of this age do intytle their Ghospel, and which is indeed
but express subjection to sin and true slavery. But true Christian liberty
does consist in untying the soul, from all imperfection and sin; in subduing
and mortifying our inordinate inclinations and passions acoording to the pure
and perfect law of Christ our Lord; and in a word, in re-acquiring (for so much
as can be done in this life) that state of innocence, and that perfect
subordination of sense to reason, and of reason to God, which by Adam was lost
in Paradise.

And if still it shall appear to us, that (even supposing but ordinary grace)
this enterprise do carry difficulty in the bosom of it; yet consider at least
that no great thing can be done without some difficulty. Consider how The
infinite pains which is taken by vvorldly men for trash.
the soldier labors for a little pay; The Courtier for a miserable suite; the
scholar for a smacke of vain knowledge; The Merchant for increase of gain;
The husbandman for the hope of a good harvest; The Shepherd for the thriuing
of his flock. Consider the torments which sick and wounded men endure for the
recovery of a little corporal health; and the sensual person for the
obteyning of his bestiall pleasure. And be thou sure to believe this most
certain truth; that the perfect service of God deserves in no sort to be
accounted painful, in respect of that deadly affliction and torment, which
the tyranny of our inordinate affections, and worldly pretenses does daily, and
hourly put us to. And know this withal, that still the stronger those
passions grow, the more un worthy servitude do they also grow, every moment,
to hold thee in; besides the mortal wounds which they often inflict upon the
soul, wherein if it dye, it is damned withal. Whereas a true The happiness of a
true servant of God.
Disciple of this Doctrine of Christ out Lord, has the happiness to study under
the care, and in the eye, of an omnipotent Doctor. He walks perpetually
secure, because he is ever in conformity, to the holy, and wise will of God. He
is daily gayning upon himself. He is fed, now and then, with particular
co^forts of Gods holy spirit; in comparison whereof, all the lying pleasures of
flesh and blood are no better then a smoky chimney to a tender sight. He finds
himself generally to grow stated in a kind of quiet joy, and an immovable
peace of mind; though this indeed, admits of great variety of degrees, more or
less, according to his endeavor, and concourse with the divine grace.

And although The very desire of perfection, is ^ good step toward it.
a man should never arrive to the very top of perfection; yet that proportion
whereof he cannot miss (if he faithfully endeavor to procure it) will be a
liberal reward of greater pains, then he can take. For besides the
contentment of being still in strife toward God; he will find it seated in his
very soul, as a most certain truth; That the very mere desire of perfection,
if it be a sound one indeed, gives such a sauoury kind of comfort, as puts all
the base contentment of this world to silence. By this endeavor he shall also
be defended, not only from mortal, but even from wilful venial sins. And
he is already possessed, of as great security, as can be had in this mortal
life of ours, that he is ordained for heaven; in reward of that reverence and
obedience, which here he has performed, in learning and practicing the divine
Doctrine of Christ our Lord; which he came to teach us with so infinite love.
But yet further we ought to be his everlasting slaves, in that he was pleased
that so principal a part of this very doctrine, should not only be delivered,
but should remain recorded, and written in holy Scripture for our instruction
and comfort, as partly we have seen already, and will yet appear more
particularly, in the Chapter following.

Of the unspeakable Love of our Lord Jesus, in ordeyning, that the greatest
part of his divine Doctrine should remain in writing: and of the great benefit
which grows to us by the holy Scripture.

CHAP. 36.
HOw clearly is our merciful God, as good as his word, in fulfilling the
promise which he was pleased to make to us by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias:
Isa. 30.
Non faciet auohere a te vltra, Doctorem tuum; and erunt oculi tui videntes
praeceptorem tuum etc. and again by the Prophet Joel: Filij Sion exultate, and
laetamini in Domino Deo vestro, quia dedit vobis Doctorem Iustitiae. Our Lord
will not make thy Doctor fly away any more; and thine eyes shall see thy A
most tender expression of the love of God in the teaching of man.
Teacher. And thine ears shall hear the word of him, who admonishes thee
behind thy back. This is the way, walk you in it; and decline you neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. Rejoice ye children of Sion, and be joyful in
the Lord your God, because he has given you a Doctor of Justice.

That God did give us this Doctor for the instruction of our souls, we know
by faith; and we feel by grace; and the Church his Spouse, is daily
recomending it to our memory. But The holy Scripture does most lively represent
Christ our Lord, as it were, to our very eyes.
that yet, he was so to be here, as never to remove, even as it were, his
visible instructing presence from us; this blessing is chiefly affoarded to us,
by the holy Scripture. For thereby we are daily, and howerly told, so many
particulars of his sacred person; how he looked, how he walked, how he spoke, how
he groa^d, how he wept, how he prayed, and how he preached; so that besides his
real presence in the B. Sacrament (for upon that I shall reflect hereafter)
we esteem our selves to have him still even personal, after a sort, amongst
us, and to be as it were, chayned with our eyes, to that divine countenance of
his, and with our ears to those heavenly words, and with our hearts to those
immense benefits, which we find him to have povvred upon our fore fathers,
and by them on us.

Our Lord forbid, Psalm. 32.
that we should be like that horse or mule which has no understanding; but
when the Master has fed him full, and fat, does abuse his care, and give him
perhaps a kick, instead of doing him painful service; yea and that for
nothing else, but because he had been so liberally fed. For even such shall we
be, if the riches of Gods mercy toward us, should incline us rather to a
fastidious kind of contempt, then to an obsequious reverence and respect. If
our Consider well of this truth.
Lord JESUS had not been so gracious, as to inspire his servants to write his
story; or to enable his Church to preserve it from the consumption of time, and
the Canker of Heresy, and the inundation of Infidelity; how willingly would we
have sold our selves into our shirts, to have obtained so great a favor at
his hands? If we should only have known, that when our Lord lived on earth, he
had conuersed with men; and had expressed himself to the^, at large, by words;
sometimes by way of Sermons, sometimes of Parables, sometimes at meals,
sometimes in the working of miracles; That he spoke at large, Joan. 14.
at that supper which was the last he made on earth; and in the Garden, Luc. 22.
when he boiled himself in a bath of bloody sweat; and upon that Cross when
he left his most precious life, in the midst of cruel torments, and most
bitter scorns which brake his heart, (though indeed he dyed, of pure love to
us) but yet withal that those words of his, were lost, and that they had not
been kept upon record; or if they had been kept, that now they could be found
no more: What labor, I say, would we not endure; what charge would we not
undergo; what danger would we not incur with joy, so that by means thereof,
one word of his might be recovered and known? And in that case, how should we
be still sounding it out with our tongues; and on grauing it upon our hearts,
and entertayning our selves, day and night, in the cogitatio^ and conte^plation
thereof? But They have little knowledge of God who grow not in love and
reverence to him, the more they treat with him.
now it may be feared, that plenty it self, has made us poor; and
familiarity has bred contempt; and that our queasy stomachs, are overcome and
gone, through the only smell of such a sumptuous feast as we are invited to;
whilst such a world of those very words, which Christ our Lord did use in holy
Scripture, are set before, not only our mind, but even our very eyes and ears,
by our holy mother the Church. If it be so, let us pray, that hereafter such a
great ingratitude may be far from us; and let us begin to cast our hearts;
at the feet of our Lord, for so incomparable a favor.

The Canon of this holy Scripture, is therefore that which does contain, as
has been said, the chiefest part of that divine Doctrine, which our Lord JESUS
came to teach on earth. I say the chiefest part; for it is not al. But our Lord
JESUS taught many things, both by himself, and by his Apostles, which we are
all obliged to believe, and yet they are not expressed in holy Scripture. And
so he told his Apostles and Disciples: That The proof of Tradition Joan. 16.
he had many things to say to them, but that then, they were not capable
thereof. And the Text it self does also affirm, that he conuersed with them
between his Resurrection and Ascension, discoursing by the space of Forty
days, Luc. 1.
of the kingdom of God, which is his Church. And it cannot be, but that then,
he told the^ of many of those very things, whereof he had known them to be
incapable till that time; and yet the holy Scripture gives very little account
thereof. The Baptism of infants was not particularly taught in holy Scripture:
the Sacraments indeed were instituted, by our B. Lord; and S. Paul said, 1.
Cor. 11.
he would give particular orders, in that of the blessed Sacrament, when he
should arrive with the Corinthians; but what those orders might be, we can know
no otherwise, then by the tradition of the holy Church. The Sabbath, was
translated from the Saturday, to the Sunday. Many Ceremonies of the old Law
were abrogated, and some of them permitted, as namely S. Paul did circumcise
Timothy. Act. 15.
Circumcision, with many others; and some even commanded for a time, as the
abstayning from the eating of blood, or strangled meats, and the like. But how
long, or short that time was to be, we have no news out of holy Scripture. Nay
this Canon of the very Scripture, it self, wherein we are so happy as has been
said, and whereupon the Adversaries of the Church, for the disguysing of their
disobedience and pride, will needs pretend to rely, as upon the entiere rule
of Faith, and the sole Judge of controversies in religion, is no way declared
to us, by any one text of holy Scripture. But it is only authorized (in respect
of us) by the voice and sentence of the holy Church. Many, and many other
insta^ces might be also given; by the clear light whereof, it would appear,
that the whole Doctrine of our Lord, is not contained in holy Scripture.

Nor In what sense the holy Scripture may improperly be said to contain the
whole Doctrine of Christ our Lord.
can it be truly said to be all contained there, in any sense, unless it be,
because the holy Scripture, does plainly show the marks of the true visible
Church of Christ our Lord; and does teach, that the decrees thereof, Matt. 18.
are to be obeyed in all things, without appeal. Which Church, because it
possesses, and dispenses that whole Dopositum of true Doctrine, concerning
the service of God, which S. Paul did so recommend to S. Timothy, the holy
Scrpture, 1. Tim. 6.
may in some sense, be said, to contain the whole doctrine of Salvation;
because it sends us to the Church, which does indeed particularly contain and
teach it all. But nevertheless, it is certain, and we still confess it
again and again, to the unspeakable joy of our hearts, that the holy
Scripture it self, holds the greatest part of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord.
And therefore (as I was saying) much of that which I delivered before,
concerning the excellency of his Doctrine, both may, and ought to be most fitly
applied to holy Scripture. And because there occurreth somewhat concerning the
particular eminency of this holy book, which has not particularly been
touched before, I will here the rather reflect upon it, because we may easily
see thereby, the dignity of our Lords love therein.

How careful we must be, not to berash in the use of holy Scripture: and of
the great obscurity thereof.

CHAP. 37.
FIRST therefore, for our comfort, and to the end that no place at all might be
left for doubt, he was pleased that it should be written by the spirit of God;
whereby The infallible truth of holy Scripture.
it grows to be as true, as truth it self. And in this we are of so firm
belief, as that there is not one little in it, for the defense whereof, from
the least aspersion of the least injury, or error, we are not willing to lay
down a million of lives. This is an homage which we neither owe, nor pay, to
any other book. But to this, it is most due, both for the irrefragable truth,
which it carries; and for the love wherewith our Lord resolved, that in cases
which did so much concern us, he would have us know his mind. Yet heerin his
meaning was, that still for our relying upon the true sense thereof, we should
be ruled, by our betters. For else how Howsoever holy Scripture is infallibly
true in it self, we shall grow into error by it unless it be interpreted by
the Church.
infallible soever the holy Scripture were, in it self; we might make it,
through our fault, an occasion of being much deceived, in the belief and
worship of Almighty God; through the abundance of difficulty, which is therein,
as will soon be shevved. In the mean time, let us consider the supreme
nobility, which the spirit of God has used, in conueying his sense, into these
words.

Though why do I speak of any single sense, as if there were but one;
vvheras indeed, as it treats of high things after an h^ble manner, so though it
treates of but a fevv things, it, does it yet, after a copious manner; Alta
humiliter, Confess. l. 12. cap. 30.
and pauca copiose, as S. Augustine says. And the same excellent Saint, does
prove else where at large, or rather he does not so labouriously prove, as take
it from a known and certain truth; That out of few, and they, the self same
words, Ibid. c. 25.
a great number of most true senses may be drawn. He says moreover, That he
can see no reason, Ibid. c. 31.
why the man who wrote them (which in his case was Moses) should not be
believed to have known, and seen all those senses, in those words; (Per quem,
Deus vnus, sacras literas, vera, and diuersa visuris, Ibid. c. 26.
multorum sensib us temperauit.) He by whose ministry, our Lord did
accomodate, and temper the words of holy Scripture, to the several, and yet
all true senses, which many men would pick out from thence. The Saint, does
else where, make the case his own, and delivers himself in this manner.
If S. Augustine shows the variety of senses, of holy Scripture; and why he
that wrote it did understand those diverse senses.
I had been Moses, and that I had been enjoined to write the book of
Genesis, I should have wished to have had such a gift of speech, and such a
way of composing; as that they, who could not yet understand, in what manner
God creates, should not sly off, from the words, as being too hard for their
capacity. And yet they again, who were able to understand it, (into whatsoever
true sense or meaning they might have come, by their consideration thereof)
might have found, that the same, had not been left out in those few words,
which thy servant used. And if any other man should yet, in the light of truth,
have seen some other sense; neither should that also, have been found wanting
in his words. And this discourse he shuts up, with saying shortly after; I
will not therefore, O my God, be so precipitated in my judgment, as to believe
that man, not to have deserved this favor at thy hands. Without doubt, Moses
meant, and thought, by those words, when he wrote them, whatsoever we are able
to find true therein; as also whatsoever therein, is to be found, though we
cannot find it, or at least not yet. How The Nobility of holy Scripture.
noble and how excellent a thing does it appear by this, that the holy
Scripture is. And how great a benefit, and withal how high an honor has God
imparted to man, by putting such a book into his hand, as whereof S. Augustine
says else where, That our B. Savior is God humaned; and the holy Scripture is
God proclaimed, or preached. And we may, by this excellent means, both hear
what he says to us when we will, and make him also hear, whatsoever we
have a mind to say to him.

The supernatural excellency of holy Scripture, is evident, not only by the
multitude of true senses, which even the same words affoards; but by the
misterious expression which it makes of the very things otherwise. We may see
(says Fa. Salmero) in those Canonical books, certain most high sublime
senses and meanings; In his prolegomena. 2.
vested over, with a poor and humble garment of words; as if it were a kind of
divinity, united to the humanity; Or as a Christ laid in a Maunger, wrapped in
clouts; so as that even thereby, the height of holy Scripture does appear. It
is also contrived, with such a kind of temper, that sometimes it is obuious,
and of easy access; and someytmes again, very obscure, and hard. Thus says
Father Salmeron. Confess. l. 3. c. 5.
And S. Augustine gives this judgment of it, That it is not a thing understood
by men who are proud, nor yet discovered to such as are children. But that it
is humble in show, and sublime in substance, and ouershadowed with mysteries.

This follovving proposition, at the first sight, may seem perhaps a little
strange, That from the very difficulty of the holy Scripture, to their
understanding, for whose instruction and comfort it was written; an argument
should be fetched to prove the greatness of Gods love even therein. But in it
self the thing is most sincerely true, Salmeron in Proleg. 2.
and I will hope to make it clear (by the help of that good man in the
margent) out of the excellent fruits which grow to us by this very obscurity.
I will first procure to prove, both out of him, and the glorious S.
Augustine, that indeed it is very obscure, and then how it grows to be so;
though the pride of Sectaries be so great, as to make even the profoundest
Doctrine of Christ our Lord, to be most easy, whensoever themselves will
vouchsafe to be the Doctors of it.

S. The great obscurity of holy Scripture.
Augustine who may well go for one of the wonders of the world in point of
wit, did auovv in his Confessions (whether his humility would or no) that
when he was not twenty years old, he understood Aristotle's Predicame^ts
without any teacher at al. And there he takes God to witness, Confess. l. 4.
cap. vlt.
That of himself he read, and understood all the books, that he could
procure, which wrote of any of the liberal arts. And afterward has these
words: Whatsoever I read, concerning the arts, either of Logic or
Rhetoric; whatsoever of Geometry, Music, and Arithineticke, I understood
without any great difficulty, and without the instruction of any man, as thou O
Lord my God, do know. And yet to see how the same S. Augustine, (being not
afterward, at the only age of twenty, but more then twice as many years (when
he wrote the book of his Confessions) does well show how far off he held
himself, even then to be from being able to understand the holy Scripture; be
but pleased to read the second Chapter of his eleauenth book, where he begs
light and strength; and coniures our Lord by so many-many titles to inspire him
with the understanding thereof, with so ardent affection, and almost affliction
of mind, that it would in a manner, half grieve ones heart, to see him in such
straites. See also, in another place, if the eye of his soul (with having in
it such a deal of the Eagle as it had) did not tremble, and dazzle, with
behoulding the mystery, and majesty of holy Scripture. For thus he says,
speaking of the first words of the first book, which is that of Genesis. Mira
est profunditas etc. Confess. l. 12. c. 14.
Wonderful (says the Saint) is the profoundnes of thy words, whereof yet
behold, the superficies, or appearance, does even smile upon us little ones.
But yet the profoundnes thereof (...) in the same holy Scripture, Proleg 2. fol.
10.
as is abundantly proved by Salmeron, and (amongst other insta^ces) he shows
how the Prophet Osee says of his own prophecy, in the end thereof, Who is wise
that he may understand these things; and who is intelligent, that he may know
them? Which implies not yet, an impossibility, but only a great difficulty, Iu
Proaem. l 1. Comment. in Ose. 2. Pet. 3.
as S. Hierome notes. And S. Peter affirms, that there were some passages in
the Epistles of S. Paul hard to be understood, which unstable, unlearned
people, did pervert toward their own perdition; as they also did other
scriptures.

So they also do, in these days, whersoeuer heresy has set her cloven foot.
And that complaint is most justly made in these sad times of ours, Epist. 13.
ad Paul.
which S. Hierome made in his time. Agricolae, Coementarij, fabri metallorum
etc. Clownes, Daubers, Smythes, Wood-cleauers, Butchers, Dyers, and the like,
cannot learn their trades, without a teacher. But every prating old woman,
every doting old man, and every wrangling Sophister; and in fine, who will, may
presume to lay hold upon holy Scripture, and to toss it, and teach it, before
they have learnt it. And for my part I confess, that in my life I have nor
heard of many things, which might make a man laugh and weep both at once;
then, that one passing once in a prison of London, from one chamber to another
with a candle in his hand, which the wind blew out; and stepping in hard by to
light it in a little Sellar, where Ale and Bear was to be sold, he found the
Tapster very gravely leaning upon a barrel, with his Bible lying open before
him. And forsooth he was in study of the Prophesy of Ezechiell. So that I know
not whether ignorance be more blind, or pride more bold. But these kind of men
may learn to be confounded when they consider that even the B. Apostles, after
they had heard so many Sermons and Parables delivered and expounded by Christ
our Lord himself: And after having inioyed his divine conversation for the
space of three years together, were yet so far from understanding the sense
of holy Scriptures, that our Lord himself was feign, immediately before his
Ascension, to appear to them expressly for this purpose, that he might instruct
them, and open their meaning to them. Which may sufficiently serve to show how
full of difficulty they are in themselves, and how impossible to be understood
but by the particular favor of that Doctor of our souls.

How the holy Scripture grows to be so very obscure, and of the infinite wise
love which our Lord has showed to us even therein.

CHAP. 38.
I Will touch, in a few words, out of Salmeron, the chief reasons which make
the holy Scripture so very hard, Proleg. 2. fol. 14.
that so I may come to show, how the tender love of our merciful Lord does
evidently appear to us, even therein. This The height of the mysteries of
Christian Religion
difficulty is partly caused, by the magnitude and multitude of the mysteries,
which are there delivered, surpassing all humane understanding, and which are
able even to amaze the mind. As that of the B. Trinity, the Predestination and
Reprobation of souls; The Incarnation, death, and Resurrection and Ascension
of the son of God. The Institution of the B. Sacrament, and such like. The
variety even of literal senses, whereof the very same words are capable, and
which are assigned by the holy Fathers themselves; besides those other senses
which are mystical, and spiritual: The Predictions of future things.
Predictions of Future things, which do abound in holy Scripture, and which,
as they be hard, even in their own nature, so here, they were much harder to
be understood, because the holy Ghost, had sometimes an express design to
hide the^, under certain metaphors, to the end, that on the one side, they
might lie close, from the notice of wicked kings, (who otherwise would have put
the Prophets to present death) and on the other side, that those mysteries
might grow, in fit time, by means of prayer and other diligences, to be
conceived, and known by the faithful people of God. The seeming of evident
contradiction, which is in several places of holy Scripture. As where it is
affirmed, that God said, upon the first day, let light be made, and light was
made; and yet it is also said, That the sun was made upon the fourth day. The
variety Variety of tongues.
of tongues, wherein it was written, and into which it is translated, every one
whereof has several manners of speech and several Proverbs and Parables. The
great multitude of Multitudes of Tropes and Figures.
Tropes and Figures, of all kinds; which every where do so abound, that even
the most learned, have enough to do. The extent The arts and sciences, which
holy Scripture does comprehend.
of so many Arts and sciences, as are comprehended by holy Scripture; without
the understanding whereof, it cannot also be understood. The Universal
propositions which yet are not universally to be understood.
multitude of universal propositions, which yet are not universally to be
understood; as, All things are lawful to me, but all things are not expedient
etc. The great number Places subject to variety of sonses by reason of
diversities of natures and persons.
of places, which are subject to an ambiguous sense; both by reason of diverse
distinct persons in one, and the same divine nature (as in the B. Trinity) as
also of diverse natures in one, and the same person, as the divine and humane
nature of Christ our Lord. The The different states of the Church.
two different states of the Church, Militant and Tryumphant; and the The
double coming of Christ our Lord.
double coming of our B. Savior, once in humility to redeem us, and once in
Majesty to judge us. The The sudden change from one person to another.
sudden and instant change of the persons, who are brought in, to speak, and
the persons also of them, to whom the speech is made; which is very often
used, in the Prophets and Psalms. Neither The limitation of things enjoined
to some and not to others, and yet no limitation expressed.
are all things meant to be enjoined to all, but some things only to certain,
and peculiar persons; by the not knowing of which difference, unadvised men are
led on, to error. The The easy passage which is made from the letter to the
spirit, and from temporal things to eternal.
easy and frequent passage from the letter to the spirit; from carnal things
to spiritual; from temporal to eternal; from the Kings of Israel, to the
King Messiah; and so also, there is often passage the other way from the
spirit, to the letter, and so in the rest. It is also made very hard, by the
Equiuocatio^ The ambiguity of the Hebrew tongue.
of words, whereof the Hebrew tongue, is so full. Which since it was the first,
and consequently the most compendious, and short, of all others; it must
necessarily contain many several significations, in few words. And from hence
it grows, that generally such variety has been found, in the Translations of
the old Testament, and some part also of the new. Nay The misplacing of points
etc.
the very difference in placing a point, does make sometimes a different sense;
and so does the manner either of writing or pronouncing a proposition. As
namely (when it is ambiguous, whether any thing be affirmatively, or
Ironically, or Interrogatorily to be read). This, with more is showed, by
Father Salmeron.

For these, and for many other reasons, the understanding of holy Scripture is
very hardly learnt; and we see by sad experience, what divisions do abound in
the world by occasion thereof; when men will call disobedience and pride by the
name of holy Ghost, and Evangelical liberty. There are amongst Sectaries of
several cuts, and kinds, sixteen different opinions concerning their
Doctrine of Justification. All which they severally do yet pretend to be
grounded in holy Scripture and yet this Scripture it is, which they will have
to be so clear and plain. And upon those four words, Hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body, there are almost fourscore diversities of opinion.

Our adversaries themselves, do by their deeds of disagreement with one
another, proclayme the difficulty of holy Scripture; which yet in words they
will deny; that so they may be excused in making it say what they list. The
truth is this; That indeed it is full of difficulty, and our Lord who made it
so, did with infinite love provide therein for our good, and that, more ways
then one. For The many and great goods we get by the very difficulty of holy
Scripture. See Salmeron vhi supra.
thereby we are obliged, as Father Salmeron does also further show, to confess
the unspeakable wisdom We are brought to a great belief of the high wisdom
or God.
of Almighty God, which does infinitely surpass all knowledge, or conceyte of
ours; even then, when he vouchsafes to express himself by words, the
ordinary signification whereof we understand. And Our pride is humbled.
by this means he depresseth pride in us, and depriues us of all confidence in
our selves. Heerby It spurs us on to prayer. Psalm. 119.
he does also stir us up, to make, with all humility, most earnest prayer to
his divine in majesty that he will open to us the secrets of his law; as we see
S. Augustine did, and all the Saints have done; and especially King David, who
was ever singing of this song.

It also grows, through the great obscurity of holy Scripture, that the Church
is filled with much variety It breds great variety of divine knowled^ in the
Church.
of divine knowledge; neither is there that possibility, to draw several true
senses out of plain and easy places, as out of such as are obscure: According
to that of S. Augustine, The obscurity of divine Scripture is profitable for
this, that it begets and brings to light several Doctrines of truth;
whilst one man, understands it after one manner, and another, after another.
And It breeds diligence in study, and care to conserve in memory.
for this very reason also learned men are incited to a more diligent, and
earnest study thereof. And consequently they will entertain that knowledge with
more gust, which they have acquired with more labor. This It inuiteth us to
purity of life.
obscurity, is also a cause which makes us purify our souls the more, because
like, loves his like. And holy things will never be well comprehended, but by
holy persons.

Moreover it helps to maintain and make good, that order It helps to
maintain the Church in due sub ordinatio^, and Order
in the Church, which our Lord God has thought fit to hold, in the
dispensation of his gifts and graces. For as the superior Angels, do
illuminate them who are inferior; so has he been pleased, that amongst men,
some should excel others in learning, and divine knowledge, who, as Doctors
and Pastors might interpret the same to others. It It saves Pearls from
being cast to swyne.
keeps impure and wicked persons, from knowing those mysteries which belong to
God; whereof they are unworthy and incapable, since they will not use them well.
And our Lord himself has said in his Gospel, that so it was fit to be; and
that seeing, Marc. 4. Matt. 7.
they might not see; and that hearing, they might not understand; and that
pearls must not be cast before swyne.

And lastly, the frailty of our corrupted nature is excellently provided for,
by this means; since through the difficulty which we find in holy Scripture,
we are It nourishes us in reverence and a holy awe.
kept in reverence, and in a kind of holy awe; whereas if throughout, they were
familiar, and gave easy access to all co^mers, they might (through our fault)
grow instantly to be contemned. On the The Scripture is wouen both with hard,
and easy things, and this is of great use to us.
other side, if all the parts thereof were hard a like, we should give over to
seek, that, which we despayred to find. And therefore the good pleasure of our
Lord, has been to make the holy Scriptures obscure, yet with a kind of
plainenes; and plain, but yet with an obscurenes. That by their plainenes, in
some places, they might illuminate us; and by their difficulty in others, they
might exercise us. And that the easy places might help us toward the
understanding of the hard; and the hard, might serve to employ our wits, and to
make us know withal, how much we are bound to God, for having made some others
easy.

And this is the substance of that which Father Salmeron has delivered, both
concerning the reasons, which make the holy Scriptures hard, and the fruits
which grow to us thereby. Through which we may easily discern the tender and
wise care, and love of this divine Doctor of our souls. Not only in giving us
such excellent lessons; but for having done it in such an admirable manner; as
A demonstration of the love of our Lord to us in this particular.
that whilst we are studying them, we must (almost, in despite of our own
proud hearts) be employing our selves withal, both upon the exercise of
prayer, and the practice of the solid virtues, of humility, patience,
obedience, purity, and charity. And if yet, we shall not think, that our Lord
has showed us love enough, in giving us such an excellent Doctrine, and that
in such a fashion, as has been here described, as seeming that this love,
has more of the solid in it, then of the sweet; let us cast our eyes upon the
next two Chapters, which are to follow this. Wherein I will briefly endeavor to
show, the excessive tenderness of the divine love, which our Lord does bear to
the soul of man. And which he has been pleased to show, in the Testaments,
both old and New. Whereby he proves himself not only to be our God, and our
Father; but our mother also, and our Spouse, and in fine our all in all, which
may any way concern, the bearing of an infinite love to us.

Of the great tenderness of the Love of our Lord which is showed to man by the
express words of holy Scripture: and first of the old Testament.

CHAP. 39.
IN the Burse, they are wont to ask in-commers, what they would have, and what
they lack; as if they were able to supply all wants; and that a man could not
seek for more, then they had the means to make him find. But yet
nevertheless, when the buyer grows to put them to it; and in particular to
desire that, whereof he has particular need; many things are not to be had; and
their poverty, or ill provision does soon appear. This divine book of holy
Scripture, is another manner of storehouse, The holy Scripture is a plentiful
store house where men find, whatsoever good thing they want.
of the tender, and maternall love of our Lord God to man. Nor are we subject
to any kind of misery, whereof the remedy is not there at hand; nor can any
affection be thought upon, wherewith as has been said, he did not vouchsafe to
vest himself, in most patheticall words, to the end that we might be well
assured of his incomparable love. It would grow to be a large volume, if a man
would take hold of many passages, amongst the multitudes of them, which are
there presented; especially if he should ponder them as he goes. It shall
therefore suffice (because I make have to the rest) to point only at some very
sew; and to leave even them, to the contemplation of my pious reader.

We shall The most tender love of our Lord expressed most clearly in holy
Scripture.
easily discern therein, the indulgence and deernes of his love; and the joy to
which he inuites us by his holy Prophets. We shall not cease from wondering, to
find a God of infinite Majesty, descend so low; and to translate himself to
such a language of sovereign, and most sweet mercy. We shall see, how he
declares, and does, even (as it were) vaunt himself to be wholly ours; and how
he has created and redeemed us, and how, in him, we had our beginning; and
that in him, we shall have our end, without any end: and how still, between
those two extremes, he would not have us so much as fear; but that in all our
accidents, and occasions, he would protect, and conduct, and carry us free from
all shadow of hurt. We shall also see, how this Lord of Hosts, who has
prevented us with such abundance of benedictio^s, does still behold us, with
the same eyes of strange, and tender pity; notwithstanding that we forsake
him, and despise his law, and forfeyt his favor, and dishonor him to the
uttermost of our power. And how, instead of spitting us, by the furious breath
of his mouth, into the flames of hell; those arms of his mercy, are still
extended toward these worms of the earth, to keep us thence; he does, as it
were, forget himself, to remember us; and he ponders the offenses which we
commit against an omnipotent God, not so much in the nature of a God, as of
some dear and tender friend, who had been discourteously and unkindly used by
his friend. We shall see how he represents the little satisfaction which the
world, and sin can give to a soul; and how abunda^tly he had resolved to
bless us, in the depth of his love, if we would have continued in his service.
How he He declares himself to us by most tender comparisons.
compares himself to a mother, and then protests, that his love exceeds any
mothers love. How he compares himself to a Spouse, but protests that he loves
us more, then any Spouse can do.

And now, though he make such Court to us, it is not for lack of Wisdom, to
see how much he is wronged; nor for lack of power, to right himself. For he
discernes, and weighes, and still he wonders at us for it. And (as if he were
not able to wonder as much as the case deserves) he inuites the whole world to
do it with him. He declares it by similitudes, and shows how the very beasts
are more men, then we. He asks us what cause he has given us, that we should
be so unkind? He assures us, that if he punish us now and then, it is for our
greater good, and for no long time. That Infinite love.
he is (as it were) content, to resign his office of being our Judge, and that
he takes his case to be so clear, and that the wrong is so very foul, on our
side; that he will submit himself to the sentence of our very neighbors, and
friends; (when once his allegations and our answers are produced) to see
whether ever he were wanting to us, on his part; or if we have not been
inexcusable on ours.

And then, notwithstanding that we are so detestably faulty, as to have
deflowred, Laborau^ rogans. Ierem. 15. Misi ad vos omnes seruosmeos prophet as
consurge^s diluculo^ Ieru. 35.
and defiled our souls, with all comers, and upon all occasions; and
notwithstanding that he represents himself, as having labored for our good,
even till he was weary; and that for fear of being prevented, he had risen
early in the morning to seek us; that, because we were gone several ways, he
had sent all his Prophets, and servants to find us out. And that although in
the time past, we had been so wicked, as not to value or esteem his
solicitations; Notwithstanding (I say) all this, and an infinite deal of
other excellent demonstrations of his love (which I shall not have, so much as
means to touch) this God of pity, does still dispose himself, to Court, and
woo us, for the time to come, that we will return to him, with such
unspeakable deernes, as if his very Godhead lay upon it; and as if it were
not we, who were the vvretches, and were to be the damned souls, if we
did not instantly repent; but as if himself were to be but a solitary kind of
God in heaven, unless he might have us there, to communicate his own
felicity to us. And then, in case that we will hearken to him, he protests
that he will pardon us; that he will purify us; that he will forget that ever
we had so much as offended him; and that if he perform not these mercies to
us, he is content, that the whole world shall reproach him for it.

To this excess Our Lord submits himself to those laws of love, which pass
between man and man.
does the heart of our Lord God extend it self, toward his poor creatures,
in the way of tender love. The heart I say of God; who being the fountain of
Majesty and glory, disdaines not to live (as it were) by such laws with us,
as are vvo^t to have force, amongst mortal men. And verily, if his own holy
spirit had not vouchsafed to record these things in holy writ; it would have
looked, like, little less, then blasphemy in us, to have imputed such
affections to him; whereas now it is sovereign bounty in him to make profession
of such things to us. And to the end you may see, that it is not I, but he that
speaks; I will frame his own words (with as little variation as may be)
into a context; Why the several places of Scripture, are drawn to a context.
that so you may the better judge thereof; and be the more lively inflamed
thereby. Though I cannot sometimes but use some very few words of mine own
therein; as well for the connection of the discourse, which is drawn out of
several places; as for the more clear and cordial understanding thereof. But
I will place the beginning of every such Latin speech, in the margent, as I
shall reflect upon in the text. That so it may be found and seen, how I have
not svvarued one whit from the scope and drift of the holy Ghost, in the
expression which he makes of his love to man, nor in effect from the very
words themselves.

Rejoice (says our Lord) with Jerusalem; Latamini cum Jerusalem. etc. Isa. 66.
and do you exult with her; all you who love her. Rejoice with joy, all you
who mourn over her; that you may suck, and so be filled, by the breasts of
her consolation. That you may take milk from her, and so ouerslow with
delights, through the absolute, and excellent greatness of her glory. For thus
says our Lord; Behold I will power down, upon her, the glory of the
Gontills, like a flood of peace: and like a very torrent which ouerflowes; and
which you shall suck. You shall be carried close to her breasts; nay they shall
See how God descends, for it is he who speaks.
dandle you upon their knees, even as a mother does dandle her little one; just
so will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted in Jerusalem. You shall see
it, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your very bones shall grow and spring, at
if they were grass; and the hand of your Lord, shall be known to his
servants, and he will be in indignation against their enemies.

Harken to me, Andite me domus Israel. etc. Isa. 46.
says our Lord, thou house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of
Israel. You who are conceived in my womb, and who are carried by me about, in
my very bowels. And I will carry you on, till you come to old age, and even to
the most decrepite state thereof. It is I, who made you, and I will carry you: I
will conduct you; and I will save you. This says thy Lord, Plaec dicit Dominus
Isa. 43.
who created thee, O Jacob; I, who framed thee, O Israel. Be not afraid, for
I have redeemed thee; and I have given thee thy name; and mine own thou art.
When thou shall pass through the waters, I will be with thee, and the floods
shall not cover thee. When thou shall walk through the very fire, thou shall
not be burnt, nor shall the flame so much as offend thee.

Yet all this love and care of mine, has not been able to co^taine thee in any
terms: In omni colle sublimi. Iere. 2.
But upon the Top of every hill, and under the auow of every shade, thou have
prostituted thy self, to all impurity, like a harlot. I planted thee as a
choice vineyard; as a grain of true, and faithful seed; and how art thou
therefore grown, to be so unfit to yield me fruit? I hedged thee round about;
I picked all the stones out of thee; I built up a house in the midst of thee^
and I placed a wine press in thee. And I expected that thou should have
brought forth ripe grapes, and thou gave me none, but such as were sower.
Come therefore He is content to be judged even by our very selves. Non ego te
seruire feci etc. Ierem. 41.
O you Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and you men of Judah, and do you judge between
me, and this vineyard of mine. What was I to have done, more the^ what I did?
Was I not to have expected grapes; and has it rendered me ought but veriuyce?

I made not thee, take servile pains, for the oblations which thou were to
offer me. Nor did I give thee toil, and trouble, in the procuring of
frankencense for me. But thou have made me a slave to thee, by thy sins; thou
have put me to labor, by thine iniquities. Yet still I am my self; I am that
very he, who wipe away thine iniquities, for mine own sake; and I will not
retain the memory of thy sins. Call me at length to mind, and let thee, and
me, be judged together; and say, if there be any thing, which thou caust
allege in excuse of thy self. Tell me, Popule men's quid feci tibi? Mich. 6.
Audite caeli etc. Isa. 1.
O my people, what offense have I committed against thee; or wherein have I
been troublesome to thee? Answer me. Or at least, O you heavens do you give
ear, and harken O thou earth, for the Lord thy God has spoken it. I have
brought up children, and I have exalted them; but they, on the other side, have
despised me. The Ox has known his owner, and the Ass the Manger of his
Master; but I sraell has not known me; and my people has no understanding
of me. Obstupescite caeli super hoc. etc. Iere. 20
Let the heavens be amazed at this, and let the gates thereof, even tremble and
shiuer. For my people has done two wicked things. They have forsaken me, who
am the fountain of living waters, and they have made certain leaking
cesternes for themselves, where no water can be kept. Hearken to me O Jacob,
Audi (...) Jacob etc. Isa. 48.
and Israel whom I call. It is I my self: I am the first, and I am the last.
Thus, O Israel, says thy Lord, and thy holy redeemer, I am the Lord thy God,
who teach thee profitable things; and who conduct thee in the way, where thou
walk. O that thou had applied thy self to the keeping of my
commandments. Thy peace should then, have been as any flood; and thy instice,
as the very swelling mouth of the sea. And thy offspring, and seed, Lauamini
mundi estote. Isa. 1.
as plentiful as the little stones, or sands, upon the shore thereof. Yea be
thou yet clean at last; be pure; away with thy wicked thoughts, out of my
sight. Make once an end of being perverse. Learn to do well; seek judgment;
succor the oppressed; Do justice to the Orphane; defend the widdowe; and then
come and reproach me, if I make not good my word. For if thy sins should be
as scarlet, they shall become as while as snow; and if they should be as red as
vermilion, they shall be as clean, as the purest wool. I know thou have said,
Dixit Sion Dorminus dereliquit me etc. Isa. 49.
Our Lord has forsaken me, our Lord has forgotten me. But what? can the
mother forget her infant, or can she fail to take pity upon the child of her
own womb? And though she should, yet will not I forget thee. Behold I have
engraven thee in my very hands. Quare ergo dixie populus etc. Lerem. 2.
Why has my people said to me, We will depart, and come to thee no more? Can
the virgin forget her gorgeous attires, or can the Spouse forget the ornament
which she wears upon her beast? Yet my people has forgotten me, I cannot
tell how long. Vulgo dicitur etc. Ierem. 3.
It is commonly said among you if a man dismiss his wife, and she marry
another; will that husband ever resort to her again? Shall not that woman be
held for an impure defiled creature? But thou, have committed Fornication with
many lovers; and yet, return to me (says our Lord) and I will receive thee.
Look up, and consider where thou have not prostituted thy self. Thou have
gotten the face of a Harlot, and thou would not blush. Yet now at last call
upon me, and say, Thou art my Father, Et dixi c^ fecisset haec omnia etc.
lerem. 3.
Thou art the conductor of my virginity. For I, for my part, have said to Sion,
after she had committed all her sins; Return to me, and yet she returned
not. Return to me, O thou untoward Israel, says our Lord; and I will not
turn my face from thee; because I am holy, says our Lord, Ad punctum in
modico dereliqui te etc. Isa. 54. In funiculis Adam etc. Ose. 11.
and I will not be angry with thee, for ever. I have forsaken thee, for a short
time; but I will gather thee up in great mercies. For an instant of
indignation, I hid my face from thee; but I have taken pity on thee, with
eternal mercy, says thy Lord, and thy redeemer. I will draw thee to my self,
in the cords af Adam, in the bonds of love. And I will be as one, who takes the
yoke from off the neck of his cattle; and gives the raines to his horse, that
he may feed.

These are the words of the holy Ghost, and by them does he express, the
infinite love which is borne to man. And now it does but remain, that we
answer such love withal the love we have. To which, if this Chapter will not
have obliged us, by making us see the expression of Gods mercies in the old
Testament, woe be to us; but yet let us try what may be done by the
consideration of that which passed in the New; whereof the next Chapter will
inform us.

The infinite tender Love of Christ our Lord, which is expressed in the
Scriptures of the new Testament.

CHAP. 40.
SVCH, as has been seen, is the style which the God of heaven and earth, does
hold, with his miserable, and most sinful creatures; and this he has held
from all eternity; and he went executing it thus in time, even under both the
law of nature, and the written law, when yet, his Son our Lord, had not taken
flesh. But as the mercies which were vouchsafed and expressed by our Lord God
to men in the old Testament, were yet all designed, and imparted by him, in
contemplation of Christ our Lord, who was then to come; so when the fulness of
that time was arrived, and that indeed the increated word become incarnate for
the salvation of man; it was It was fit not only in mercy but even in justice,
that under the law of grace the love of God should appear more clearly the^
before.
agreeable, not only to mercy, but even to justice it self, that the love of
God should triumph, for our benefit, more then ever. And that, not only in the
solid proof of love, but even in the sweet and tender demonstrations thereof.

For now, our Lord spoke no longer to us by his Angels, nor by his Prophets
only, but by his Son himself, who was no more a perfect man, then he was
God. And this God, without the interposition, or interpretation of any other
creature, did now in person converse with men. He taught them by the words of
his own sacred mouth. He cured them of all diseases, by his miracles. He
assumed some, to the dignity of being his Apostles; and all the world, to the
honor and happiness, of being his Disciples. He How the servants of God are
dignified by Christ our Lord.
declares how they who obey the will of God are his brothers, his sisters, and
even, as it were, his very mother. Sometimes he calls men his servants, and
when they have carried themselves well therein, he aduaunceth them to be, not so
much his servants, as his friends, professing to impart all his secrets to
them. Look in his last Sermon, recorded by S. John.
Sometimes he calls them his children; yea and sometimes, by the name of
Filioli, his little children, to show, that innocent, careful, and tender kind
of sweet affection, which a mother would carry to her Infant.

We may see the whole history of his most blessed life, all imbrodered, by the
hands of the holy Evangelists; here with tears, and there with sighs, and
every where with abundance of corporal and spiritual labors, both active and
passive, for love of us, Matt. 10.
even before the time of his precious death. Is any thing more liberal then
his promises, where he entayles the inheritance of heaven to the gift of a
cup of cold water, Matt, 25.
without our bestowing so much cost as even to heat it? Nay, and he is content
to say, that whosoever should perform any little work of charity to any
servant of his, he would take it in as dear part, as if it had been affoarded
to his, very self. Is His earnest protestations.
any thing more serious then his protestations, of that truth, which he came to
teach us for our good: Amen Amen dico vobis; Verily verily I tell you this, and
that? And was it not a stra^g descent for that Prima Veritas, that root and
fountain of all truth, to help our blindness and backwardnes in believing, by
protesting things to be so; as if his simple word had not deserved so well, as
to have been taken? Is any thing more universal then his Proclamations, which
thus he makes to all the whole world at once; Joan. 7. and Apocal. 22.
If any man thirst, let him come and drink: and it shall cast him nothing.
Come to me all you who labor, Matt. 11.
or be ouerloaden, and I will refresh you? No man is excluded whom he offers
not to embrace; nor no misery is exempted from that hand of pity which
undertakes to cure the^ al.

Is any thing more punctual then his visitations; who vouchsafes not only to
knock at the doors of our unworthy hearts; but to tell us that he stands there,
Ego sto ad ostium and pulso. Apocal. 3.
for that purpose; as if it were, to wait our leisure, and to know our
pleasure, whether we be content that he come in, or no? Is any thing more
sweet, and even, then his conversation; which he expresses in this manner;
Apocal. 3.
That if we open our souls to him, when he begges entrance, he will come and
sup with us? He says not only that we shall sup with him; but that he also
will sup with us; and do us the honor to make us able to inuit and feast
him. Joan. 16.
He says also else where, That if we will love him, not only he, but his Father
also will love us; and that they both will come in, and dwell with us. Yea and
yet in another place, That he will not only sup with us, but serve us. Luc. 121
And he was richly as good as his word; when at that last supper of his, he
washed and wiped the feet of his Apostles, as we have seen elsewhere. Nor did
he only induce men to do us good, by his putting his very self into our
persons, that so himself, might receive the favor from us; but he discouraged
men from doing us any hurt, by the self same reason, when he expostulated
with S. Paul, Act, 8.
asking why he persecuted him; whereas yet, he had but persecuted his servants.

Is any thing more tender, then those comparisons, vvherby he vouchsafes to
discover the beating of his divine heart, and the boiling up of his profound
love. Whilst, with the tears in his eyes, he contemplated that misery, Matt.
23.
which the ungrateful and blind Jerusalem had drawn upon her self by her
sins. And when (after the manner of an Interiection) he exclaymed and asked,
(that which himself could only tell how to answer) how often he was
desirous, and had endeavored to dravv those wicked men to himself, with as
much vvorking, and earning of his bovvells of pity, as any Hen could use in
the defense and sauegard of her chickens from some ravenous Kyte. Now as the
What a great deal of tender love, is inuolued in the comparison of our Lord,
and us, to the Hen and her Chickens.
Hen by spreading her vvings, makes a Buckler of defense for her chickens
against any violent hurt which may approach them; so also does she make them a
kind of Arbor of solace and recreation under which they may repose, against
the scorching heat of the s^ne. She contemnes her own safety, in respect of
theyrs; and she grows even sick with sorrovv, upon the least apprehension
of any hurt which may be coming toward them.

What name shall we give, to that vouchsafing of our B. Lord; when (in
compassion of our miseries, and in the ardent desire he had to free us from
them) he disdayned not to apparaile himself, with the similitude of a
Shepherd? The Parable of the shepherd. Matt. 28.
Who having a flock of a hundred sheep, left ninety nine (whereby the
Angelical nature is designed) to seek that one (being the figure of man kind)
which went wandering, and loosing it self, in the desert of this world. And to
look it so long, as at last to find it; and to take it, first into his arms;
and then to lay it upon his own shoulders, all stinking and rotting as it
was. And then, so return home so ouerioyed; as if this Pastor could have no
other felicity, but in the feeling, and removing of the calamities of his
sheep. Whom to show how much he loves the^, beyond the love that is borne by
the sheepheards of this world to their several flocks, he professes that
there is not one of them, whom he does not know, and call by his particular
name. Our Lord did also stoop so low, as to expose himself to our sight in
the person of a Of the widow who lost a piece of silver. Luc. 15.
widow. Who having lost one single groate (which figureth any soul, which
is lost by sin) laid aside the contentment which she might have taken, in
all that rest of her substance, which she had not lost. And the lights her
candle, and svveepes, and searches every corner of her house; and never leaves
to labor, till at length she have found it out. And then, not being able to
co^taine herself, she inuites her neighbors, and her friends, that they will
help her to rejoice, for her good success; since of her self, she is not
able to be glad enough.

And The story or Parable of the Pro gall child. Luc. Ibid.
who shall also be ever able to express the tender love, he shevved to man, in
being pleased that the Parable of the Prodigal child, should remain to the
world, upon record. That so for ever it might appear, as in a most fresh and
lively picture, how impossible it was, for the most grievous sin of man to
quench the infinite mercy of almighty God; so that once, he would return by
penance. Yea, and he shows that the same Father, who has the patience to
endure all the wikednes which can be committed, has not the patience to endure
that the son should wade so far in sorrow, not to find him til he should
get home. But he must needs put himself upon the way; yea, and (forgetting as
it were his state, and gravity) must run to meet him. And at the first meeting,
to embrace him, and presently to fall upon his neck; and to be fully
reconciled to him by a kiss of peace. And howsoever the son did but his duty
in accusing himself of his grievous sin; yet the Father would take no hold of
that; nor continue him in cause to be blushing, or so much as thinking, of what
was past: But he instantly changed his discourse; and commanded his servants,
in all have, to go fetch the most sumpcuous, prime garment which he had; and
that he should be all clothed with it; and that a ring of honor should be put
upon his fingar; and that the fatt calfe should be killed; and that a banquet
should be made, and that Musicque should declare, how full of joy he was.

I spare in this place, to speak of another banquet or feast which the holy
Scripture records him to have made to man, with infinite love, in the
Institution of the blessed Sacrament. And The B. Sacrament is incomparably the
greatest gift which ca^ be given.
yet this, does as far exceed all the rest which has been said, as himself
does incomparably surpass, whatsoever other thing, which it is, even in his
power, to give. I will also, in this place sorbeare to hearken to that other
divine consort of Music, which he made in that least Sermon of his, next
before his sacred Passion, which S. John relates in his holy Gospel. For that
of the B. Sacrament, is considered in a discourse thereof a part; and that of
the infinite love of our Lord in his last Sermon, is touched in the beginning of
that, of the Passion. And we have here, I hope, been showed enough, to make
the love of our B. Lord appear: Not only in regard of what he conceived in his
own precious heart, toward man; but moreover for the abundant blessings which
he has imparted to the world exteriourly. For we see, to what greatness, and
happiness the meanest of us is sublymed, through the high account into which we
are taken by Almighty God. Only we must be sure, that his infinite goodness do
not give us occasion and color for contynuance in our wickedness. For as much
as in God, all is infinite a like; All is a like Infinite in God; and therefore
even the very infiniteness of his Mercy does show us how Infinite his Justice
also is.
and even by the excess of his mercy when men are sorry for their sins, we
may infer the intolerable rigor of his Justice, against such as are
impenite^t. The holy Scripture is also full of most particular proof, how
deeply our Lord does detest al sin and wilful sinners. This has been
pointed at before, upon another occasion in the discourse of the infinite power
of God; and in the end of the Passion it will also be resumed again. For the
present therefore, I conclude, concerning the most excellent Doctrine of Christ
our Lord, delivered especially in holy Scripture; and I pass on to the
consideration of his Miracles.

Of the excessine Love which our Lord Jesus showed to man, by the Mirac'es
which he wrought on earth.

CHAP. 41.
THE excessive love of our Lord Jesus, was far from being content, to
express it self toward man, by any one single way alone; but it was
soliciting him in every minute of his most holy life, to try as many as might
be found for our good. He therefore considering, with divine wisdom, that men
were composed of flesh and spirit; and consequently Men being composed of flesh
and spirit are to be wrought upon both by spiritual and sensible means.
that they must be wrought upon, as well by sensible, as by spiritual means;
and knowing also, that through the miserable disorder of their minds, they
were then more capable and would be more obliged, by ease and health of body,
then by graces powered into the soul; he was therefore pleased to accompany the
purity and perfection of his Doctrine with the power and Majesty of his
miracles. And as, by creation of the world, he led men up, by means of visible
things, toward a knowledge, and belief of the invisible; so in the case of
our reparation, and redemption, he would also use the corporal cure of men
from sickness, as a disposition, whereby their souls might be recovered from
sin.

Heerby our Lord does evidently discover, to be a true and perfect lover of
mankind. For as the property of love, is not The measure of our love of God is
to exceed all measure.
to be tied up within the compass of any ordinary law; and the measure which
that power uses, is to exceed all measure; so did our Lord, out of the
nobility of his love to man, refuse to walk within so small a circle, as the
laws of nature did lead him to. These laws of nature were made by almighty
God; at the creation of the world; and it is not all the power of heaven, or
earth under him, which can inuert that order. Psalm. 148.
Praeceptum posuit, and non praeteribit. He gave the precept, and it shall not
pass away. And it was good cheap for him who made al things of nothing; to
command that nothing should fail, of that inviolable course wherein all things
were appointed to proceed.

According to the law of nature, no return is made from privation, to the
habit; as from a fixed blindness, to sight; and much less from death, to life.
But the law of the love of our Lord JESUS, did ouertop that other law; made
those things grow true and samiliar, which otherwise were not only hard, but
impossible. Moist bodies were appointed, by the law of nature to give place,
and such as are heavy, and solid to sink down below the^. But yet, when there
was question of giving comfort to his poor Apostles; Matt. 14.
the love of Christ our Lord, made him lay those laws aside; and he went
walking toward them upon the sea, which was glad to perform the Office of a
pauement, to his precious feet. Penerration of bodies, is a thing whereof
nature cannot endure to hear; but yet, for the unspeakable love which he bare
to The honor which was done by Christ our Lord to the purity of his B. Virgin
mother.
the honor, and excellency of his all-immaculate mother (that ornament, and
glorious gemme of heaven and earth) he was not affrayd to give that principle
of Philosophy the lie. And he passed out of those bowels of supreme Purity,
into those arms of matchless Piety, without the least offense to her most
entire Virginity. But yet in this, there is the less wonder because he wrought
the like, in favor of his Apostles; whom he loved by innumerable degrees,
less then his most excellent mother. Isa. 7.
For in their case also, his love was transcendent in the self same kind, unto
his laws. For having first passed through the sepulcher, he went afterward
through, Joan. 20. Ibid.
and through those doors which were shut between them, and him; that so he
might, as it were, perfume them all at once, with his sweet breath of Peace.

But why do I name those persons, who were so highly privileged; as if our
Lord had only been in love with them; and not indeed (as yet indeed he was)
enamoured of all mankind so far, as to make his miracles, distill down upon
them, like so many drops of dew, for their relief, or comfort, in all
occasions. And although these miracles of Christ our Lord, could not have been
wrought, but by the omnipotent power of almighty God; yet may that power be
accounted to have been but as a kind of instrument whereby he wrought them; and
that indeed, they flowed from his love, as from their prime cause and root.

He wrought no miracles for the ostentation of his power, and therefore we see,
how often he precisely commanded both men and devils, Marc. 3. and 5. and 7.
Luc. 5. and Luc. 4. Matthew. 20. Matt. 21. and Marc. 11.
that they should not publish what he had done. He wrought none, for any
commodity of his own; or for the relief of any corporal necessity, which he
was and would be subject to. For though the Foxes had holes, yet the Son of
man had not where to lay his head. And one morning when he returned from
Jerusalem to Bethania, he is said expressly to have been h^gry, and he refused
in the Matt. 4.
wilderness to turn certain stones into bread for the satisfaction of his own
extreme hungar. And his Apostles were so oppressed in this kind, Matt. 12.
as that they were defended by him, in gathering the ears of that corn, which
belonged to others; yea and that, upon a Sabbath day, which did belong to God;
and except their case had been of precise necessity, they coued not so well
have been excused in doing it.

But the while, though they fed themselves, Christ our Lord did not so; for if
he had, those malicious Jews (whose teeth were sharplier whet against him,
then all the rest, (or rather not against them, at all, but only in regard that
they belonged to him) would have been sure to have bitten him with their
reprehension. So great therefore was his necessity, and yet he would not stretch
forth his arm of power to help himself, by any supernatural means. Nor do
we find (as I was saying) that he who wrought such worlds of miracles for
worlds of men, did serve him self of any one, to his own advantage. Matt. 17.
It is true, that he did miraculously enable S. Peter to take a piece of money
out of the belly of a fish to be paid as tribute to the Prince, though he says
he was no way bound to do it. So that Our Lord would rather work a miracle,
then suffer the occasion of any scandall^
he, who would not work a miracle, for the saving of his own dear life,
would yet be sure to do it, for preventing the scandal of other men. And
withal, that he might show, how obedient men ought to be to their te^porall
Princes, so that it be in things which indeed and truth, are only temporal.

He wrought no miracles, either by way of prevention or for the delivery of
himself, Luc. 4.
from his most wicked enemies; saving only, when, once or twice, he grew
invisible to their eyes, that so he might preserve himself for greater tormets
afterward. When once he came to his Passion, he told them indeed what he could
have obtained of God for his deliverance, Matt. 25.
namely so many Legions of Angels. And he gave them also a taste of what he was
able to do for himself, Ibid.
(if he had been willing) by the miracle which then he wrought upon Malchus.
Joan. 18.
And by that other also of stryking the^ who came to take him, with sad
astonisheme^t, to the ground, by the only saying of Ego sum. But he kept his
miracles for the instruction, and ease of other men; and the only Miracle which
he wrought for himself, was to make (by the omnipotent force, and power of
love) a God of infinite, and eternal Majesty, to undertake, for such worms,
such a world of misery.

He wrought no miracles for the winning of favor from great persons. Luc. 23.
Nor could the splendor of Herod's fortune, nor the extreme curiosity of his
mind (because it was but curiosity) obtain any one, at the hands of our Lord.
Matt. 13. Marc. 6.
He was not desirous, to win the affection and estimation, of his own
co^patriots. For though it cannot be said, but that he wrought some miracles
among them; yet those some, were so very fevv, (by reason of their
incredulity) that in comparison of such as he was pleased to work in other
places, they may, in a manner, be accounted none. He did not, a whit, depend
upon the acknovvledgment, and service, Luc. 17.
which he might expect from such persons as he cured. For we see he was not
discouraged, by the ingratitude of those Leapers, from whom he well knevv,
that it was almost One of ten returned to give him thanks.
ten to one, that he should not have so much as thanks, for his labor.

But the force, and fire of pure, and perfect love alone it was, which moved
that divine heart of our Lord; to pass over the law of nature, by working of
miracles, whenever there were motives, and means to do good to men thereby.
Whilst himself, the while, who was the author of them all, would yet lie (as
has been said) under the same laws of nature; so to work the more easily
upon their souls, by the admirable example of his sufferance, whose bodies he
had restored by a miraculous deliverance.

How all the miracles of the new Testament do tend^ to mercy, and how our Lord
did never deny the suite of any one; and of the tender manner which he held in
granting them.

CHAP. 42.
IF the meaning of Christ our Lord, had been but only to prove that he was God,
he might have insisted upon that course, which formerly had been held, with the
people of God in the old Testament. At which time, howsoever some miracles were
wrought, which tended to the comfort of the good; as that of parting Exodus 15.
the Red sea, when the children of Israel were to pass; and of the Exodus 13.
pillars, both of the Clould, and that of Fire; of Ibid.
the rayning down Deuteronomy. 3.
Manna in the wilderness; and some others; yet these miracles which showed the
love of God to the good, were not so many, by much, as those others, by which
he showed his power and justice against the wicked. As we may easily see, by
the ten miraculous Exodus 9. ande.
Plagues, vvherby Pharao, and the Egyptians were scourged; the burning of
Sodom Genes. 19.
and Gomorrha; the destruction 4. Reg. 19.
of Sennacherib, and his army, with many more.

Much less, can those ancient miracles of mercy, come into competition for
n^ber, with the innumerable miracles of this kind, which were wrought on
earth, by Christ our Lord. Of whom we cannot find, that ever he wrought any
one of revenging Justice; Luc. 9.
nay he rebuked S. James, and even the beloved S. John himself, for moving him
to revenge, by supernatural means, an affront which the Samaritans had put
upon him, Matt. 16.
and them. The Jews indeed desired, to see some sign from heaven, which
might have fed their curiosity; but our Lord who loved them, so infinitely
much more then they did themselves, refused to humor them in that, which was
not to have profited them at all; and which it would have cost him nothing to
perform; and he resolved vvithall, to work another miraracle, (which was
figured in the Prophet Jonas in the belly of the vvhale) which imported the
death of God for their sins; whereby they were admirably to be relicued; and
himself, beyond imagination, to be tormeuted.

Amongst Our Lord did never finally refuse the humble suyte of any one. Matt. 8.
the innumerable creatures, who needed and desired miraculous cure, from Christ
our Lord, we hear not of any one, who was finally frustrate of his suite. Nay
he rejected not the very devils themselves, whom he suffered to enter into that
heard of swyne. His eyes were but as so many conduyts, whereby he brought into
his heart, all the miseries that he saw; and then by the same way, he sent his
mercies out for relief thereof. It is true that sometimes, he seemed as if he
would not grant their suytes, as in the case of the Cananean woman; but it was
but seeming. For indeed, Matt. 15.
he meant, not only to cure the Daughter, but to glorify the mother, for that
full cluster of virtues which she had, of humility, patience, perseverance;
and such an eminency of Faith withal, as that himself was not only pleased to
commend her for it; but (being the true, increated wisdom and knowledge of
God) he would yet be content, to seem obliged to be in admiration, and to make
this exclamation in her honor, O mulier, magna est sides tua; fiat tibi sicut
vis. O woman great is thy Faith; be it unto thee, as thou will. And this he
did, though himself was he, who both gave her grace to conceive it by his
inspiration, and occasion to express it, by the appearance which he made of
her reprehension.

There was no time nor place, nor several disease of body, nor disposition of
mind, to which this divine Physician of the whole man, did not accomodate
himself, with unquenchable charity, and incessant care. Which was a million
of times greater in him, toward every beggar, then any Physician of this world
could ever tell how to carry, toward the only Son of his sovereign king,
whom he had in cure. If Our Lord did acco^modate himself to the cure of all
men, according to their several dispositio^s and necessities. Marc. 5.
men had feeling of their infirmity, and with all, so much desire to be
recovered, as might serve to carry them to the places where he was to be; he
gave them leave, by the increase of their labor, to grow in merit. If they
cried out, as not being able to come quickly to him, he would expect till they
arrived, and then would cure them; as he did the ten leaprous persons; all
leaprous in their bodies, but nine of them more leaprous in their souls, since
they were ungrateful to such a goodness.

If their miseries were great, although their knowledge and belief in him were
very small, he would seek such out, without being sought, Luc. 17. Joan. 5.
Marc. 9. Luc. 9. and 4. and 5. and 8. Marc. 10. Matt. 9. Marc. 2. Matt. 20.
as he did the man, who lay at the Probatica piscina, eight and thirty years.
If it were peradventure, a kind of a middle case, he would meet them in the
half way; or he would require them to be brought to him; or he would stay
as if he stayed not for them, till they came, of themselves; or he would cast
to go, where they were to come; or else where he knevv them to be, he would
not fail to go. And howsoever it were, if he savv the^ in need of help, he
would cure them sometimes, though they did not so much as ask it of him.
Matt. 12. Luc. 14. and 5. Joan. 9. Luc. 9. Matt. 150 Marc. 6.
Which was the case of the man with the withered hand; and the man who was
Hydropicque, and that other also, who was borne blind. And when, at several
times, he fed men, women, and children, by thousands in the desert, there was
not one of them who opened his mouth to ask him meat; but their distress,
was the only Solicitour of his merciful heart, to show the^ pity. If they
delivered him their own petitio^s, Marc. 1. and 12. Luc. 7.
they were sure to be graciously hard; if their case were exposed, by the
intercession of others, they were also as sure not to be rejected. To teach us
thereby, what high co^fide^ce we ought to have in the prayers of saints, since
he heard such sinners for one another.

Now the manner of his cures, was vvithall so deerly svveet, as that they
seem even to exceed the mercy of the very cures themselves. How tenderly
would he be carrying himself toward those poor creatures in all their
necessities. Sometimes he would perform the base Office of leading blind
beggars by his own hand; and he would conduct both blind, and deaf, and
dumb persons out of company, Marc. 7. and 8.
that he might enjoy them alone; and so make the^ know vvithall, and us by
the^, that for the cure of al our spiritual diseases, it is fit for us
sometimes to retire our selves, hand to hand with God. Nay those hands of his,
would not disdain to touch the loathsome and polluted flesh of leapers. And
though many make great dainty, Matt. 8.
to serve sick persons, who are subject to less foul diseases, (whereas our
Lord had said, that in serving them, Matt. 25.
we should be giving comfort to himself) yet to the eternal glory of his
name, and by the merit of his example, and through the power of his grace, we
will acknowledge, and be glad, that in his holy Catholic Apostolicque Roman
Church, the Spirit of this holy practice, does still live. And The good custom
of serving in Hospitals.
that there are thousands, and many thousands amongst us of all conditions,
sexes, and ages, who in imitation of our Lords humility and charity, are daily
visiting sick persons: Instructing, comforting, and feeding them, both in body
and soul; procuring to ease them in their pains, and making their beds; and
drying their sweats, and wyping their sores. It were a shame that the servants
of God, should not employ themselves in these good exercises; when they
consider how Christ our Lord did put those omnipotent fingars of his own,
Mare. 7. Ibid.
into the ears of those poor creatures, and into their mouths; Joan. 9.
Joan. 11.
and how himself made plasters for their eyes; and how he would sigh, and
groan to consider sin in their souls, and the miserable effects thereof, in
their very bodies of flesh, and blood.

We see how he prayed, and how he wept at the raising of Lazarus; and how,
through the excess of love, wherewith he desired to restore him to life, the
Scripture says, Infremuit spiritu; Joan. 11.
which betokned, (as it were) a kind of tumult, and tempest of his affections,
which were working and wrestling with God, in the behalf of that dead man. In
so much as the lookers on did wonder to see, that so great a Prophet, and the
worker of so many and strange miracles, should lament, and weep like another
ordinary person. And they easily inferred thereby, that those tears, and other
greater demonstrations of grief, must needs proceed from some puissant cause;
and so they said to one another, in the way of wondering: Behold how he loved
that man. Ibid.


Yet Lazarus indeed, and his friends, had obliged our Lord by particular
services to his own sacred person; whereas the holy Text affirms in many other
places, that his divine pity and mercy, did work most tenderly also toward
others, upon whom he had no other eye at all, then as they were parts of
mankind, all which he did so deerly love. And therefore he pitied both their
general and particular miseries, as appears by the story of the widow, in
the death of her son; Luc. 7. Matt. 13. Mar. 8. Matt. 23^
and of the people in the wilderness, for their distress of hungar; and
especially of the city of Jerusalem, when, with his eyes full of tears, he
lamented their misery, as has been said else where.

The holy Scripture also affirms, not only that he pitied them, Matt. 1^.
Marc. 8.
but that himself would profess and say as much; And besides he ordained,
that the notice of it should be left to us upon record. And what charming words
were those, when he would bid them, Ask Joan. 16.
and have, that their joy might be full; and when he would say, What Marc. 10.
will thou have me do? Yea and also, in express terms, Be it unto thee Matt.
15.
as thou will, thy self. As if he were content, that man should be, as it
were, his own caruer, out of the very omnipotency of God; and that the mercy
of God, were to have no other measure, then man's own desire. And when he would
say, My self will Matt. 8.
go and cure the sick person at thy house. And when, being the sovereign
King of glory, he would yet become a beggar of a cup of could water of the
Joan. 4.
Samaritan women, whilst, the while, he was filling her soul with the water of
grace, which instantly might take all possibility of further thirst from her.
And when he would call them by many and most tender names, as we have showed
upon another occasion; And when he would beg of them that they would sin no
more; And when he would so labouriously defend and plead the cause of S. Mary
Luc. 37.
Magdalene, his enamoured penitent; And when he confounded that hypocrysy and
pride of the Jews; and had such divine pity of the poor Joan. 8.
Adultresse; And when he would go as he did to him who was borne Joan. 9.
blind; whom himself would needs vouchsafe to seek, as soon as he was
excommunicated by the Jews: And having found him, he gave him comfort, and
passed sometime in his conversation; and withdrew that curtain, which he
suffered still to hang betwixt him and others; and told him, at last, in
plain and powerful terms, Ibid.
That the Savior of the world was then speaking to him.

The great laboriousnesse of Love, which our Lord Jesus, expressed in the
working of his Miracles, is more declared.

CHAP. 43.
NOW withal, this love which our Lord, expressed in the working of his
miracles, was no nice, or wary kind of love. For it cost him excessive pains,
and labor; and employed him in iourneying through all that hilly co^try on
foot; as may be seen throughout the whole Evangelical history, to find
matter, Matt. 9. Marc. 6.
for his mercy of that kind, to work upon. And sometimes, all Iewry not being
able to contain, and compass in those bowels of his charity; he would be
breaking out, into the skirts of the Gentiles, Matt. 25.
which he began to ennoble and sanctify by his presence. And whersoeuer he
were, he was importuned by poor people to take pity on them; and he had so
much toward them, that he had none of himself. But he prayed for them by
night, and he labored for them by day, and that so hard; that as sometimes
Matt. 4. and 12. and 15.
he had no bread to eat, so, at othertymes, he had not so Marc. 3.
much as leave, or time to eat it in; yea or so much, as Marc. 2. and 3.
even scarce means to stir through the press of people which came about
him. At all hours was he ready to give them health, if they had been ready
always to receive it. But (the Country, in summer, begin extremly hot) for
them to have repaired to him, in the heat of the day, would have been perhaps,
but to have exchanged one sickness for another. Or else, though the Patients
would have been glad to be carried or conducted, the men who were to help
them, had not charity enough to endure the trouble.

But howsoever the Patients, or their friends did stand affected, the
Physician was still at hand; and he desired no better Fee, then to be doing
them favor. And What troops of sick persons were brought to our B. Lord for
eure. Luc. 4.
so therefore in the euenings, about Sunne-set, the holy Scripture shows,
what troops of people of all those villages, towns, and cities would come
in about him. Drawing out dying men into the sight of that truer, and brighter
sun, which was ever shining toward them, as at noone day. Not only did he
cure them all; but besides the benefit it self of their health, he imparted it
with so much tenderness of love, as not to permit that there should be so much
as any one of them all, whom he would not touch with his own pure
powerful hands; though he was infinitely able to have cured them all at
once, Luc. 4.
and with the least word of his mouth, or even with the will of his heart. At
other times again, he would accomplish their desires in another form. And as
before he cured them, by touching them with his own sacred flesh to show his
love; so now, he would do it by letting the^ touch his garments, Marc. 6.
or his person, to show his power.

There might you have seem, as if it had been, a very Market or Fair, of
sick Folks of all diseases, both of body and mind; which went Progress with
him, whersoeuer he had a mind to go. Some leaning upon staves; some carried in
men's arms; and some in their beds upon wheel barrowes. A running A running
ca^pe of soldiers, who had been wounded by sin.
camp it was, of soldiers, who had all been wounded in the war by their
enemies; and they hoped for help by flying toward the Colors of this
Captain. And we may make account, that though he were the King both of heaven,
and earth, yet he took not so much gust in being courted by the Angels of
heaven, as he did in being haunted, by this hospital, which went ever creeping
after him, on earth.

This Many Hospitalls in one.
hospital had all kinds of hospitals made up in one. One hospital for all
sorts, of ordinary diseases; as Feauers, Dropsies, Fluxes of blood, and the
like. Another for the Blind; Another for the Lame; Another for the Deaf;
Another for the Dumb; Another for the Leaprous; Another for the Paraliticques;
Another for the Lunatiques; and another for persons who were possessed by
devils; and who would ever have continued so, unless that right hand of God,
had cast them out. But A strange spectacle.
what a spectacle then, would it have been to see a number of diseased,
distressed, and defeated persons; at an instant, all become new men. All the
Dumb, being able to speak; the Deaf, to hear; the Lame, to go; the blind,
to see; the mad men, to discourse with reason; and the dying men, to show
health and strength. How, I say, would they look, with a face of wonder and
amazement, upon one another; as scarcely believing what they felt, and heard,
and saw when they found the scene of all the world to be so changed at once.
For then Christ our Lord (of whom S. Peter said, Act. 10.
Quod pertransijt benefaciendo) curing all such as were oppressed by the devil
even as fast as he could go, was rayning The great labor, and the great love
of our Lord.
down from those liberal hands of his, the several blessings, whereof every
one had greatest need. And this he did, with a heart so tenderly behoulding, in
every particular creature, the image of his eternal Father, that it made him
love the meanest of them, a million of times, more then his own precious life.
And so observing how in every one of the^, that Image was grown to be defaced,
which himself had made, he took care to reform it, which no power but his
could arrive unto.

There have been in the world, certain ambitious sculptours, who conceauing
themselves withal, to be of matchless Skill, would take pleasure and pride,
(when they were in making any curious Image, or statue) to leave some ear, or
fingar, or some part of the foot unfinished. Thereby sending out, a secret kind
of defiance, to any other of their profession, who would presum to make that,
like the rest. But The omnipotent power and lone, of the divine Artificer.
this heavenly Sculptour of ours, who made not only the forms, but the matter
also, of the creatures; was both more cunning, and more charitable then the
former. For at the first, he made all the Images of his Father most complete;
nor was there any want of that perfection, which they could desire. And
afterward, when they grevv to be defaced, and broken, through the falls
which they took by actual sin (besides Adams fall which infected the^ with
original sin) one of the^ wanting an arm, another an eye, (for all these and
the like were the effects and fruits of sin) he was pleased to bring, with
a kind of greedy heart, the same hand of strength, which before, had made those
arms and eyes, to restore them, as by a kind of second creation.

But O thou infinite God! and who shall ever be able to tell us, how the
tenderness of this love did make that very heart of thine, a kind of most true
interior How the heart of our Lord was the true hospital of mercy. Job. 29.
hospital, whereby all those other hospitalls were fed; and whereinto their
miseries were received; and from whence they were supplied with all that
mercy, vvherof they had need. For if Job had such a heart, as made him be an eye
to the blind, a foot to the lame, and a Father to the Orphane, (for as much
as he grieved at the miseries which lay upon poor people, and procured to
remove them, by works of mercy) how much more are we to believe it of
Christ our Lord. In No mercy must compare, with that of Christ our Lord.
comparison of whose least mercy, the greatest mercy of Job, was mere
cruelty. Tell us therefore dear Lord, how full that heart of thine was of
eyes; and how many vvayes they were looking, all at once, for our both
te^porall and eternal good? For whilst thou were curing the bodies of some,
thou had an aim at the miraculous recovery of the souls of others. He cured
S. Peter and S. Andrew of the intricate netts, and perplexed cares of worldly
business. And S. James and S. John, Matt. 4. Marc. 1. Matt. 9. Marc. ^^ Luc. 5.
Luc. 7.
not only of wordly affairs, but of wordly affections to their friends. S.
Matthew he brought from unlawful gaynes; and S. Mary Magdalene from impure
pleasures. And every one of these, and many, many more, at an instant, by the
only cast of a countenance, or some one single word of his sacred mouth, having
first received a tincture from his enamoured heart.

How the corporal Miracles of our Lord Jesus, had an aim at the reformation
of souls, and did tend to the discovering, and facilitating the belief of
great Mysteryes.

CHAP. 44.
THE corporal miracles themselves, did all carry a kind of respect, to the
souls, either of the^, on whom they were wrought, or else of others. And that
not only, by way of purging them in point of life; but of illuminating them
also by way of most perfect understanding, and belief; yea and yet further, by
way of uniting them to himself, through pure and perfect love. Fitting every
thing, with divine wisdom, to every person, according to the several
disposition, which he was found to have. Christ our Lord (as S. Augustine
says) did intend: That whatsoever he wrought corporally, S. Aug. sermon. 44. de
verbis Domini.
might spiritually also be understood. He wrought not (says he) those miracles
for the miracles alone; but that, as those things which he exposed to the sight
of men, were acknowledged to be strange; so those other things, which he
insinuated thereby to the understanding, might be embraced as true. And S.
Gregory declares (to the same effect) That the miraculous works of Christ our
Lord, Hom. 21 in Euang.
did show one thing, by the power which they expressed; and did declare
another, by the mystery which they contained.

There The relation which corporal diseases have to spiritual.
was not therefore, a corporal miracle, wrought by Christ our Lord, which had
not also a relation, to the discovery, and cure of some spiritual disease of
the mind. The defenes of men, did show, a not complying with heavenly
inspirations. Their blindenes, a darkness of understanding. Their Fevers a
boiling up of sensual appetite, which caused extreme disorder in the will.
Their leaprosies, a rooted impurity of the soul. Their Lunacies a mad
inconstancy of the mind. Their Paralisies an unaptness and weakness toward all
good works. Their dropsies, a gredines after gain, together with a swelling
up of Pride. And sinally, their being possessed, a state of men, who were
reprobately given over to sin; together with the bitter servitude, wherein the
devil holds such as become his slaves.

No one sigh was uttered by Christ our Lord; no one tear was shed, but with
intention to instruct us, how to deplore our misery and how to implore the
divine mercy. There was The mysteries which were contained, and the ceremonies
which were sanctified by his miracles.
not a motion of his hand (with relation to the cure of any man) wherein some
mystery was not wrapped up; or else some ceremony sanctified; and recommended to
the use of the holy Church. And so we see, how in the administration of
Baptism, those very ceremonies are embraced by us, which Christ our Lord did
use to sick persons of several kinds; all whose spiritual diseases, do
meet in the person of an infant, till he be baptized. For he is spiritually
deaf, and therefore does the Priest put his fingars into the child's ears, and
cries Ephata. He is spiritually dumb, and therefore his tongue is touched with
spittle. And he is yet in the power of the devil, and a child of wrath, and
therefore is he exorcized, as we see, to have been done upon possessed persons,
by our B. Lord. Oftentimes, he cured both the bodies of sickness, and the souls
of sins, though the Patients desired but to be corporally cured. And when he
did not cure their souls, it was only because they were not, nor would not be
well disposed to receive that blessing. But otherwise, what he wrought upon
their bodies was ordained by that divine goodness to the help of their fowls;
and if they hearkened to his inspirations, they did instantly recover both in
the outward and inward man.

Many also of the miracles of Christour Lord, Many miracles were ordained by
our Lord to facilitate the belief of Christian Religion. Joan. 11. Matt. 14.
Matt. 15. Marc. 8.
did sweetly prepare a way for the belief of other nobler miracles, which did
also concern the highest mysteries of the Catholic faith. As namely, the
raising up of Lazarus, disposed men to believe the resurrection of the dead, at
the last day. And those two miracles of the walking of our Lord upon the sea,
and the stupendous multiplying of the loaves of bread in the desert, do both
together, open a fair and ready passage, toward a belief of the Catholic
Doctrine, concerning the real presence of our blessed Lord, in the most
venerable Sacrament of the Altar. For, his walking on the sea, showed that his
body was no way subject to the ordinary conditions of a natural body,
whenever he should be pleased to exempt it from them, although of it self,
it were a perfect natural body. And his multiplying of the loaves, did
deliver, in plain language to the world, the sovereign power which he had,
and has, to multiply, what, and how much, he would. Which two points being
accorded, there remains no difficulty in believing our doctrine of the real
presence of our Lord in the blessed Sacrament.

So The conclusion of this discourse, of the miracles of Christ our Lord.
that to conclude, the love of our Lord JESUS, in the working of his miracles
was extraordinarily great. Both because the things themselves were so greatly
great; and because they were wrought, with such a perfect and pure intention,
of Gods greatest glory, and our greatest good. They tended not only as we have
seen, to the cure of bodies, but also of souls. And not only of souls, to be
converted at that time; but through all ages also afterward, by the discovery
of our spiritual infirmities; and by the institution of most holy ceremonies;
and by facilitating a belief of the highest mysteries. Making one miracle, to
be a step, and introduction for another; as I have showed in the particular of
the blessed Sacrament. And Consider all these circumstances with attention.
if for every one of them alone, a loyal and grateful heart, would find it
self obliged to love him, withal the power it has; what effect ought such an
abundant cause (as they all, together do make up) to work in us, and how
ought they to induce us to honor and adore such an incessa^t goodness. For if
it would go for a great favor, that a Principal man should once vouchsafe to
visit a sick beggar or leprous slave; and the more principal the one of them
were, and the more base the other, so much the greater fanour it would be; And
if to that visit, he should be pleased to add the tenderness of some
compassionate speech, and alms, and even of corporal service about that
creature; and not only once, but often; and not only to one, but to all the
world; how justly would such a charity, exact all admiration at our hands?

Let us therefore love and eternally adore our blessed Lord, who being the God
of heaven and earth, vouchsafed to look upon such miserable creatures as we
are with such eyes of pity. And How those ancient miracles, oblige us to the
love of our Lord.
although those former cures, were not wrought for the recovery of our
individual bodies; yet there is no single circumstance belonging to any one of
them, which gives not a copious supply of instruction and comfort to our
souls; and especially that last and greatest miracle, of all miracles, of the
institution of the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar. So that, to omit all
other modern miracles (which yet are innumerable) Christ our Lord does still
work miracle upon miracle in this blessed Sacrament. For this is consecrated
in thousands of places, daily and hourly; and it is imparted as easily and
liberally to the worst and wickedest of us all (if even now at last, we have a
resolution to mend) as it was to his own most blessed mother, and his Apostles.
And this, is not only a lasting miracle of instruction, and direction, and
consolation, both of body and soul, as those others were; but it is a miracle
of high communication and perfect union. Whereby the omnipotent Majesty of God,
Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. Joan. 13.
is content, after a sort, to make sinful man, become one thing with himself.
That divine goodness vouchsafing to leave it to his Church by way of Legacy in
the night precedent to his passion, as even now I am endeavoring to show.

Of the infinite Love which our Lord Jesus, showed to us, in the institution of
the blessed Sacrament, and the holy Sacrifice of the Mass.

CHAP. 45.
OUR Lord God of his goodness give us grace, that in us it may be verified,
which has been uttered by his own sacred mouth: Habenti dabitur; Matt. 13.
To him who has, shall be given. And that, since he has endued us with Faith,
in the belief of the mysteries of his precious life and death; we may still
have Faith, more and more; wherewith to give a firm, and feeling, and inflamed
kind of assent, to all the testimonies of his infinite love, which have been
made to us, his miserable creatures. For What loades of mercy our Lord does lay
upon our souls.
verily, in this kind, he lays such load upon us; and does, as it were, so
press us even to death with his dear mercies; that if the eyes of our minds,
were not elevated by his supernatural grace, and fixed thereby upon an
infallible truth; we might be beaten blind with seeing, and starued with
surfeiting, as we see many others are; and the very vastnes of those mysteries
which are opened to us for our comfort, by Christ our Lord, would make us half
doubt, whether they were, or could be true, or no.

The beloved Apostle, and Evangelist S. John, had lodged himself, so long, so
near the heart of our blessed Lord; that he was easily able to discern, and
declare how excellently he loved us from the beginning; and that withal, his
love continued toward us to the end. Jesus autem, Joan. 13.
cum dilexisset suos, in finem dilexit eos. Nay the motion of the love of his
divine heart toward man, having been so natural in him; it is no marvel if
it went more violently in the end of his sacred life, then at the beginning.
All the passions of that happy soul, were intyrely subject to the command of
his reason; and he held it to be a thing agreeable to the dignity and
immutability of the God he was, to speak of all things (as was touched before)
after a positive manner, and wonderfully (as we use to say) within compass.
Superlatiues, and Exaggerations used to be thin sowed in the blessed mouth of
our Lord JESUS. Nor is he, in effect, ever found to have said any thing, as
seeming to have been transported with any extraordinary, or passionate desire,
or care; but When he came toward the passion our Lord did seem to break his
pace.
only concerning that which he was to suffer in his sacred Passion, and that
which he was to do, in the night precedent to the same.

When formerly he was aduising his Apostles to have great confidence in the
providence of God, (by letting them see what a care he had even of sparrowes;
and inferring thereby, that he would incomparably more, have care of them) he
exaggerated not the matter, Matt. 10.
but did only ask: If themselves were not to be more esteemed then many
sparrowes? Whereas yet one soul, is more in the sight of God, not only the^
many sparrowes, but then all the whole material world put together. When he had
a mind to tell them, what a misery it was for that wretch, that he would make
himself the betrayer of the son of man; Matt. 8^.
he only said; woe be to that man, it had been better for him if he had never been borne; which was but a very plain, and positive manner of expression. For
as much as, not only this greatest sin which ever was perhaps conceived, but
the least mortal sin that can be imagined, without repentance, does make a
man much more unhappy, then if he were utterly deprived of being. When he
professed the omnipotency of his eternal Fathers power, to deliver him out of
the hands of them who took and tied him; he told them only, Matt. 26.
that if he should pray for any help of that kind, his Father would send, more
then twelve legions of Angels, to his succor. Whereas he might as good cheap
have said, twelve thousand, as twelve legions. But our Lord JESUS, was not wont
to use any superlatiue manner of speech; and he has had many servants, who
have carefully imitated him in this, as in the rest. But yet never thelesse,
when he reflected upon the thought of that passion, which he was resolved to
undergo for the Redemption of man; the very desire of the approach of so happy
a day, made him confess, that he was in pain, till it did arrive. Luc. 12.
Baptismo habeo baptizari, and quomodo coactor, donec veniat. Or rather he did
not so much say, that he was in pain, as by words of interrogation, (in the
way, after a sort, of seeming impatient) he asked himself this very question
in effect; How much am I payned, how straitely am I imprisoned, til I have my
fill of suffering for the love of man?

Just Our Lord did long for the time when he might institute the B. Sacrament.
so may we see, that when the time of celebrating the feast of the Paschal
lamb was come; he grew even greedily desirous, to eat it, in the company of
his B. Apostles, before his Passion. And for their comfort, he would not choose
but say, Luc. 22.
Desiderio desider aui manducare vobiscum hoc Pascha antequam patiar. That he
desired it, and that with desire upon desire; and such desire, as could never
be appeased, till he were satisfied, till that time of the last supper were
past, wherein he had resolved to impart unspeakable tokens of his love to them;
and so the other time of his Passion, wherein he was to endure the depth of all
torments, and affronts for the same love, were then immediately to come.

In the evening therefore, and within few hours of his Passion, this enamoured
Lord of ours, having all the parts and passages thereof in his eye, and looking,
as it were, in the very face of death, and such a death; he yet Our Lord kept
the show of all his sorrow to himself. Joan. 13.
laid up all the sorrow in his own heart, and would discover to his Apostles,
no other semblance then of joy and comfort, least his grief might be a cause
of theirs. He conuersed with them after his ordinary and familiar manner; he
disposed himself first to eat the Paschall lamb with them. After that, he
sat down with them to a common Supper; He kept his divine countenance full of
quietness and peace; He took them close about him, on all sides; He cheered
them up, with his gracious eyes, and he carved them with his liberal hands.
Nay with those hands, (to the dispe^sation whereof his eternal Father had
committed all things) he disdayned not then, to wash the unclean feet of
those poor Apostles. For which purpose first, he put of his upper garment, as
any hired servant was to have done; Joan. 13.
and by the force of his own arms, he took a big vessel full of water, and
out of that, he silled a lesser. He girt himself with a towell, into which he
took their corporal uncleanness; as a figure of how he would purify their
hearts, by his sacred Passion; For then he was to bear the deformity of their
sins upon the shoulders of his body, which was a kind of winding sheet to his
soul. When our Lord had thus performed this act of religion, in eating of the
Paschall lamb; and of incomparable suauity in his conversation; and of
unspeakable humility, in the Lotio^ of his Apostles feet; he returned to the
table, and amazed all the The Angels might well be amazed to see the son of
God give his own body in food to sinners.
Angels of heaven, whose understanding did even agonize, in seeing him
perform, that supereminent act of Charity; when he instituted the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, and ordained the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, which was
so worthy of an infinite God.

This was done by divine goodness, immediately upon his having washed the
Apostles feet. And our Lord was pleased, by that unspeakable humility of his,
to prepare, and exalt them to a participation of so high mysteries, as were to
follow. Joan. 7.
The holy Ghost was not then descended, because the son of man was not
ascended up to heaven. And therefore it is no marvel, if S. Peter, were at
that time to seek, concerning the reason, why our Lord would use such an
excess as that. But he was told, that he should understand the mystery
afterward, Joan. 13.
and then he would easily know withal, that The great purity which is
requisite, to a Catholic Priest.
no purity in this world could be too great, for the disposing of themselves,
to that which they went about; which was to be ordained Priests; and not only
to partake, but also to dispense the precious body and blood, of our blessed
Lord.

Our Lord JESUS did therefore take bread into his hands; he blessed it, and gave
thereof to his Disciples, when first he had pronounced the words of Consecration
over it. Declaring, and consequently making it, to be that very body of his,
which was to be offered upon the Cross. That being done, he also took the
Chalice, and he consecrated that in like manner; affirming, and thereby also
making it, to be that very blood, which was to be powered out afterward, for the
salvation of the world. He authorized and commanded them withal, to do the
like in commemoration of what he should have done, and suffered for them.

Now incomparable was the love which our Lord showed heerin both in substance
and circumstance. In Most strong in substance, and most sweet in circumstance.
substance, because he gave himself for the food of his servants; and in the
manner of it, because he did it in such a sweet, and tender fashion toward
them; and at such a time, when yet his own heart, was oppressed with sorrow,
through the foreknowledge, and expectation of his bitter Passion, which was
the^ at hand. Nay he was pleased (as appears by the words of the sacred Text)
to be In the very consecration, he speak and thought of his Passion.
feeding his thoughts actually upon how he was to give his body up, by his
bitter Passion, and to shed his blood, by a violent, and most dishonorable
effusion, even whilst he was granting that legacy, and consecrating the same
body and blood of his, for the comfort and joy of mankind, under the familiar
and delightful forms of bread and wine. He was taking his leave of them,
though yet he knew not how to leave them. But as he went from them, in that
visible manner, according to which he had conuersed with the^ til that time;
so yet, he would bind himself to come in person to them for their comfort,
though in another form, whensoever they should have a mind to call him.

How our Lord would not harken to those reasons, which might have dissuaded him
from showing this great mercy to man. Of the necessity of a visible Sacrifice:
and how our Lord himself, does still offer it.

CHAP. 46.
IF reason might have prevailed, it seems that he should have taken heed what
he was about do. Matt. 7.
That if Pearls were not to be cast to swyne, much less was this inualuable
jewel, to be misspent upon so many, who would continually be vvallovving
in the filth of sin. That there would be a world of Pagans, Jews,
Heretics, and who would not believe, and would blaspheme the truth thereof.
That millions of Catholics, though they did believe it, would not yet frequent
it, but would rather for bear this bread of life, and this fountain of
heavenly water, then the muddy miserable gust of some carnal pleasure, or some
base interest of the world, which yet does but lead them from a Purgatory in
this life, to a Hell in the next. That some would do worse then to abstain;
for notwithstanding that they resolved still to sin, they would yet presume
with Sacrilegious mouth to profane this Lord of heaven and earth; and to bring
God into that house, whereof the devil had possession and dominion. And in
fine, that they would be too few, who would often resort to it with due
reverence of that Majesty; with hungar after true sanctity; with love of that
immense beauty; and with that purity of heart which might forbid them to lavish
and wast themselves away, in pursuit of creatures.

This might have seemed to be the voice of reason which was to have diuerted
our blessed Lord, from submitting himself to such indignity, as he seemed, by
his mercy, to grow subject to. But How the infinite love of our Lord made
answer in our behalf to this infinite wisdom.
he, on the other side, would needs understand it to be otherwise. And that he
being an infinite God, it would become him well, to be infinitely good. That
it should not be long of him, if all the world were not inchayned to him by
love. That if any man would either undervalue the benefit; and much more if he
would abuse it otherwise, a most rigorous account should be asked thereof. And
that, in the mean time, it would be comfort enough for him, if such as were
resolved to serve him, might be incorporated to him; not only by supernatural
grace, but by this supersubstantiall bread, which should cause an unspeakable
union between him and them. This was a principal reason, why our Lord was
pleased to institute both this divine Sacrifice and Sacrament in this last
supper of his; but he did it, besides, for the fulfilling of Prophesies, and
the perfecting of the figures of the old Testament.

He was not come, as himself had formerly affirmed, To break the law, but to
fulfill it. And therefore as he was pleased to eat the Paschall lamb, with all
those Ceremonies which the law required, and which, till then, were to be of
force; so The Paschall lamb was a figure, both of the death of Christ our
Lord, and of the B. Sacrament.
the same, being partly a figure of the Passion and Death, of our Lord JESUS;
and much more properly, of the Blessed Sacrament, and the holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, it became his Truth and Goodness, to ordain and institute them at that
time.

For his Church in every one of the states thereof, as well under the law of
nature, as the written law, was the Spouse of Christ our Lord; and in virtue of
that only conjunction, it was acceptable and pleasing to the eternal Father.
But particularly it was to be so, under the Law of Grace, when once it should
come to be fed, by his sacred body, and inebriated by his precious blood. And
therefore, as in those former times, the Church of Christ our Lord, had never
been without her Sacrifices (neither is there indeed, or can there be, any true
Religion, without a real, and proper Sacrifice) so much less would he
permit, that Spouse, under the law of grace, to want this sovereign means,
whereby to protest the faithful, and incommunicable homage, which she ovves,
to him. For The Oblation of Sacrifice is the highest act of religion.
a Sacrifice, is a worship of Latria; and the supreme act of religion, whereby
(through the oblation, and external mutation of some corpor all thing,
(according to the particular rites, and sacred ceremonies which are performed,
by persons, who are peculiarly deputed for that purpose and are called Priests)
the excellency of the divine Majesty, and the supreme Dominion which it has,
over the life and death of all the creatures, is acknowledged and protested.
Now therefore, Christ our Lord, would not deprive us of this blessing. But as,
with great advantage to us, he had already changed the Circumcision of the old
law, into Baptism; so also was the divine Goodness pleased, to make all those
figurative Sacrifices of the same old law, yield up their possession in the
new, and give place to this one other most excellent Sacrifice, of his own
most precious body and blood.

The Sacrifices of the old law, were bloody; Number. 1. and 3.
and they were offered by that branch of the Tribe of Leui, which descended
from Aron. But yet Melchisedech, also was a Priest, and that long before; Genesis
14. Psalm. 109.
and he offered an unbloody Sacrifice, and it consisted of bread and wine. Now
Christ our Lord, who is our true high Priest; did sum up all the Sacrifices
of both those kinds, into his own sacred self. For as those former bloody
Sacrifices, did prefigure the Sacrifice of his precious life upon the Cross;
so that other of bread and wine, did prefigure the Sacrifice of the holy
Mass. And so truly and properly, is this last a Sacrifice, and so truly was
he the Priest, who offered it first in this last supper of his; and so truly
did he ordain his Apostles to do the like by those words, Hocfacite in meam
commemorationem, Do this in commemoration of me, Luc. 22.
(and in their persons, all those others also, of succeding ages were
appointed to do it, who should in like manner, be ordained by them) that
unless this truth be sincerly and religiously granted, we shall never be able
to verify those words of the holy Ghost, vvherby it was prophesied thus by
David, Psalm. 109.
concerning Christ our Lord, and so understood by the holy Fathers of the
Church (as we shall shortly see,) Tues sacerdos in aeternum, secundum ordinem
Melchisedech: Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech.

But a true and lawful Priest he is, after the order of Melchisedech, and a
Priest he is to be, till the end of the world. And although he be reigning
still in heaven, yet continually does he exercise this office of his, by his
deputies, who are true Catholic Priests. And principally it is he, who
offers up his own body and blood, together with them; he being the only
true Original Priest, and these other (though properly and truly Priests) yet
being but partakers of his Power, and Order, by his grace. Now this body and
blood of our Lord JESUS who is the one only Sacrifice, and who was offered
up in a bloody manner upon the Cross, is now offered daily, in an unbloody
manner upon our Altars. Containing The sacrifice of the Mass is both
Propitiatory Impetratory, and of thanksgiving; and does benefit both the quick
and dead. Mala. ^.
in it self, all sufficiency, and abundance of grace, both for the living and
dead; for the propitiation of sin, and the pains which follovv it; the
thanksgiving for benefits already received, and the impetration of graces to be
hereafter granted, by Almighty God. And this is that Sacrifice whereof Malachy
did so clearly prophesy; when (reproving the Sacrifices of the old law) he
spoke thus, as in the time of the law of grace: Ab ortu solis, vsque ad
occasum, magnum est nomen meum in gentibus etc. From the rising of the sun,
to the going down thereof, great is my name among the gentiles. And in every
place, there is sacrificing, and there is offered to my name a clean oblation;
because my name is great among the Gentills, says the Lord of Hosts.

Of the judgment which the holy Fathers of the Church have always made of
this holy Sacrifice, and B. Sacrament; and the great veneration, which they had
them in; and the motives whereby we may be induced to do the like.

CHAP. 47.
WELL might the Prophet say, that this Sacrifice was pure and clean, since
it is no less then God himself; though not as God, but man. And the chief
Priest also is God who daily offers up the same, together with the
subordinate Priest. And although no Quire of Angels can speak as
magnificently of it, as the thing deserves; yet the Fathers of the Church have
done their best, to acknovvledge and admire it. And for the comfort of my
reader, I will cite him a fevv of the many passages which are found in them.

Who is more the Priest of God, says Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 3.
S. Cyprian, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a Sacrifice to God the
Father, and he offered that which Melchisedech offered, towit, bread and wine,
that is to say, his own body and blood.

When we offer this Sacrifice, says Cyril. Hierosol. (one of the fathers of
the first Council of Nice) in Catech. mist. 5.
Saint Cyrill, we afterward make mention of the dead.

We erect not Altars to Martyrs, says August. de ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 10.
Idem. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
S. Augustine, but we offer Sacrifice to him alone, who is the God both of them
and us. This S. Augustine says; and he relates else where of his mother, That
when she was dying, she desired him to remember her, at the Altar, where she
was wont to be present, every day; and from whence she knew that holy Sacrifice
The body of our Lord.
to be dispensed, whereby the hand writing was blotted out which was contrary to
us.

Our flesh, says Tertul. l. deresurrect. carnit cap. 8.
Tertullian, does secd upon the body and blood of Christ, that the soul also
may be made fat with God.

The bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, ( as Cypr. de coena Domini.
S. Cyprian says of the Real Presence) being changed not in show, but in
substance, by the omnipotency of the word, was made flesh. That as in the
person of Christ the humanity was seen, and the divinity lay hid; so has the
divine essence unspeakably powered it self, into this invisible Sacrament.

We do rightly believe, says Gregor. Nyssen. in oratione catechistica cap. 37.
S. Gregory of Nisse, that bread being sanctified, by the word of God, is
transmuted into the body of the word of God.

We know, and have it for most assured, says Cyril. Ierosol. cathe. Mist. 4.
S. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem, that this bread which is seen by us, is not
bread, although the taste esteem it to be bread, but that it is the body of
Christ.

Many mothers, says Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Matt.
S. Chrysostom, put out their children, when they are borne, to be nursed by
others; but Christ our Lord would not do so, but does nourish us with his
own body, and so does conioyne, and glue us to himself.

O miracle! Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerde tio.
O benignity of God, says the same S. Chrysostom! He that sits above, with
the Father, at the same instant is handled by the hands of all; and he delivers
himself up to such as will receive and embrace him. And in Chrysostom. hom. 24
c. 10.1. Epist. ad Corinth.
another place, he says thus, That which is in the Chalice, flowed out of his
side, and of that do we communicate.

This indeed, as says S. Saint Ephrem (who was familiar with Saint Basil the
great) lib. de natura Dei non serutanda cap. 5.
Ephrem, exceeds all admiration, all speech, and all conceit, which Christ
our Savior the only begotten son of God, has done. To us who are clad with
flesh, he has given fire, and spirit to eat, namely his body, and his blood.

My bread, says Ambros. l. 4. de Sacra men^is.
S. Ambrose, is usual bread but this bread is bread, before the words of the
Sacrament, but when the consecration once does come, of bread it is made the
flesh of Christ. Let us therefore settle this point how that which is bread, can
be made the body of Christ? By consecration. This consecration, of what speech
and words does it consist? Of the words and speech of our Lord Jesus. For all
the rest which is said, is either praise given to God, or there are particular
prayers, made for the people, and for Kings, and others. But when he comes to
the time of making the B. Sacrament, the Priest does no longer speak in his
own words, but in the words of Christ. The speech therefore of Christ, is that
which makes this Sacrament. What speech of Christ? Thevery same whereby al
things were made. Our Lord commanded, and the heaven was made. Our Lord
commanded, and the earth was made. Our Lord commanded, and the sea was made.
Our Lord commanded and all the creatures were made. Thou see therefore how
effectually the speech of Christ does work. If Note this consequence.
then there be such power in the speech of our Lord Jesus, as to make those
things be, which were not; how much more effectually, will it work toward the
making of them be which are; and to make them be changed, into other, then what
they were. Therefore Mark well the express authority of this Saint.
that I may answer thee, I say: That it was not the body of Christ, before the
consecration; but after the consecration, I say to thee, that then, it is the
body of Christ.

Christ was carried, says Aug. in Psalm. 33. Conc. 1. Ibid.
S. Augustine, in his own hands, when commending his body to his Apostles, he
said, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, for then he carried his body in his
hands.

And again, Our Lord would place our salvation, in his body, and blood. But
how did he commend his body and blood to us? In his humility. For unless he
were humble, he would not be eaten and drunk.

The good Pastor, says Greg. in hom. 14. in Euang.
S. Gregory the great, laid down his life for his sheep, that he might turn
his body and blood into our Sacrament, and might feed the sheep which he had
redeemed, by the nutriment of his flesh.

Under the species of bread ( says S. Cyril. Ierosol. in Catech. Mist. 4.
Cyrillus Ierosolymitanus) the body is given thee; and under the species of
blood, the wine; that so thou may become participant of his body and blood.
So shall we by (...), that is Carryers of Christ, when we shall have received
his body and blood, into our body; and so, as S. Peter says we shall be made
consorts of the divine nature.

And ( according to that of S. Cyril. l. 10. in John. c. 11.
Cyrill) if any man shall mingle wax, which is melted, by fire, with other wax,
which is also melted, in such sort that they both do seem to be but one, made
of both; so by the conjunction of the body and blood of Christ our Lord, he is
in us, and we in him.

S. Greg. l. 4. Dialog. c. 58.
Gregory does surther say: What faithful soul can doubt, but that in the very
hour of the Sacrifice, the heavens do open, at the voice of the Priest; and
that in this mystery of Christ Jesus, the Quires of the Angels do assist; the
highest and the lowest things do meet; Terrestrial and Celestial things are
joined; and there is made one thing, of things which are visible, and
invisible.

Here then we are taught, by the holy Fathers of the Church, (whom I might
have cited to this purpose, both more at large, and more in number) the
inscrutable love of our Lord JESUS to mankind, expressed in these high
mysteries, of the blessed Sacrament, and the holy Sacrifice of the Mass. But
how shall we be able to disingage our selves, for being even overwhelmed with
the huge weight thereof, since the superexcellent Humanity of our The incompable
dignity of the person of Christ our Lord.
Lord JESUS (consisting of that precious body, which first was framed out of
purest blood of the all-immaculate Virgin, by the only hand of the holy Ghost,
and of that glorious soul, which in the first instant of the creation thereof
was hypostatically united to God the son, the second person of the most B.
Trinity; (and the same person, being indivisible from the other two, of God the
Father, and God the holy Ghost) that this person, I say, of Christ our Lord,
should be communicated to all the Priests of the holy Catholic Church, to be
offered daily, over all the world, and to be received into the breast both of
them, and all the other faithful children of that mother, as often as
themselves should desire. What Cherubim is able to discover the greatness of
this benefit; and what Seraphim has his heart hot enough, to breath out such
ardent flames of love, as grow due to God upon this account? How full of reason
was the exclamation and admiration of holy David when he said, Psalm. 34. and 9.
That there was none like to God, in the cogitations which he interteyned for
our Good? No man, no creature could ever have aspired to such a happiness, or so
much as to have conceived, that even the divine nature it self, had been able
to express such goodness. But God is God, and God is love, and the love even of
Creatures is full of How full of Invention great love is.
invention, for the inioyning, and (if it were possible) for the very
exchanging themselves by love into one another. And now as God is infinite, in
all things, so is he infinite, after a particular manner, in his love, and by
consequence, he is infinite in his invention.

How inspeakeable honor had it been for man, to have been, though but
admitted, to the sight alone, of Christ our Lord, in the blessed Sacrament?
Number. 88.
For if the sight of that brazen serpent with faith in Christ our Lord (who was
then but to come so long after) were able to cure the Israelites of the stings
of serpents; how much more would the only sight of our blessed Savior, with
faith, have sufficiently served to cure their souls of all their sickness?
How much happiness had it been for us, to touch the sacred host, with our hands;
the senfible part of the same host being a garment which sits so close upon the
body, and soul of Christ our Lord. For we know that a woman was cured of a
bloody flux, Matt. 9 and 14. Marc. 6. Luc. 8.
by the only touch of the hemne of his looser garment. Such honor and happiness
had been much for us to have received; but it was nothing, in co^pariso^ of the
excessive charity of our Lord, which would not be satisfied with doing less
then all. For what could even his omnipotency have added, to the trace which
here he has devised; not only of a conjunction, but of an union; and that
such an one, as is the most internal which can be imagined, being in the way
of food. S. Augustine shows how God has made as able to feed upon him, by a
mere spiritual manner, in the mystery of the Incarnation; and we may fitly
apply the same words, to this Sacrame^tall kind of feeding, as indeed these
two mysteries have great affinity with one another. God A passage of S.
Augustine, which well deserves to be consi. dered. Manual. cap. 26.
became man (says this incomparable Saint) for man's sake, that so man might be
redeemed by him, by whom he was created. And, to the end that God might be
beloved by man after a kind of more familiar manner, he appeared in the likeness
of man. That so, both the internal, and the external senses of man, might be
made happy in him; and that the eye of our heart might be fedd by the
consideration of his divinity, and the eye of our flesh and blood, by that of
his humanity. That so, whether we should work inward, or outward, this humane
nature of ours which was created by him; in him might be sure to find store of
food. This S. Augustine says, and if this might be well affirmed in respect of
the Incamation of our Lord JESUS, how much more may it be said, in respect of
the mystery of the blessed Sacrament; where we feed not only spiritually, but
besides, after a sacramental, and yet real manner.

How we do both feed, and are fedd upon, in the blessed Sacrament; and of the
admirable effects which it must necessarily cause, in such as do worthily
receive it; and of the reason why it must be so; and of the Figures which
forshewed the same.

CHAP. 48.
WE may well perceive, that our Lord JESUS, is a great friend of God is a great
friend of union.
Union. His person is distinct, from the other persons of the B. Trinity, but
the essence is one, and very same of them all. When he was resolved to become
man, he was also pleased to knit man's nature to the nature of God, by the
Hypostaticall union. An infinite honor this was to man; for it grew true
heerby. that man was God; and that God was killed upon a Cross, for the love
of men. Yet though by that union in his Incarnation, he brought us all to be
his allies, he did not personally unite himself to us all. But by this last
How our Lord unites us to himself.
sacramental union of him and us, when purely we take his precious body and
blood into our selves, under the quality and condition of food; he makes every
one of us, much more one with him. And then no marvel, if the honor he does
us, and if the joy he gives us, (when the fault is not our own) be the
greatest which we can receive in this world. For we inioye none of the other
mysteries of the life, and death of our Lord JESUS, but only by faith, and
memory; whereas this, is present to us, in very deed; and present so, as the
food which we receive, is present to us.

And so, in like manner, when no impediment is at hand, it breeds a great love
of his goodness, and a great delight in his sweetness, and in fine, an union of
us both, in one. Though with this difference from other food, that (as S.
Augustine was taught by our Lord) we change not him into us, Confess. l. 7. cap.
10.
as by eating other food we use to change it; but we are changed into it, by
it, if we approach to it, with a pure and hungry soul; and so feeding in this
B. Sacrament upon him, he feeds also upon us.

Nor is it strange that we should both feed, and yet be fed upon, when Almighty
God is a party to the contract: Omnia quaecumpue voluit fecit: He can do what
he will; and he is pleased to will, Psalm. 113.
that he, and we, should feed upon one another. And to such, as endeavor to be
truly, and entirely, and purely his; he contenteth not himself with less then
thus to come to them in person, with desire of union. And he is The
unspeakable benefits which are reaped by worthy receiving the B. Sacrament.
Psalm. 147.
washing away all the dregs of sin by that fountain of grace. He is thawing
all frozen hardness of the heart by the sweet breath of his Spirit; Flabit
Spiritus eius and fluent aquae; and he is consuming the rust of their self
love, by that burning fire of his charity; comforting them in all afflictions
and satisfying them in all their doubts and wants; illuminating their
understanding; and composing their will; and fixing their imagination; and
possessing, and imprinting himself upon their memory; calling in, and
consecrating their senses; and sealing up their hearts to himself. And
changing, at length the whole taste of their souls, he make them love that
which he loves, and hate that which is any way offensive to him. To conclude,
of devils (which perhaps they were) they become as so many Angels, in flesh
and blood; and are naturalized, after a sort with God, and grow to be even very
Christ's, according to that of the blessed Apostle, who said of himself: Viuo O
happy holy state.
ego, Galat. 2^
iam non ego, viuit vero in me Christus. I live, yet now not I, but Christ is
he who lives in me, by my lively imitation of his divine virtues, and by a
perfect conformity, or rather transformity of my spirit into his.

And No wonder is strange where God is the work man. Psalm. 111^
what marvel can it be, that such wonders as these be wrought in man, since
it is the Creator of man, and of all things else, who descends so low as to
live in him; he of whom it is said, that, Gloria and diuitiae in domo eius?
What marvel is it, if we be made so glorious and so rich, since he vouchsafes
to make pure and humble souls, the house wherein he desires to be intertayned,
and even to be the very couch wherein he delights to be enloyed, by the most
chaste, but yet most strayte imbracements of divine love? What marvel, I say,
if such as receive this food with pure affections, do lead even in this world,
a life which is not of this world; since the self same God, who feeds all the
spirits of heaven, has contryued In some sort we are equal to the Angels
even in this life.
a way, how to give himself for the same food to mortal men? The same food I
say, though it be dressed after a different manner, and served in under a
disguise of the accidents of bread and wine, as between two covered dishes,
according to the custom, amongst great persons?

Even this of the disguise, was also done, out of an admirable divine love to
us, who had not been able in this frail state of ours, to see God and live.
And besides, we grow thus, to have a means of exercising most heroical acts
of Faith, toward him. To which acts of believing in this life, does correspond
the rewards and glory, of perfect seeing in the next. But the substance of the
food, is still the same, both here and there. Apoc. 22.
And Our food in the blessed Sacrament is the very same, where with the happy
souls are feasted in heaven.
therefore S. John. (according to the observation of Doctor Auila) relates,
that it was one, and not diverse Trees, which he saw, on both the bancks of that
river, which flowed out of the throne of God. Upon the one of which bancks
being the tryumphant Church in heaven, Christ our Lord does sustain them
there; and on the other bancke, which is the militant Church, whereof we have
the honor and happiness to be members, the same tree of life does feed us here.

We are also taught this very truth, by the sacred mouth of Christ our Lord
himselfo, John. 6.
who said: That he was the bread that came down from heaven. If therefore he be
the bread of heaven, he is the food of the inahbitants of heaven: and if that
food be thus imparted to his children in this world, it must be only their
fault, if they lead not even here a life of heaven. We How man ennobleth other
food by eating it, but he is ennobled by this
see that in the case even of common food (how base soever that be) it is
raised (by being eaten) to the dignity of beco^ming a part of him who eats it;
because the man is nobler then the meat, and he assumeth it therefore up, to
himself. And what should then become of such as do worthily feed upon this
bread of life, this nourishment of heaven, which is Christ our Lord; but that,
for as much as this food is infinitely of better quality then our selves, by
eating it we should be transformed into it; and of terrestrial in our
conversation, should become celestial; and resemble the Angels in purity,
since we carry resemblance to them, in the food we take, which is the God, and
King of glory.

An infinite, and of it self, an incredible thing this is, that such
creatures as we, should be sublimed to such a height of dignity, even in this
life. But to the end that it might astonish us the less, when it should
arrive, and that our wonder might be all converted into love, it The banquet of
the B. Sacrament was fortold by many Figures before it came.
was the good will of God, to foretell us of it long before; and to reprosent
it, as it were, to our very eyes by way of figures and shadows; that so being
accustomed to consider those shadows, we might, with more facility, embrace
the body, when it should be come. For this is the accomplishment of al those
figures of the Exodus 11.
Paschall lamb; of the Psalm. 77.
Manna; of the bread of Exodus 25.
Proposition; of the Banquet which King Hester. ^.
Assuerus made; and of many others. And as it was a body in repect of those
former shadows and figures, so may it be accounted, in some respects, but as a
figure, in respect of the celestial Banquet of eternal beatitude, which shall
be served in, hereafter, as the second course of our delicious fare, when we
are to feed for all eternity.

The Sacramental presence of our Lord JESUS, does stay no longer, then the
species of bread and wine remain; but the air and virtue thereof, does still
continue, till it be driven thence. And The wonderful effects of the B.
Sacrament.
so great effects they are, which grow upon it, (in such as are careful to
comply with God) as gives them abundant testimony that no less then
omnipotency it self, is there. Nay it is most certainly true, that the blessed
Sacrament, does work, and that very often, (in the souls of such as dispose
themselves devoutly to it) so many, and so wonderful effects, sometimes in
giving strength of body, where it was wanting before; sometimes in the utter
extirpation of some passion; sometimes in the infusion of some great virtue;
sometimes in changing, at a very instant, the whole sense of the soul (making
it all triumph with joy, whereas immediately before it was half dead, of grief)
as does much declare and prove, the divinity of Christ our Lord. Yea and their
souls do feel it so; as that if there were no other argument, or authority,
in the whole world, but what they find within themselves, it might serve to
give them great assurance, that Christ our Lord is no less then God.

A The great life and vigor which grows to the soul by the B. Sacrament.
Mineral this is, so full of Spirit, that it leaves a lively tincture in the
violl, wherinto it has been powered. It perfumes the whole soul, if it be well
dissolved by acts of love. But then we must do, as we use when a room is well
perfumed, to keep the doors and windows shut. Recollection in this case,
does even import a man, as much as his life. Which yet if God bid him give
over, and that his divine Majesty, do, for the reasons of Spiritual comforts
must give place to the exercise of charity and obedience 2. Cor. 2.
Charity or Obedience, require him to open, and impart himself to others, he
shall be still, A good odor of Christ our Lord to God; but withal he has so
much strength, as not to be dissipated, in himself.

Of the great Love of our Lord, in conueying the Blessed Sacrament to us, under
the species of bread and wine. Why it is neither necessary, nor convenient, nor
scarce possible for all Christians to communicate of the Chalice. Of diners
kinds of Union: And how liberal our Lord is to us, in letting us all frequent
these divine Mysteries so often.

CHAP. 49.
AS the love of our Lord JESUS, was full of invention, in disposing him to
perform this work; so The great love of our Lord, does admirably appear by
diverse circumstances.
was it also, in the manner of contriuing, and dispensing it, according to the
capacity of man. And first concerning the forms or species, under which he is
presented to us, what other, could have been thought of, either more agreeable,
or more gustful to the nature of man, the^ they of bread and wine? If, for the
punishment of our sins, or the mortification of our senses, he had been
pleased to ordain, that we should have received him, in the forms of pitch,
or ink; as himself would thereby have been subject to no indignity at all; so
yet still we must have acknowledged, that it had been infinite mercy for us to
have received such a precious Jewel as that, in how course, or homely case
soever, it had come.

But bread and wine, are the very stanes of corporal strength, and comfort;
and he confined his body and blood, to the species of these two creatures; that
so this superscription (as it were) of the Loue-letter which he was writing to
us, might prepare us, for an expectation of those sublime, and sweet conte^ts,
which lay within. Yet The Blood of our Lord, is always together with his body;
and for that reason, it was necssary for lay people to receive both the body
and the blood distinct. Nay there are many other reasons which make it neither
convenient nor yet possible to receive them so.
because there are some, who have a natural auersion from the taste, and even
from the very sent of wine, which no man ever had, from bread; Because there
are some countries, so remote, both from the Sun, and from the Sea, as that
there, wine is hardly to be found; Because in the infinite multitudes of
Christians, it would be impossible, for all to receive of the sacred Chalice,
without indangering, yea and committing much irreuere^ce; Because some would be
so sick of pestilent feauers, as that even a drop of wine, would do them
hurt; Because persecutions would be sometimes so great, as that it might be
fit, to leave the blessed Sacrament in the custody of some particular men, and
women, to be received by themselves for their comfort, in some great exigent of
distress, and danger (as was often done in the primitive Church by the
testimony of Tertullian and others) and which could not be done with the
Chalice, for any long time, or even almost at all, in any hot country. For
these reasons, I say, and for many others, which by the wisdom and love of our
Lord JESUS were thought convenient (and especially because his body is a living
body (and consequently it cannot be without the blood) he was pleased, that
both the blood and the body should remain under the species both of bread and
wine, that so he who received one, might be sure to receive them both.

And In the sacrifice of the Mass the reason is very different.
howsoever, for as much as concerns the Sacrifice of the Mass, both the bread
and wine are seueraly to be offered, consecrated, and consummated by the Priest
(for in these three acts, the substance of the holy Sacrifice does confist, and
not in the prayers, or Scriptures, which do either precede or follow, or
interlace them, since these latter, do but serve as an addition for devotion,
and for a spiritual ornament to that high action. For as much, I say, as this
Sacrifice which is daily offered up, upon the Altar, is to be a most lively
representation of the bloody Sacrifice of our Lord, upon the Cross (a
representation, for as much as concerns the manner of it, but no
representation for as much as concerns the thing, because both the one, and
the other, is but only one, and the very self same Sacrifice) yet when there
is only question of receiving the blessed body and blood of our Lord' JESUS in
the nature of a Sacrament, the same Lord was pleased The Church is to ordain
of many things, according to that spirit of discretion which reigns in it.
to leave it, to that spirit of discretion, wherewith he would emine^tly indue
his Church; to ordain when it should be convenient (for necessary it could no
way be) to use both the bread and the wine distinct, and when but the one of
them alone.

It is also well observed, by spiritual writers, that the very species of
bread and wine, do inuit, and bespeake our souls, to a very intrinsecall
union, both with God, and our neighbor. In these species, we may consider,
that there is an union of two sorts. The one of them, having been settled by
nature, and the other growing on, by industry, or art. The natural Two kinds
of union which are showed by bread and wine.
union consists in this; That many graynes do grow upon one ear of corn;
and many grapes upon one cluster of the vine, with great resemblance to one
another. The artificial union, which is made between them does defeat the
former natural union; that so, that former, may become more perfect. For first
by plucking off, or pressing the grapes, or breaking and grinding the graynes
of Corn; and then, by separating the chaff, and husks, and branne, and
skins, and stones, it grows to be one paste, or liquor, which is perfected,
and purified afterward, by heat; the must by the natural heat which it has;
and the bread by the heat of fire. And the^ we can not know, which grain of
corn in particular, was white, and which was brown, or which grape was great,
and which was small.

These How these two kinds of Union are found in men.
Unions also there are, and are to be in men; The natural as they are men of
flesh and blood; and the other supernatural, as they are faithful Christians,
regenerated by grace, and animated therein, by his divine Sacraments. In virtue
of the former union, we love our kindred and friends. And because this love,
does use to carry imperfection with it, through the influence of self love,
and the mixture of temporal and vain respects, Christ our Lord comes to us,
in this supernatural Sacrament, and does take, as it were, our souls and the
desires thereof, all in pieces; casting away that which is inordinate,
unmortified, and any way unfit, concerning honor, or estate, or delight, or
any other earthly thing whatsoever; and he does so boil and bake us in the
blessed Sacrament by the fire of his charity, as that we may grow to be
perfectly united, both to him, and within our selves, and to one another. And
then will that be fulfilled which the blessed Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.
That we are all one bread and one body, we who are partakers of that divine
bread, and of his Chalice. But though this may be truly said, to some
proportion, of all such, as do carefully and devoutly come to this blessed
Sacrament; yet most eminently is it true, of them who are fed thereby, in the
state of holy Religion. Whose perfect The union of religious persons is a kind
of miroculous thing.
Union, has so very much of the miracle in it, that it conuinceth even the
most malicious tookers on. For even they, when they are in their wits, cannot
ascribe it to any other cause then the powerful presence of the grace of God
and the powerful grace of his presence, that such a world of persons of so
different and incompatible nations, ages, humors, descent, dispositions, and
talents, should live together in as perfect a mutual consent of mind, as if
they were all, the twynnes of one, and the same natural mother.

The Of other circumstances, which do greatly show the love of our Lord.
ardent love of our Lord JESUS, does also as lively appear in other
circumstances of this divine Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the Altar. It is true,
that such as receive Christ our Lord, with great purity of heart, and are
content (as it were) to be at cost, and care, to adorn their souls, when they
to be sit at this celestial Banquet; are received by him, with an unspeakable
communicatio^ of himself; and he imbraceth them with arms of so great delight
and joy, as is very different from what he ordinarily does, to such as approach
Iesse devoutly to him. At this we are not to wonder, for the love of our Lord
JESUS, to us, is not like the love of men, which if it be very great, it puts
them, as it were, out of their wits. But the The love of our Lord, does no way
derogate from his infinite wisdom.
love of our Lord God, does not take him one hairs breadth from home, nor does
it derogate at all; from his high wisdom. Nor are there in the world, any
weights, either of gold, or diamonds, so precise or nice, as the weights of the
wisdom of our Lord God, whereby he values every thought of preparation which
is made, more or less, when we approach to his presence. And accordingly he
receaues us, either like his servants, or like his Sons. But yet still this
is true, that there is no person in state of grace, who may not celebrate if he
be a Priest, nor no other man or woman, but may communicate otherwise of the
body, and blood, of Christ our Lord with great profit.

This Our Lords love does still more and more appear, by the consideration of
other circumstances.
Lord might have annexed this incomparable benefit, to the only state of
perfect Chastity; or only to such persons as had performed certain grievous
penances; or, at least, to such alone, as had never dishonored or profaned
either this sovereign Sacrifice, or most venerable Sacrament, by ill receiving
it. But his Charity would not endure, that any one should be excluded from such
a benefit, if at last he would be content to love him. He might have abridged
us to one only time of communion in all our life; or at least, that we should
not communicate above, once a year. But so far he was, from giving any such
restraint as this, that he desires nothing more, then that we should often
repair to this food of life. Yea, and he has inspired his holy Church, by his
holy Spirit, to counsel her children to frequent it; and to drive them out of
her company by They are excommunicated, who do not communicate once in the
year.
excommunication, if at certain times they do not satisfye the longing, which
he has, to become thereby, one with them.

There is no necessity, or important occasion in the world, either corporal,
or spiritual, either public, or private; for which this holy Sacrifice may
not be offered. And not only brings it profit to living men, but to such as
have led us the way to Purgatory; where the pains are much discounted hereby,
as S. Augustine, De cura pro mortuis possim.
and many other of the Fathers do abundantly show. So also, in our receiving
the blessed Sacrament; we of the layty, are put to no stint heerin; but every
Christian may communicate as often, as his own ghostly Father shall think
fit. And as, when The King of Glory vouchsafes to come and visit in person
every beggar.
we have health of body, we may, in every Church, go to him; so when we are
sick, we need take no care in this, for he will be sure to come to us. And if
it were an incomparable mercy, as we have seen it to be, in the last discourse
of the miracles, for our Lord JESUS, to visit and cure the sick of corporal
diseases, whilst himself was mortal; how much more is he to be magnified, by
all the powers of our souls, since he co^sines himself, as a man may say, to
our Altars; and binds himself to be there, at all the hours, both of day and
night; and to be ready in all weathers, and upon all warnings; and sometimes,
with small attendance, to transport himself to the deathbed of every beggar,
yea and of every sinner, (who may perhaps have profaned him in the same
Sacrament) to cure and comfort their afflicted souls. And all this he does,
now that he is glorious in heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God.

Sometimes He is pleased to be exposed for our comfort opon our Altars, for
many hours together.
he is pleased that we shall not only receive him, which action is begun, and
ended as it were, at an instant; but moreover, upon great solemnities, as also
upon other particular occasions of the Church, we may have the comfort to see
the blessed Sacrament with our corporal eyes, for some good time together. And
sometimes it is exposed, for the space of forty hours upon our Altars. And
because he reapes much honor, and we much good, by the meeting of many pious
affections in one; and for that, the multitude of the faithful is so great in
every good town that no one Church can hold them, for that purpose; this
merciful Lord of ours, is content to be carried in procession through the
streets, and public places; and so to take homage from whole Cittyes at once,
whereby they How we reuerse the dishonor which was done to our Lord in time of
the Passion.
do, the best they can, to reuerse the ignominies and affronts, which he
received in the many most paynfull and most shameful processions, which he made
to the house of Aunas, of Cayphas, of Pylate, of Herod, and of Mount Caluary,
in that night, and morning of his bitter Passion, for our Redemption.

The misery is showed, and the error is partly convinced, of such as do not
embrace the belief of those divine Mysteries.

CHAP. 50.
Who shall therefore be ever able, enough to admire this Sovereign Lord of
love, for the mercy which he has showed us, in this blessed Sacrament of his
most precious body and blood; and for the care he has taken, of the
co^pletenes of our comfort heerin. Psalm. 105.
Quis loquetur potentias Domini, auditas faciet omnes lands eius? Who I say
shall be able to declare Gods power, and to proclaim his praises?

And how much reason therefore is it, that there should not be in the world, any
Priest, or other faithful Christian, who will not set up, the rest of all his
comfort in this life, in frequenting this bread of heaven; and in spending some
part of his days and nights, in preparing to receive this divine food, with
due devotion? If our Lord JESUS, Lue. 14.
took it ill in the Gospel, that they would not resort to that supper of his
(which was indeed a type of heaven it self, and yet withal of this heavenly
mystery;) how heavily will he lay it to our charge if we be negligent in coming
to this Table: when himself is both he who inuites to the banquet, and the
very ba^quet it self? But O The lamentable ingratitude of such as are not
Catholics.
misery to be eternally deplored, even with tears of blood; that in these
woeful days of ours, there should be any found with the name of Christians
upon their forehead, who yet renounce the benefit, yea and expressly blaspheme,
the inviolable truth of this mystery.

Miserable creatures they are, and a thousand times miserable, who do, by this
means, either ignorantly, or maliciously, degrade, and depose themselves, from
the most sovereign point of Christian dignity, which the infinite wisdom,
and love of God himself, was even able with all his omnipotency to impart to
the meanenes, and weakness of sinful men. Yet some of them being pressed, as
it were, to death, by the evident words of Hoc est corpus meum; (so often
iterated by so many of the holy Evangelists) have begun, of late years, to
affirm, that they believe the real presence of our Lord, in the blessed
Sacrament, as well as we; but only that they dare not pronounce de modo. But
Their speech de modo is a false and foolish stift.
our Lord does know, that they speak not as they mean, but only to abuse the
people. Neither can they believe it as we do, according to their other
particular declarations, concerning this doctrine. And yet in truth, if they
did believe the thing it self, and did only differ de modo, as they say they
do, (amongst which modo's, or ways, they understand our doctrine of
Transubstantiation to be one) how could they dare so wickedly blaspheme this
our Doctrine concerning the modus, and yet profess that they are ignorant of
the modus, or way, how the real presence comes to be in the B. Sacrament.

But this The scope of this book is not to teach faith but love.
Treatise is not intended, for the settling of the truth of the Catholic faith,
and to convince them of error, who inpugne it; but only to inflame the heart of
the true Christian to heat of love, upon those reasons and motives, which are
already ministered, by the light of faith to our souls. That other task, has
been performed by multitudes of our learned Authors, whereof the world is full. I
will only beseech them, for the love of our Lord JESUS, that they will procure
to purify their hearts from sensuality, and other sin, which blindes that
soul wherein it reigns; and till then, we will wonder the less, that men of
so bestiall life, as the founders of their religion were, had no sight wherewith
to pierce into so pure mysteries.

The carnal man cannot discern of things belonging to God; 1. Cor. ^.
and if not of things which are but belonging to him, how much less, of the
substance of this blessed Sacrament, which is God himself? as truly God, as he
is God, who made heaven and earth. In the mean time, these people deserve much
pity at our hands, who whet the teeth not only of infidelity, against God, but
even of Envy against themselves. For what does it look like but envy, since
they refuse to believe, and to embrace so great a good, upon this chief
reason, because they think it is too good, to be true? And The counterfeyt
sanctity, and preposterous pretense of the humility of Sectaries.
this perverse and preposterous humility, together with a seeming to take such
a counterfayte care of the dignity and Majesty God; is one of those bucklers
under which they hide themselves, from the darts of love, which he would feign
be shooting at their souls,

For they say it is an indignity, and what if a rat, or a dog, should eat
the blessed Sacrament, and I know not what unsavory stuff of the kind. But
they consider not the while, that God receaues far more dishonor, in being
profaned by a Judas, or any other obstinate sinner, then if the body of our
Lord, should be eaten by as many rats, as there are blaspheming Heretics in
the world. That Sun, (true Sun of Justice) can well enough, tell how to
keep his beams from being defiled, upon any filthy dunghill. And if he could
not, it would go hard with him. For the divinity of Christ our Lord JESUS is
actually, and intrinsecally, in all the parts of all the creatures of the whole
world, both by essence, presence, and power; yea and in all the devils of
hell, as truly as in any Angel of heaven; or else that thing, would instantly
give over to be. And now, if the Note this most certay ne and apparent
consequence.
divinity of Christ our Lord, be in all vile places without any indignity; the
humanity, how noble soever it be, will be far from disdayning to keep it
company.

Little do these deceived creatures consider, how low our merciful Lord could
be content to descend for the love of man, toward the receiving (if there
should be cause) of dishonor, by the means, either of beasts, or other men.
And I should think, that the Temptation of Christ our Lord, by the Prince of
darkness in the wilderness, Matt. 4.
might read them a loud lesson upon this subject. For there, our B. Lord, was
not only tempted by the devil; but that divine goodness, did suffer that sacred
Son of the blessed Virgin, to be taken as has been said, and posted up and
down in those arms or hands, which the infernal Spirit, had assumed to
himself, for that purpose. Or if they had rather look upon the Sons and
slaves of the devil, then upon himself; Let them Note also this consequence.
behold how that holy humanity, being so knit to God as that it made the self
same person with him, was content for love of us, to be spit upon, to be
buffeted, and stripped stareke naked, and scourged, and crucified, and
blasphemed, for the love, and for the good of man.

I find it not so strange, that a Jew who called Christ our Lord, Impostour and
Traitor, should deny this Doctrine of the blessed Sacrament; because he
believes him to be a Traitor, and a Liar, who said, That the bread was his
body. I find it not so strange, that a Pagan or a Morisco, should deny it; for
he also denies to believe, that God did make himself man, and dye. But that a
Christian, who says, that Christ is God, and who acknowledges those words of,
Hoc est corpus meum, to have been spoken by his own sacred mouth, and that, so
immediately before he dyed; and besides, in the nature of a last will, and
Testament (which no ordinary wise man, would have penned, in doubtful and
ambiguous terms;) that a Christian I say should cut himself out, such a motly
kind of faith at this; and argue against Gods power, by saying that his body
must needs be subject to all the qualities of other natural bodies, whether he
will or no; and against his infinite mercy, by not believing that he would
submit himself (though he said he did) to such indignities, as they conceive
him to be subject to, by this kind of communication of himself; this I say is
strange, and I say again, that it deserves to be eternally deplored with
tears of blood.

For, in The denial of this doctrine does shoot at the disgrace of Gods
omnipotency or infinite wisdom or infinite love.
in fine, all the arguments which they bring against the probability of this
divine truth, are but so many arrows, shot up by them, against his
omnipotency. And all those reasons whereby they would tax it of any absurdity,
or inconvenience; are but so many teeth, which offer to carpe and tear away,
some part of his infinite wisdom. And all those charges, whereby they would lay
aspersion upon it, of indignity; are but so many protestations, that they are
not capable of the supereminent science whereof the blessed Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 3.
concerning the infinite goodness, and love of Christ our Lord, to man.

Of the Obligation which we have to God, for so great a benefit; and who are
most bound to be devoted to it, and why; and how happy they must needs be, who
frequent it with devotion.

CHAP. 51.
LET the same love of JESUS Christ our Lord intercede with the Eternal Father,
that they may not for ever, be deprived of this food of life. Without which, it
is no marvel, if they be daily, more and more disposing themselves to dye,
that fearful double death both of body and soul. And for our parts, we who
are Catholics, let The great obligation which Catholics have to God for the
blessing of our faith.
us adore that excellent Majesty, for this high mystery; and especially, for
that light of faith, and grace whereby he has enabled us to believe it, and to
love him for it. Nay let us do it so much the more, as there are too many in
the world, who dishonor and blaspheme him, even for this very excess of his
goodness. Which though he designed to all mankind; yet to us alone, he has
given efficacious helps, whereby to gather the true fruit thereof. And so let
We must procure God amends, for the faults of others.
us double our devotion to this bread of Angels, as that we may make Christ
our Lord, a kind of amends (as I may say) in respect of the much love which he
has wholly lost, upon the unbelievers, and blasphemers of this mystery; so that
we must pay not only our own, but others debts.

Especially it will concern such of us, to be entirely deuouted to it, as have
much dishonored or profaned this divine Sacrament; either by any notable want
of preparation before the receiving it; or of recollection afterward; and much
more if when they came to this Table they examined, and looked upon their
conscience, through the false spectacles of self love and passion, and not
through the clear pure crystal glass, of the law of God. For thus they
taught themselves to believe gross lies instead of truth; and to walk in the
dark, through the most intricate and obscure ways of sin, and thereby they
have come to pollute themselves, and profane the holy things of God, and to
commit as many sacriledges, as they received Sacraments, and they would
infallibly, and most justly have dropped down into hell, if our Lord had not,
been infinitely merciful toward them.

Such persons as these (and there are too many such in the world) when they
communicated or celebrated, in such a state of mind in mortal sin, as this,
did deserve to be stricken with sudde^ death, at the Altar, where they stood,
or before which they kneeled; and there to have made their entrance into the
eternal torments of hell fire. It Our Lord might have inflicted great
punishments for this great fault and yet still have been full of mercy.
had been mercy and infinite mercy in God, if giving them grace, to repent
their sins afterward, he had but stricken them, at the present, with some
sign from heaven, in the face of the world; according to some such examples of
his Justice, as were seen sometimes by the testimony of S. Cyprian, and others,
in the primitive Church. Or else, if he had deprived them, of the use of reason,
and made them mad, and frantic for a while; Or else if, toward the saving of
their souls, he had permitted them, for a time, to be possessed with Legions
of devils, in their body; and to be subject to their rage, by tearing their
flesh with their own hands, and throwing themselves into fire and water; and
foaming, and uttering dreadful cries; and wandering by night, in dark woods,
or else amongst the sepulchers of dead men, as we find in the holy Ghospel, that
possessed persons did use to do. This and more then this severity, might our
Lord have used against the prophaners of this mystery, and yet, have showed
excessive mercy; if withal he had given them grace, to repent at last. But
these sins are frequent, though the exemplar punishment be not so. For our
Lord expects us to penance, that so he may not be forced to take revenge; and
this he does in the bowels of his own charity, and the inuinciblenes of his
patience, for which, let all the Angels praise him.

But for this very reason of his infinite goodness (even abstracting from the
double and trebble dangers, which either delays of our conversion, or relapses
from grace, do use to bring) it will be time for us all, to turn the leaf;
that the good may be better, and the bad, may procure to be growing good. For
Even the excellency of the food makes the not digesting it the more dangerous;
but as for this food, by grace we may digest it if we will.
we are to know, that the more nutritive the food is, in it self, the more
imminent will our danger be, if we will needs be still, so weak, as to want
that heat of love wherewith it is to be digested, by our souls. And it may
happen to us here, as is uses to do in the case of common food, that instead
of health, we shall find our selves more desperately sick of surfeiting, by our
approach to this bread of heaven. But so, on the other side, if we prepare and
purge our selves by penance; if we arm, and strengthen our selves by prayer,
and practice of solid virtue; this tree of life will fructify in our souls
after a strange proportion; and the more, the oftener, we shall feed, thereon
Nor shall we need to fear, that by frequenting this mystery, either the
benefit which it will impart to us, or the veneration which we shall be enabled
to carry toward it, ca^ any way decrease, but the contrary.

The Why the frequenting this bread of Angels does breed increase of reverence
and love of God.
pleasures of the world, glut a man for the time, and he is ready to starve for
hungar afterward. And so the couersation of many, is valued highly till it come
to be inioyed; but by custom, and familiarity, there grows contempt. It is
not, it cannot be so in this case of ours. For the honor, and profit, and
delight, which is both found and felt, by treating, in this inward manner, with
the infinite spring, and fountain of all Good, does easily put us out of
fear, that ever, there can be any want of reverence, but only with such, as
come not to it, as they ought. In all things, but especially in this blessed
Sacrament, he is of infinite greatness, and goodness, to such as will resort to
him with h^ble love; or rather who will but give him leave to resort to them;
and who lay no impediment in his way, but that he may enjoy them all, as he
desires. For, as much more willingly, does Christ our Lord repose in such a
soul, then even in the Imperial heaven it self, as the preparing of that
soul (although it be yet but the seat of his grace) did cost him more, then
the building of heaven though it be the seat of his glory. For heaven did but
cost him a word, which was but one simple act of his will; but the soul of
man, did cost him many a bitter sigh, and many a salt tear, and so many drops
of his precious blood, as that he had no more left to give.

The next discourse is to give us a larger prospect upon the object of his
infinite sufferance, as this is, striving to make us feel and ponder, the care
he takes to keep us from suffering any misery, at all, either of sin, or
pain. For in this divine Sacrament of Sacraments, to The many offices which
our Lord performs to souls in this B. Sacrament.
the poor oppressed Orphane he shows himself, a most dear and loving
Father; To the sick and wounded patient, an expert and careful Physician; To
the negligent, and wandering sheep; a pitiful, and watchful Pastor; To the
ignorant, and unlearned scholar, a wise, and most diligent Master; To the
penitent and afflicted soul, which splits with grief for having offended such
a Goodness, and melts with love, through the desire to enjoy such a beauty, he
is a pardoner, a protector, a perseruer, a cherisher, an illuminator, an
inflamer, a companion, a friend, a spouse, an all in all.

O fire The conclusion of this discourse, in the way of prayer.
divine, O sacred food, O heavenly feast! So heavenly, as thou do incorporate
thy self in us, and us in thee, and do after a sort, even Deify our nature,
in this mortal life of ours; by making it, in a manner, one thing with thine.
Let thine eye look back upon thine own ancient mercies. And since thou have
taken such strange pity upon thy Creatures, by thy vouchsafing hitherto, to
dwell in such durty houses; take pity, now at last upon thy self. And make
henceforth, these our hearts, such holy Temples, as may become thee, O thou King
of glory, to inhabit; and therein, for ever to be adored. Let all the faculties
of our souls, and all the senses of our body hang like so many incensories
before thy Altar, and breath out eternal praise of thy holy name; and even
spend themselves wholly in thy service, in contemplation of this infinite
benefit. Thou have lodged a treasure as rich as thou thy self art rich, in
these frail vessels of our souls. Give us therefore grace, to carry the^
about, with such a care to keep them safe from breaking, as that the Jewel may
be for ever ours. Humble us, dear Lord, by what other way thou will, but let
not our former sins, be punished by our contemning, or vnderualuing these
sovereign mercies. Luc. 12.
And since upon thy bringing the fire of they holy Spirit into the world, thou
did expect that it should be all inflamed; do not permit, that we should yet
remain so void of heat; when thy unspeakable goodness does so often bring
into our bosoms, yea and into our very breasts, that furnace of this very
fire, which is thy self; this death of sin, this spring of virtue, this bread
of life, this cure of passions, this strength of weakness, this treasure of
grace, this banquet of joy, this root of glory, this conduit, and conue yance
of all good things.

Of the infinite Love which our Lord Jesus discoueuereth to mankind in his
sacred Passion; with a reflection upon the dignity of his divine person; and
the use which here we are to make thereof.

CHAP. 52.
OUR Lord JESUS was figured, in the old Testament, Isa. 1. Genesis 49.
with great propriety, by the flower of the root of Iesse, and by the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah. A flower he was, both through the savor of his benesits,
and through the odor of his divine conversation, as the precedent discourses
will have showed; and a Lion he was also by the nobility of his strength, and
Passion, as will now appear. Fortitude is both active and passive, yea and the
Passive is far the greater, and far the harder of the two. The The whole
life of our Lord, may in some sort be called a Passion.
course of his whole life, was like a field so thick so wed with crosses, and
cares, that it may all be accounted to have been a kind of continued Passion;
but yet, because the last day and night of the same life, did so abound
therewith, it is this alone, which is eminently known, and called, by that sad
name.

In this state he was to be, when the Prophet Esaias foresaw, and spoke of him,
to this effect. He has no grace or beauty; Isa. 53.
we have seen him and there was nothing in him, to be seen; and we desired
that he might be contemned; as the most abased thing amongst men. A man of
grief, and who did even possess the knowledge of infirmity. His face, was as
if it were hiddden, and despised; and we had him, in no estimation. It was he
indeed, who bare our infirmities, and who suffered our pains; and we esteemed
of him, as of some Leaprous person; and as one who had been stricken, by the
hand of God, and so dejected.

How truly were these things performed, in the person of Christ our Lord
throughout the course and current of his Passion, will instantly be represented
here; when first you In the consideration of the Passion of Christ our Lord,
it is necessary to ponder his infinite Majesty, as he is God.
shall have been desired, to look a little back, with the eye of your
consideration, upon the first Chapters of this whole discourse, wherein the
dignity of the person of Christ our Lord is touched. For so, when we shall have
coupled that former excellency, with this present infamy; and shall withal,
have weighed how the only reason that moved him to dispoyle himself of the
one, and to vest himself with the other, was a desire of the glory of God,
which might redound to him by our good; And that he emptyed himself, out of
his own felicity, to the end that we might partake thereof in heaven; And did
even as it were inebriate himself, with the Chalice of affliction, affronts,
and desolation, that so in the strength of that, he might secure us from the
eternal chains of fire in hell; I The use of these consideratio^s.
think we shall not be so blindly bold, nor so wickedly ungrateful, as not to
detest our sins which were the cause of all his sorrow; and continually to
lament, and serve, and love that Lord, who was pleased to undergo, such
penance for them.

Consider therefore, I say, that he whose Passion you are to read, was the only
Son of the sacred Virgin Mary, that most excellent and perfect pure Creature
that ever was. Consider that his humanity, was framed by the hand and skill of
the holy Ghost, out of her Royal and all-immaculate blood. Consider that he
was beautiful above all the Sons of men, for complexion, for constitution,
Psalm, 44.
and for grace, and motion. Consider the complete sanctity of his holy soul,
which animated that body, so full of beauty; The high purity, the wide charity,
the profound humility, the entyre conformity, and transformity of his will,
into the will of God; with all other virtues in the highest degree, which God
could communicate to a creature.

Consider the other incomparable gifts and graces, which were imparted to him
or rather ingulfed in him, beyond all measure and proportion. That gift of
Prophesy and Miracles; That treasure of incorruptible wisdom; That ever -
flowing river of his infallible Knowledge, Experimental, Infused, and
Beatificall. Consider that this body and soul, were knit by the indissoluble
bond of Hypostaticall union, to the second person of the most blessed Trinity,
who (according to the words of the Creed of the Council of Nice) is God of
God, light of light, true God of true God, begottens not made, consubstantiall
with the Father, by whom all things were made. Consider, if thou can, the
infinite, eternal, simple, unchangeable, independent essence, and wisdom,
and power, and goodness of this divinity. It being the fountain of Immortality,
Purity, Liberty, Verity, Clarity, Peace, Plenty, Grace, Glory, Swauity,
Excellency, Beauty, Majesty, Felicity, Providence, Preservation, Protection,
Justice, Mercy, Pity, Longanimity, and Love. Consider that to every of these
Attributes, there belongs an addition of being infinite; and that in a word, he
is the substance, and the sum, the circumference, and the Center of all
Original created perfection.

Of the most tender and divine Love and care, which our Lord Jesus showed, at
his entrance into the Passion, in his last sermon, and long prayer, to his
eternal Father.

CHAP. 53.
THIS man, this God, this God and man, did abandon himself so far, as to
suffer hideous things for the love of us. And we are bound, with our whole
hearts, not only to carry great compassion toward him, but to fly a main,
from all that which is any way offensive to him, who did voluntarily, and with
a kind of infinite charity, cast himself into such a bed of Thorns, for our
sakes. For as soon as our Lord had instituted the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, and the holy Sacrifice of the Mass; and had thereby The Apostles
ordained Priests, with authority to ordain others to the end of the world
ordained his Apostles Priests, who (in the person of their successors, and
such as should lawfully be sent by them) might perpetuate the celebratio^ of
those divine mysteries, till the end of the world; he went disposing himselse
to that Passion, which Judas was already gone to bring upon him. And
notwithstanding that he knew, how vast things they were to be, yet desired he
with excessive appetite, to embrace them. This is plainly insinuated by that
expression of the holy Prophet, who says of Christ Our Lord did long for his
fill of suffering for our sakes. Ierem. Thren. 30.
our Lord, Saturabitur opprobrijs, which implies a being hungry after the
enduring of reproach, and scorn for us; as a man might be after some curious
and costly banqueting dish; and that, at the time of his Passion, he should be
sure to have his longing satisfied.

But before he went forth to the place where he knew he should be betrayed, and
apprehended, he resolved to take a kind of leave of his Apostles; he had
intertayned the^ with a large, and amourous, and most mysterious discourse. And
although, as a man may say, one of his feet were already in the grave, and
that he was soon to find the whole rage and fury of hell upon him, for the
sending of the other after it; he Out Lord was tenderly careful to comfort his
Apostles in the middst of his own greatest sorrows.
applied himself yet to comfort them, and to forget himself (as was said
before) with such a courage, as might well become that man, who was the
natural Son of God; and with such a love, as might well declare the divine
pity which he carried to the Sons of men. For from hence it came, that he
took such tender care, to arm them against all future fears; He told them to
this effect, and almost in these very words; That indeed he was to go away;
but withal, Joan. 14.15.16.17.
that he went. to provide a place for them. He assured them, that their
afflictions (whenever they might happen) should not last; but quickly be
converted into joy; and such a joy, as never should be taken from them. He
insinuated himself to their rude capacities, by sweet and tender comparisons.
He made the eternal Father to be a husbandman, that so himself might be the
vine; whereof they were to be the branches. He told them what care the Father
himself would take to purge and purify their souls, from time to time; He
showed them what a glory it would be for them, to resemble their Master in his
Cross; and he made them know vvithall, that they should not carry it, alone;
but that in the place of his own corporal presence, which then was the object
of their senses, he would send them a comforter, the Holy Ghost from heaven,
who should inhabit, and sanctify their souls. He promised them his Peace,
which should show them a safe, and quiet port, wherein to ride, in the very
midst of all the difficulties, and greatest dangers of this world. He told
the^, in plain terms, that he loved them; and he besought the^, that as they
loved him, they would keep his commandments; and that if they would do so,
both he, and his Father would come and visit, and dwell with them. He told them
moreover, that even his eternal Father loved them, and that whatsoever they
would akse they should be sure to have; whether they should ask it of
himself, or of his Father, in his name; yea and he desired them to ask
somewhat of him, that so their joy might be full; as if he had bid them try,
and be even judged by themselves, whether he had said true or no.

It serves also to show the very passionatenes, (as I may say) of his love,
Agreat proof of the tenderness the love of our Lord Jesus.
that he was content to repeat the self same expressions of it, many times.
To declare that he could not say that, enough, which he thought, he could never
do too much. We see how tenderly he called them his servants, his Disciples,
his friends, and that he would tell them all his secrets; his Sons, and even
his little Sons, whom yet he would not leave as Orphans without a Father.
And now we shall hear him pray the eternal Father, for them, in most
efficacious and obliging words; That he would sanctify them in his Truth. He
presses him by the highest points of divine Rethoricke, which could be though
of. He puts him in mind; Of the eternal love he bare the Son; and of the
faithful service which he the Son had performed to the Father. He also
represents the Fathers Mission of the Son; and he avoweth; That as the
Father had sent him, so had he seent them. He begs the union of all his
children with one another, and of all those children with himself; that so he
being in God, and they being in him, they all might also come to be one, in
God. In this How earnest our Lord Jesus was for us, in his suyte to his
eternal Father.
suite of his, he is so importunate, and proceeds so far to urge the same,
that in effect, he tells the eternal Father that he will not be denied therein.

Nor was he content that this should be an union of inferior degree, but an
union with perfection, and consummation. Just so as in a broth, which is made
of diverse meats, there is an union of those meats, in that broth; and if they
boil in it till they even boil away, there is not only an union of the
meats, but a consummation thereof, into that broth. And although in most
places of holy Scripture, when our Lord spoke to his Apostles or Disciples, he
meant not that his words should be for them alone, but that all the world
should be comprehended in their persons to whom then he spoke; Yet his love at
that time was not content to intend us, only by way of inference; but that
dying flame, would needs be sending out certain flashes, which yet extend
themselves so far, as even to lay express hold upon every one of our
individual persons, who have the happiness to be members of the holy Catholic
Church. Which they only are, who believe the Doctrine of Christ our Lord, by
the preaching of the Apostles, or of those Apostolical men, who have a lawful
and direct mission from them. And therefore he said (for now I cite his own
very words) I pray not only for them, (that is to say, for his Apostles) but
for those others also, who will believe in me by their preaching, that they be
one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee, so they also may be one in
us; and the world may believe that thou have sent me. And that glory, which
thou have given me, I have given to them, that they may be one thing, as we are
one thing. In thee, and thou in me, that they may be A stra^g desire for
Christ our Lord to make to God, in our behalf.
consummated in one; and the world may know that thou have sent me; and that
thou have loved them, even as thou have loved me. I will, O Father, that they,
whom thou have given me, may be with me, there where I shall be. That they
may see the glory which thou have given me, because thou louedst me before the
framing of the world. O thou just Father, the world has not known thee, but I
have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. And I have made
my name known to the^; and I will make it known; that the same very love,
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in the^, and I in the^.

These, amongst many others, were the words of our bleffed Lord, in that last
divine sermon, of his. Whereby we may see the amourous and restless desire,
which took possession of his heart, wherewith he solicited his eternal Father,
that we might behold the glory which he had given to him; and placing as it
were his whole Our Lord Jesus did place his honor in being Lord by his
eternal Father, for us.
credit upon the obteyning of these favors for us, when he begs it, to the
end, that so the world might come to know that the Father had sent him. As if
he should have said, that in the face of the world, he had given his word both
for our Redemption and Sanctification and Union, and for our right, to reign
in heaven with himself; and that if the eternal Father, should not make good
that word; the world might have reason not to believe, that he was, as he had
said, the Son of God.

The horror, and terror, and sorrow of Christ our Lord, together with his
Prayer in the Garden

CHAP. 54.
NO sooner had he ended that speech, but instantly he went out, with his
Disciples, over the Torrent of Cedron. Joan. 18^
He did perhaps pass over that Torrent, without once tasting any drop
thereof; but the whole world was a kind of Torrent of affliction to him; and his
whole life was that way, wherein, he did not only taste, but take deep draughts
thereof, before he exalted his head, Psalm. 109.
by ascending up to heaven. Already did the sensible, or inferior part of his
soul begin to be obscure, and sad with care. He was pleased to leave it after
a sort, to it self, for the increase of that pain, which he desired to
suffer. For else his soul, being united to the divinity, would have been far
from feeling any thing but unspeakable joy. But leaving eight of his Disciples
not far of, he took, to himself, the three whom he favored most; Marc. 14.
S. Peter, S. James, and S. John, as the fittest to be eye witnesses of his
affliction, because they had been fortified by having been present at his
Transfiguration. Matt. 17. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.


He bad them watch and pray, least else they might enter into Temptation. But
the lead of their sad hearts, drew down, and closd' the doors of their heavy
eyes; making them sleep (after a sort) whether they would or no. Our Lord had,
by that time, retired himself a little even from them, into perfect Solitude
is fit for such as pray.
solicitude. Not that he had need thereof (who knew not what be longed to a
distraction) but to teach us in such cases, what we are to do. Yea and to make
even men of the highest prayer, and contemplation, not to contemn the
preparations and helps, which weaker persons are wont use. When he had prayed
a while, he went to visit his Apostles. And so he did again at two several
times afterward; for no pain of his own, was able to make him forget them.
And although in all reason, they were to have been sharply reprehended for such
a dulnes; yet he would not open his mouth toward the holding of any such
language. But The wonderful meeknes of our B. Lord.
he pitied them rather, and bad them, at the last, sleep on; and (to the
extreme confusion of such as for tryflles are cholerickly transported against
their servants) he excuses, and defends, and even comendeth them, for the
promptitude and good desire of their mind; although their body of flesh and
blood were frail. Returning therefore again to pray; his soul was over
wrought with grief, in such excess; that his valiant heart which knew not what
belonged to fear, and his silent tongue which used not to vent it self by
speech, were not ashamed to profess that he was all seized with terror; that
he was oppressed with a kind of wearines; and that he was surcharged with so
profound sorrow, as made him say; That his soul was sad, even to the death.

What a blessed goodness was this in him, to pluck up those stakes, and dikes,
which formerly had made it impossible for such thought as those, to break in,
and ouerflow him; and now to give way to such The weakness of our Lord has
obtained strength for his servants, in their suffera^ce.
weakness in himself; that by the merit thereof, so much grace might be applied
to men, and not only to men, but even to tender and delicate Virgins; as that
in virtue thereof, they might be able, with patience, and even with joy, to
endure, as cruel Martyrdomes, as ever the rage, of the most barbarous Tyrants
could invent. For, as we grew to have perfect life, by the obedience of his
death; and true honor, by his humility and shame; so by this weakness of his,
we have gained strength; by his wearines, alacrity; and by his grief, his
faithful servants have obtained joy, in their greatest misery. From hence we
may also gather an other fruit of comfort; that since our Lord himself went
so far in the expression of his distress, his servants must not think (when
themselves should be much dejected by their crosses, in the inferior part of
their soul) that therefore God is angry with them; if still, in the superior,
they will imitate this Lord of ours. Who notstanding he desired, that the
Chalice might have passed from him, did yet resign himself, with entire
abnegatio^ of his own will; accepting thus, Luc. 22.
and embracing the will of God; Pater si est possibile transeat a me Calix iste;
attamen non mea voluntas, sed tua siat. Father, if it be possible, let this
Chalice pass from me; yet not my will, but thine be done.

Now as the charity was unspeakable, which our Lord JESUS, was pleased to
express, both in bearing such a weight as this for our Redemption, and in
letting us hear the groans which it cost him, for our instruction, and
consolation; so who shall be able to sound into that bottomless pit of his
profound humility, which drew the God of glory to submit himself to such
indignity, and to make him content to need the comfort of a creature, though he
were an Angel, which Angel must come down from heaven like a prince of
glory, whilst the creator of all the Angels, was planted there, so full of
misery. And that he would find himself in such necessity of How he persisted
in prayer.
persisting in his prayer; sometimes Luc. 22.
upon his knees, and sometimes Marc. 14.
prostrate upon the ground, and often repeating the same Prayer, and that in
the self same words; as if it had been like, to prove a kind of doubtful
case, what would become of him, at last. But of that, there was no doubt at
all; for besides his Hypostaticall union, with the divinity, his happy soul
was fully in God. And both by the straytes, into which he was content that the
inferior part thereof should be cast, for as much as concerned any sense of
comfort; as also by the course which he took to become victorious in the end,
he went recording ways, and rules for us, whereby we might also conquer all our
enemies.

Our blessed Lord, in the mean time, was laboring, as it were, for life; and
to such plunges was he brought, as to find himself in express agony, Luc.
(...)
for so the holy Evangelist declares. Now this is the state of dying persons,
in the last moments of their life; when the eyes being already dymme, the teeth
being knit, the heart strings being straynd, and all the noble parts being in
commotion (as this Globe of the lower world would be, in a general earth
quake) the divorce of the body and soul seems near at hand. And it is to be
noted, that this grevv in him, without any torment then inflicted upon his
body; and only from the The excessive anguish of mind which our Lord Jesus felt.
anguish of his mind. How exquisite therefore, and how insufferable must that
anguish be? But the more closely he was to be set upon, by that Sea of
sorrovv, which seemed, as if instantly it would swallow him up, the more
firm was his hope in God, and so also must ours be, in such occasions. And
after the rate of our discomforts, so is our Prayer to be increased. Forvve
see, it is affirmed of our blessed Savior, that when he was grown to be in
Agony, he produced his prayer into great length; Ibid.
Et factus in agonia, prolixius orabat.

Prayer is therefore that, which still he recommends to us heerby; and we see
with how profound reverence it must be made; and what high estimation we
are to make thereof, as shortly will be shevved more at large. And since our
blessed Lord was content to repeat the self same prayer thrice; we are to
pity the poor men (who will needs be our adversaries) whilst they laugh
and scoff at us for our often repetition of the same That Repetitio^ of the
same prayers is commended by the example of Christ our Lord.
Prayers. Indeed if we did but say them, with the lips and tongue alone, as
they impose upon us, and took not care to accompany them, with the
application, and attention of our mind, they might still laugh on, and the
devil would keep them company therein. But otherwise, we see, by this
mystery of the Garden, that Repetition of Prayers, is no ill custom, if we
use it as we ought. And then if still they will needs be laughing at as, for
the use thereof, they will be feign to do it alone, for the devil is not such
a fool, as to do so too, since he knovves he looses by the bargain.

A heavy Agony to our Lord JESUS, that was; but a happy one for us; since he
offered it to the eternal Father, for the obtaining of comfort and strength,
not That Agony of our Lord, got comfort for us, both in our afflictions of
mind, and diseases of body.
only in all the distresses of mind, as was said before; but in all the
deadly diseases of body also, which might come to carry us out of this life.
And it is in virtue of this Agony, that we see the servants of God, so full of
patience, and courage; and sometimes even of joy, when they are upon that bed,
and eue^ as it were, in the very jaws of death. Nor when they are abandoned
by the help of the whole world, and when their corporal strength is entirely
gone; can yet all the proud devils in hell, (who are then employing all the
force and fraud they have to their perdition) disquiet their conscience, or
disturb their peace.

What grief it must needs cause to our blessed Lord, to be estranged from
feeling comfort in God.

CHAP. 55.
BUT what might that be, the very apprehension vvherof, wrought so
impetuously upon our blessed Lord, whom nothing had been observed to
distemper in the least degree, through all the course of his holy life; what
kind of thing I say must that be, which durst assault his heart with sorrovv?
Or of what had he been ignorant till then, the knowledge whereof, at that time,
might be able to put the powers of his mind into that appearance of disorder?
His knowledge was still the same, but his love, in some sort, was not the same;
for it seems, as if every minute of his life, he had been adding new feathers
to those wings, whereby his heart was flying toward the comfort of ours. And
knowing of how great advantage to us, his humility and patience would be, in
the sight of God, Our Lord was pleased to suffer much for us whom he loved so
much.
it was only his pleasure, at that time as has been said, to hide the comfort
of his divinity, from the inferior part of his soul; whereby those
apprehensions, and reasons of grief, and desolation, were of unspeakable
torment to his mind. Which so long as it was feeding, upon the clear, and
sensible vision of God, could not so much as once distract it, from incessant
joy. Whereas now he was so very far from joy, that we see him, as if he
had been half overcome with grief. To let us know, by the way, that as all
our burdens, are light when they are carried upon our backs by the help of
God; so when he retyreth his holy hand, there is not the least of the^, which
may not trouble the strongest Saint that lives.

But the object which caused such excessive anguish to our Lord JESUS, and
which wrought so far even upon his sacred body, as to make it utter a
prodigious sweat of very blood (and that not by drops, but as it were by
streams and flood, Luc. 22.
(which did not trickle, but run down a maine, from the heavenly earth of his
body, to the terrestrial earth whereon he kneeled (which was made a kind of
heaven, by drinking up that quintesse^ce of life) was The dishonor of God and
the perdition of man, was the two edged sword, which cut our B. Saviors heart
in funder
the glory of God, which he saw profaned by the sin of man; and the souls
of all mankind, (whereof he loved every one, a million of times more then his
own precious life) addicted to the eternal torments of hell fire. For this
was that sword with a double edge which did, as it were, cut his soul in
sunder,

Who is also able to imagine, what a sad affliction it must be to him, to be
deprived, for one moment, of the feeling of that sovereign delight and joy,
wherewith he did so abound, from the very instant of his Conception; by the
sensible shining of his divinity upon his whole soul, which now, in part, was
abridged thereof. The want of any communication of Almighty God, to a heart
which has seen light, in light; is of so great moment how little soever it be,
that it wo^ds that heart with much grief; which does well discern, that
nothing of that kind, is little. To know any thing of God, by way of sensible
experience, does kindle in the spirit, a very furnace of desire to enjoy the
rest. And how much sorrow then must it feel, to be deprived, even of what it
had? The lives of Saints are full of the sweet, and sad complaints, which they
have made to God, upon such occasions; and in particular, you may see store of
this, in the life of that great woman, Blessed Mother Teresa of Jesus, which
was written by her self, upon the commandment of her ghostly Father.

And not only did this holy Passion, reign among such souls departed, as the
Church esteems to be Saints; but, by the goodness of God, we have met with
some amongst the creatures who are yet in flesh and blood, who serving God in
great purity; and in conformity thereof, having been admitted to some dear
imbraceme^ts of that heavenly spouse of their souls, have gone lame^tably
mourning and that for a long time together, (like so many Turtles for the
absence of their beloved) through the want of that infinite Good whereof before,
they had been admitted to take a taste.

They The great sorrow which is felt by the spouse of Christ upon any hiding of
himself from a soul; or even by living in this Pilgrimage.
are so deeply wounded with love, that to be hindered from inioying him, is wont
to give them excessive grief. They feel it so much, as they know not how they
shall endure that want; since the only remedy of all their other pains, is the
certain By often thinking upon God.
means, to increase this one pain of theirs. For as a sore is most felt, when
it is most touched; so is their pain augmented by speaking, or thinking of
things which concern Almighty God; whose breath they smell, but upon whose
substance they are not suffered now to seed; and yet all things else are a
torment to them. They thirst and pine, they even consume and melt, and they cry
out to our Lord; and there is none but only himself, who can comfort, that
swelling and gasping soul of theirs. And though they seem to be near him
(yea, and so they are, in very deed) yet they find themselves to be, as in a
prison, out of which they know not how to break.

Such affects as these, do reign in the hearts of some choice servants of God,
upon the consideration which they have of wanting certain feeling
communications of his divine Majesty, in this woeful pilgrimage wherein they
live. Yea it is not many years, since one who was sick of this sweetly sad
disease, was so happy as to die of a flux of tears; and another, whose heart
strings brake, and he instantly dyed in exercising some acts of the love of
God; and so it was found, when he was opened.

Measure The incomparable grief of our Lord Jesus.
then by this, what depth of sorrow it must cause, in the heart of our B. Lord,
to be absented so, from the feeling fruition of God, whom he knew so well,
whom he loved so much; and whom so perfectly he had inioyed before. In
comparison of whose knowledge, and love and joy in God, the knowledge, and
love, and joy of all the other creatures put together, is not so much as one
single moate, compared to the whole body of the earth. And yet whereas they with
all this grief of theirs for wanting God have yet, through his goodness, some
such kind of feeling of him still, as makes it to be, in the midst of pains, a
kind of most joyful sufferance; our Lord was pleased to take the bitter
without the sweet for himself; and only to feel, and penetrate the want
vvherin he was of that good; without enabling the inferior part, to reflect
upon that same very good, in the way of conceauing any Comfort by it.

The incomparable sorrow of Christ our Lord, through his consideration of the
dishonor of God, and the sin and misery of man: together with the sight, of
what himself was to suffer.

CHAP. 56.
NOW, if it would be of such insufferable pain, for Christ our Lord, to be
only absented or estranged from Almighty God (which abse^ce, is no sin but
only a punishment, and which is not, many tymes', of any offense at all to the
divine Majesty (but serves only, for a probation of virtue, and for a
preparation to an increase of grace) how may we think that it would pierce
his heart from side to side, to see (as has been said) that God profaned, his
glory disgraced, his law transgressed, and all those creatures, whom he had
created after his own Image, to enjoy heaven with eternal felicity; to
stand now so near upon the terms of being damned to everlasting misery. He
savv what Adams happy state had been, and what a miserable a state it was
grown to be. He savv, that reason which was a Queen, was now become the
drudge of Passion. The sins of the whole world were to pass upon his
account; nor was the least of them to be pardoned by the Justice of God, but in
virtue of the sacred Passion, which then, he was about to undergo. They were
The true cause of our Lords excessive sorrow.
all represented to his dolorous, afflicted mind, as distinctly as they were
distinct in their being committed; and a million of times more clearly, then
the men who committed them, did ever see them.

Let a man but think, how many sins he alone, may have committed in some one
day of his life; and then how many days he has lived; and how many of his
sins he has forgotten; and how many of his actions, words and thoughts, are
accounted sinful in the sight of God, which yet did not seem so to him. Let
him think how many men there are in the town where he may chance to be; how
many in the Province; how many in the kingdom; how many in all Europe; how
many in all the world, at this time. Let him think, how many there have been
in the whole world, throughout all the ages thereof, since the beginning; and how
many there may be, before the end. And who shall now be able once to conceive
of the innumerable sins, which have been, are, and are to be committed, by
all this race of mankind? Prouer. 14.
since the just man sins seven times a day, by venial sins; and many,
who go for Saints with us, will be found to have committed many, and many
Mortal.

What shall we therefore say, of such wicked men, as drink iniquity, up like
water? Job. 15.
whether they be vicious Catholics; or blasphemous Heretics; or disobedient
Schismatiques; or perfidious Jews; or Profane Pagans; or bestiall Turks and
Mores? What Legions, what millio^s, what worlds of sins must there have been
presented to the soul of Christ our Lord to suffer for? since (for as much as
concerned him) he accepted the punishment of them all; and that, by so exact
scales of divine Justice, as that if any one of all those sins, had not be
committed, the Passion of Christ our Lord had been so much, the less grievous.
And it was to be their fault who would not, by Faith and Penance, apply that
Passion to their souls, if they were not saved thereby; and not any defect of
the Passion it self of Christ our Lord; who savv, and knevv, and counted, and
accepted every one of their particular sins; and made (for as much as
co^cerned him) oblation of an inestimable payment, in discharge of the same
particular sin.

Not Our Lord Jesus suffered not only for all the sins which were committed,
but for all those others also which would have been committed without his grace.
only did he see and suffer for all finnes which already are, and are
he^reafter to be committed, but also for all those other, which would have
been committed by them all, if they had not been prevented, by the Grace which
grevv from God, in contemplation of the Passion of Christ our Lord. For no
less was his precious blood to be the Antidote, and preservative against all
sins, which might have been committed, then it was to be the remedy, and
cure of such as would be committed indeed. So that every man did add somevvhat
to this sorrovv of our Lord; both good, and bad, past, and present, and to
come, vvithall their sins, whether they were great or small; of thought,
word, or deed; whether the were mortal, or venial; of omission, or
commission; whether actually they were, or would have been committed, if they
had not been prevented by this costly means.

And if Other considerations which do open the sight of the soul, to discern
the love and grief of our Lord Jesus.
now we will but consider how infinitely the nature of God, does abhor
any one single sin; And how straightly our Lord JESUS had obliged himself out
of love, to satisfy Gods Justice for them all. And how certainly he savv,
that the far greater part of men, would take no benefit at all, by that
bitter Passion. But that some would not believe it; some others would not
apply it; yea, and that some would even blaspheme it, as thinking it impossible
that God himself should be so good to them. If we consider that men who
seriously desire to serve God with perfection, are profoundly afflicted, eue^
for the least discorrespondence to the motion of his holy Spirit; and much more
for any small defect, into which, by their fault, they may have fallen; And
when there has been question of greater sins, there be men and women,
who have dyed as has been said, even of pure repentance and sorrovv for them.
And yet how fevv sins had they to be sorry for, in comparison of the sins
of the whole world? And how little could they be sorry, eue^ for their
own, in comparison of the grief, which did seize the heart of our blessed
Lord, for those very sins? Which We shall grieve for onr sins after the
rate of our know ledge, and love of God.
was so much greater then theirs, as his knowledge, and love of God, and
them, and his understanding and detestation of all sin, was greater. If we
consider the several kinds of sin which (as has been touched before) were
distinctly represented to the mind of Christ our B. Lord; All the sins of
Idolatry and heresy offending after an infinite manner his most religious
piety; All the sins of pride, his profound humility; All the sins of
wrath, his invincible patience; All the sins of cruelty and envy, those
bowels of his charity and mercy; All the sins of gluttony, and prodigality,
his his perfect poverty and sobriety; All the sins of abominable, bestiall,
(and not so much as to be named) sensuality, his impenetrable, and
supercelestiall purity.

If concerning Idolatry, we consider that it is either exterior, or
interior. Exterior when Sacrifice is offered to a material external Idol;
and interior when Christians, or any other do lodge a creature in their
hearts, which though they know, not to be God, yet they esteem, and obey, and
do more honor to it, then to God. And if we consider, how for these
several kinds of sins he felt, and was to feel, a several kind of
Cross; an outvvard cross, to which they would crucify his sacred body; and
another which was inward, to which he crucified his own heart, through
grief and love.

In How our Lord was wounded by the considetion of Gods justice, and bate of
sin; and our great misery.
particular our Lord had his eye, upon that inflexible decree of God, which
damned so many millions of Angels, for one only sin. And how for one sin,
he drove Adam out of Paradise. Yea and how, not only for the fault or guilt of
sin, he is so terrible; but eue^ for the penalty due to any one sin
although the fault be put away by penance, that he inflicteth excessive pain
in Purgatory, if satisfaction be not made in this life. He had besides in his
sight the miserable weakness of man, toward all good works, which
weakness men contract by sin, (besides the sins themselves) and these are
the effects and teliques thereof. And he well knew, that they would make it very
difficult for men to serve God, without a great abo^da^ce ofgrace which he only
could tell how to merit for the^. Add to this, that he clearly saw, all those
vast affronts which in that night, and the next day, were to be done to
himself, with the hideous torments which he was sure they would inflict upon
him. He also saw the Martyrdomes of all his Prophets past, his Apostles, and
other Martyrs which were then to come; the banishment and confiscation of his
servants, persons, and goods, the contempt and profanation of his Sacraments.

There was no place, whereon he could tell how to rest the head of his heart. The
Synagogue was all, in effect, corrupt; and almost dead, and buried. His Church
under the name of Christian not then borne, One of his Apostles was gone to
betray him; another would shortly deny him; and the rest, were upon the point
to run from him. His B. Mother (in whom only he might have taken intiere
delight) was to suffer martyrdom in her soul, which was to be transpierced
with a sword of sorrow. Whithersoeuer he might cast his thoughs, in the search
of some little comfort, they were bowed, (as it were) and beaten back again,
into his own sad heart, which was become a whole Sea of sorrow. How would he
grieve for all this, who grieved till he wept again, Joan. 11.
and till he was troubled, and did groan in spirit, for the only temporal
death of Lazarus.

All these things I say, being well considered, and duly pondered; I It is no
wonder if such incomparable causes of grief did produce so strange effects in
the wounded heart of our Lord Jesus.
cease to marvel, that such a general muster of hell as this, had like, even
with the only apprehention thereof, to have extinguished the pure lamp of his
precious life. Or yet, that it cost him so much shame, with the horror, to
see such a world of filth cast before him (which now he was to take up, and
to make his own) as was able to put him into express Agony. Or, in fine,
that it drevv out that sweat, and even shovver of blood, as if it had been to
show the profound reason which even all his body had, to blush thereat. Or else
(according to the devout contemplation of holy S. Bernard) as if he should
have shed tears over all his body, since his sacred eyes alone, had not enough
of the sluice for such a purpose.

Of the excellency of Prayer declared by occasion of that Prayer, of our B.
Lord in the Garden.

CHAP. 57.
INFALLIBLY he must needs have dyed, under this huge weight of sorrow, if
particular force had not been sent him, by the good will of God, as the sorrow
of the same kind (though incomparably of an inferior degree) has deprived
many others of their life. Nor are we able to discern visibly by what means
this strength, and succor came imparted to him, but only by the visitation of
the Angel; and the fervor and perseverance of his Prayer to the eternal
Father. We ought to carry great devotion and reverence to the Angels of God.
Now since our Lord, who as God, was the King of glory, did not yet disdain,
as man, to accept that service and assistance from an Angel; much more must
we, who are in the next degree to Nothing, carry great devotion to those
blessed spirits, who come to us with succor in their hands, at such times as
when we are in greatest straites.

And as for the use of prayer; since it is an elevation of the mind toward
God; and a treaty of the soul with him; Since, he admits us, whenever we
apply our selves to have audience; Since, not only he receaues us, if we come,
but he loves us so deerly much as to inuit us, and command us; yea and to be
highly offended if we refrain; Since he inclynes himself to enrich us, with all heavenly graces, upon the only price, of being desired by us that he will
make us rich; and that the more we ask, the more we have; Since he is of so
excellent condition, as never to cast his benefits into our teeth, which
temporal Princes, who are but dust and ashes, otfen do, and yet the favors
which they ca^ afford, are but trash and toys, and even they, are often times
denied; and yet all men are glad to be their suytours; Since according to the
persons, with whom we are accustomed to converse, we suck their qualities
into our selves; and therefore by negotiating the business of our souls, with
that fountain of Sa^ctity, it is not possible, but that we should improve our
selves therein; Since, howsoever in other things, the Saints of God have been
of different gust, one excelling in exterior penance; another in mortificatio^
of himself within; one addicting himself to action; anotherto conte^plation;
and the rest, and best, to a life mixed of both; yet there was never any Saint
(unless some perhaps, who have been converted and canonized both at once, with
some Martyrs Crown) who has not been dilligent in the use of Prayer. And
lastly and chiefly, since we find it to be recomme^ded, both by the Doctrine,
and example of our Lord JESUS, throughout the whole time of his holy life; and
especially now in the garden, when he was to treat of the great affair of our
redemption; And when, after a sort, it was put to a kind of question, whether
he should live, til the next day and leave his life upon the cross, by the
hands of others; or else to dye that night, of the pure grief of his own
distressed and wounded heart; Since we see him, at an instant, become victorious
over all the powers of earth and hell; And that he who immediately before, was so
defeated; immediately afterward, was so full of courage, as to say to his
Apostles (in the third visit which he made the^, (at every of which times, he
found them sleeping) Rise up, Matt. 26.
behold the man who is at hand to betray me; Since by this example, and the
practice of our blessed Lord, both mental, and vocal prayer are set out;
vocal in few words, though thrice repeated; and the mental as being much the
more excellent, taking up a far longer space of time; for when he fell into
that Agony, it is expressed by the Evangelical history, (as has been said
already) that he persisted long in Prayer; Ibid.
Since the Apostles, who were commanded by our Lord to watch and pray, least
else they might enter into Temptation, did for the present, fall a sleep,
through their negligence in the use of that holy exercise, when they should
have waked; and shortly after, did forsake their Master, when they should have
accompanied him to his cross. Since these things, I say, are so, and not only
these, but a thousand more, which appear in their works, who write of Prayer,
and much more in their hearts, and lives who use it much; What Christian soul
is that, which will not apply it self, to this holy and happy exercise. Which
howsoever it be a gift of God, and depends upon the liberality of his holy,
hand, yet as he works in all things sweetly, so does he also in this
particular; and he is pleased to use some men, toward the instruction of
others; the former exercising their charity, and the latter their humility; It
It is necessary to take counsel in the use of mental Prayer, of some good
spituall master.
will therefore be wholly necessary, for him who will study this art of arts, to
betake himself to some well experienced guide. Though, in regard, that it is
not so much a business of the head, as of the heart, the best master, under
heaven, will be a pure and virtuous life. For prayer and practice of virtue are
very circular, and depe^dant upon one another. And he who prays devoutly, will
live virtuously; and he who procures to lead a virtuous life, will quickly be
able to pray devoutly. And we see the effects of this happy exercise (as has
been said) by what it wrought in the wounded soul of our Lord JESUS; and how
it raised him up into so much strength, as to enable him to go, and meet
those enemies of God and him, in the face; whom, not long before, he besought
his eternal Father, that he would auert.

Whereby yet we must not understand, that we are authorized to thrust our selves
into imminent and certain danger of death; when, without any disseruice to
Almighty God, or disadvantage to his cause, we may avoid the same. But How we
are to carry our selves in the flight of persecution, more or less.
only that when our Lord does call us to it, and when the hour is come, which
he, in his eternal providence has prefixed, we are to encounter, and to
embrace the Cross, with alacrity. In former times, the malicious Jews had a
mind to have apprehended, and so to have precipitated him down from a hill;
Joan. 7.
but he made himself invisible to their eyes; and the cause is there assigned,
because his hour, was not then arrived. And so he could also here, have, as
easily, made himself insensible to their hands if it had not been, that the
same hour of his, which was not come before, was come now. And with
unspeakable love, he was pleased, that that other, should be said to be no
hour of his, because it was not appointed for him to suffer in. Luc. 22.
But this was his hour, and it was also the hour of those perfidious
Jews, and of the Prince of darkness, by reason of the power, which then
was given them, over Christ our Lord.

The apprehension of Christ our Lord, and a just expostulation with the
Traitor Judas, for that hideous treason of his: together with a description
of mortal sin, and the danger which we are put into, by all voluntary
venial sins.

CHAP. 58.
THE Traitor Judas, who made himself the keeper of that clock, for that
time; had woone it up, and set it so, (by the men whom he had put to work)
that it was grown ready, even then, to strike. For behold he came with a
band of Pagan soldiers, and a great swarm of Jewish Officers, to apprehend
and sell his Mastier, over, into the possession of death. Whosoever had seen
those two troops, encounter one another; might Christ our Lord, and Judas did
lead the two kingdoms of God and the devil.
have beheld a most lively picture in little, of the kingdom of God, and of the
devil. The former being lead, by Christ our Lord, who marched in the head
thereof, with his meek, and innocent, humble, little flock. The latter, guyded
by Judas, with a great multitude of followers, who were tumultuous, wicked,
bloody, enuyous, and hypocryticall men.

But Amost just expostulatio^ agianst the Traitor Judas.
tell me, O thou miserable creature, since the Son of the virgin, took but
twelve Apostles, out of the whole world, and made choice of thee for one of
them; what could move thee to forget so high a benefit? and much more what
could induce thee, to conspire the death of such a benefactour? Since he had
given thee the charge of the little te^porall means he had; and that, by
consequence, thou must needs, be next at hand, both at the receiving of those
Alms, which were afforded to our Lord JESUS; and those others also, which he
would be ever imparting to the poor, out of his little store; how could thou
freeze in that ice of thy malice, and envy, even then, when thou were (as it
were) rosting round, between those two burning fires of charity.

What color, even of common sense, could thou have, to sell that Lord, for
thirty pieces of silver; Matt. 17.
to whom thou had seen the very Fishes of the Sea pay Tribute? Matt. 17.
and how a word of his mouth, fed at several times so many thousands of men
and women in the wilderness. Could thou, being an Apostle, sell that Lord for
thirty pieces of silver, Matt. 16.
when thy self had seen so lately, that the enamoured penitent S. Mary
Magdalene (who was but newly converted from a life of sin) could find in her
noble, and tender heart, to cast away (as a man may say) three hundred such
pieces, Marc. 14.
as thy thirty were, upon a precious ointment, wherewith to honor the head of
our blessed Lord, as it were, in the way of a complement. Since thou had
found by daily experience, that he knew the thoughts both of his friends, and
them, who would needs become his foes; what phrensey was that, which could make
thee think, that thou were able to ouerreach him, by the disguyse of a
treacherous kiss, whereby thou did, as bad, as call him fool, into the
bargain? And since thou had seen, that his body was not obnoxious to the
obligations of other bodies, but that the winds and seas obeyed him; and that
he could walk upon the waters, and become invisible when he would; what
stupidity (besides the impiety) was that in thee, to bid them be careful to
hold him fast, and lead him safe; whereby thou did insinuate, that he was but
a kind of Iugler, or Impostour, who would work himself out of their fingars,
by some trick or other, of Legier-de-main?

Had not thou seen the worlds of Miracles which he had wrought? He who had
restored eyes to the blind, could not he have bidden thine eyes see no more? He
who had made Paralitiques sti^re, and go, could not he have made all thy bones
and sinews wither in thy skin? He who, only, with a Lazarus veni for as, had
fetched that dead man out of his grave; Joan. 11.
had not he been able with the burning breath of his mouth to have spit thy
kiss, into thy throat, and at the instant to have deprived thee of life? But
tell me yet again, O thou Monster, and insamy of mankind, could those accursed
feet of thine, lead thee on, to such a mischief, which even but that very
night, had been washed and wiped by those hands of mercy? Could thy tongue
become the forge of so much treachery, as to salute him with Hayle Master,
when thy errand was nothing else but to betray him? could that mouth employ it
self in delivering him up to death, by animating those wretched me^ against
him (who yet needed no encouragement of thine) which for diverse years had been
daily fed, both at his table, and from his trencher?

If thy kisses were so cruel, what were thy vvounds; or rather what wound
was ever so mortal, as thy traiterous kiss? And although thine own
reprobate conscience did not strike thee through with horrou^; would not the
presece of all thy fellovv-Apostles, beat thee blind with shame, who were
so many vvitnesses against thee of all those benefits which thou had
received; and that even then, so lately, at the hands of such a meek and
merciful Lord? And had thou no body to sell him to, but those very men of
the whole world, who did hate him most? And was it possible for thy Tygars
heart, not to relent at least, when thou came to behold that holy person of
his? And though now he were no more able to work upon thee, as an object of
love, yet was it possible, that thou should not be wrought upon by him, as
he was grown to be an object of compassion? For thou could not but discern,
a great change in his divine countenance, toward palenes, and weakness, since
thou had seen him last before, through the Agony which he had sustained, and
the sweat of blood which he had powered forth in the Garden?

At least, were thou able to receive the sound of that celestial voice into
thine ears, which (besides the sacred tune) did express that sweet, and
charming ditty, Marc. 14. Luc. 12.
Amice ad quid venisti, osculo silium hominis tradis? My friend consider what
it is, about which thou comesi, caust thou find in thy heart to betray the son
of the Virgin, and with a kiss? And was not even this of power, to make thee,
at length retract the treason, which thou had contrived? had thou more the^
a Legio^ of devils in thee which at the hearing of his voice would not leave
thee free; for of other me^ we read, that he dispossessed the^, of whole
Legions all at once, by the only word of his sacred mouth. At least, if there
were no remedy, but thou would needs commit that vast sin, it might have
served thy turn to have betrayed him by a deputy; or if thou must needs do it
in sight, it might yet have been from a far of. But to do it, both in thine
own person, and that so very near at hand, as both to speak to him, and to
hear him, and to embosome thy self by a kiss, and so betray him; was such a
high strain of wickedness, that we need no less then the assurance it self of
Gods holy Spirit, to make us believe that it should be true.

O The (...) in (...).
mortal sin, which art both mortal, and immortal; in that thou put the
soul to death, but a death which yet knows not how to dye. What ruin do
thou bring to the heart of man, wherein thou raiguest? what perfect miracles do
thou work there, in reuersall of those others, which are wrought by Grace? For
as Grace illuminates, as it inflames, as it instructs, as it enriches, as it
exalts, as it delights, as it unites; just so do thou block up, and freeze,
and deceive, and impouerish, and abase, and afflict, and dissipate the whole
soul of man, into many several ways, and all at once. Thou do not only
v^xe men, which implies a painful tossing, from one thing to another; but
withal, thou do rack them, by strange inventions within themselves; making
them live and dwell in (...), as in their proper sphere, and cen^e^. Thou do,
thou do, it is well known (...) do; and we all are bound to hate thee f^^
it. Thou art that monster which did take that The unhappy Judas.
man, and by the dust of Passion thou did first put out his eyes. The Passion
of covetousness, by occasion that he kept the purse; and the Passion of Pride
and Envy, because he found, that some were favored more then he. And when thou
had made him How sinners are not only blind, but mad.
Blind, thou did also make him Mad. He first believing impossible, and
incompatible things to be most true; and acting afterward in conformity of that
belief some other things, as if they had been just, which were eternally to
have been abhorred.

Now as Judas was once an Apostle, and highly in the favor and grace of God;
so it is morally impossible, that he should fall into such extremes upon a
sudden. Nemo repent sit malus, and much less pessimus; especially from a
state of such eminency as that. Nor could the devil be so void of wit, as to
offer, at a clap, to persuade an Apostle, be betray and sell his Master, and
such a Master, and for such a tryfle. No, this is seldom, or never attempted,
or if it be, it is not wont to take effect. Infallibly he began with him (as we
use to say) at small game; and he The sleps whereby a soul may quickly fail
from the top to the bottom.
would first advise him to neglect some known inspiration of God; and then to
omit the exercising of some virtue; and after that, to give way to some little
inordinate affection; and then voluntarily to commit some light venial sin;
and so by his ingratitude, having disobliged the mercy of God from giving him
particular succor, and himself growing daily more weak, and consequently the
devil more strong, he fell into mortal sins, and at last, he came, by
these insensible degrees, into such an Abisse of impiety, as it was for him to
sell, and betray his heavenly master.

He therefore who loves danger, Eccles. 3.
shall be sure to perish in it, and he who makes himself deaf to divine
inspirations, and makes no difficulty to resolve upon committing certain
venial sins; will not possibly be able to continue long, from such as are
mortal. A man who shootes in a weak bow, at a long mark, must ouer-lay; or
else he will be sure to fall short. Now there is not any longer way, then from
the sinful heart of man, to sanctity of life; nor is there any weaker bow, then
the powers of our mind, which are so afflicted, by so many spiritual wounds.
And if any man will resolve, and hope, by the grace of God, never to commit any
mortal sin, let him ouerlay so much, as to be careful not to commit any
venial; and so, and only so, he may perhaps keep his soul, from the guilt of
any, which is mortal.

But such, in Judas, was the work of sin and such was the treachery which he
committed. Yet our Lord JESUS, was still holding on his speedy pace, in the way
of love. For The invincible patience, and meeknes of our Lord Jesus.
in the strength thereof, it was, that he did not so much as turn his mouth
aside, from receiving that pill of death, from that Apothecary of hell. But
rather he did behold the wretch, with a countenance compounded of meekenes (to
assuage his cruelty) and of misery, to extinguish his envy. And because that
countenance was not of force enough to work with him, he spoke to him as has
been said, and he had care even then, to save his honor; and he called him
Friend. Wishing him first to look in upon himself, and to reflect upon the
thing, which he was come to do, by saying (as I have showed) Ad quid venisti;
and when that would not serve, he advised him (by saying further, Osculo filium
hominus tradis?) to look upon his person, he being the Son of the Virgin;
and to consider whether it were fit to betray the Son of such a mother, and
that by a kiss.

And howsoever the hardness of that Tygars heart were foreseen from all eternity
by the eye of God; yet the same eye did also see that it would be hard through
his one fault; whether God (in effect) would or no. And although There was
mercy still for Judas if he would have repented.
he deserved to be wholly abandoned for his former wickedness, yet even then, and
afterward, if sufficiency of grace would have served the turn, it was
certainly offered and pressed upon him by our Lord JESUS; but he would none. How
willingly our blessed Lord would have saved even that wretched soul, and not
only have given him sufficient, but efficacious grace; may also appear in the
sermon which he made after the last supper, where he says; That he had lost,
Joan. 17.
but only that child of perdition, that the Scriptures concerning him, might
be fulfilled. As if he could not have endured it, without much grief of heart,
but only for the accomplishment of that, which his eternal Father was pleased
to permit, who foresavv how wicked that man would be.

Of our Lords great love to us, in permitting that fall of Judas: and of that
unspeakable mercy which he showed otherwise, in the mystery of his
apprehension.

CHAP. 59.
BUT now as God can dravv good out of evil, so does Christ our Lord,
abundantly express his mercy and charity, to mankind, by this act of Justice
upon Judas, in leaving him to himself. For who is he, that vvil any longer
presume upon his own strength? Our Lord has set many burning beacons before
us, but especialy two, that we may know, and fly the danger, which threatens
us, on all sides. Out of the old Testament (besides many others) we have the
example of Solomon, Solomon.
a Type of Christ our Lord, A pen of the holy Ghost, A man to whom God had
said, Ask, and have, The vvisest and the worthiest King of the whole world,
and withal, a Prophet. And yet this Cedar of Libanus, which might seem to
have been made of incorruptible vvood; was so wrought into at the root, by
the worm of lust, that down it fell, and the fall was great. For he
precipitated his soul to worship (in the place, of the God of himself, 3.
Reg. 11.
and of his Fathers) as many Idols, as the humors of his co^cubines would
lead him to; and it is more then we know, if ever he rose again by penance.

And here we have in the new Testament an Judas.
Apostle; one of the twelve, whom, God had elected out of the whole world, to
be his Ambassadors; one who had lived near three years, in the sight, and
taste of that fountain of sanctity, Christ our Lord; and of that stream of
purity and charity, his all-immaculate mother, whom all generations shall call
blessed. One who had wrought miracles, Luc. 2.
and exercised dominion over the Princes of darkness, by commanding them to
depart out of possessed persons; One before whom, the King of glory had
kneeled down to wash his seat; one who had been fed with the body of our
blessed Lord, which he gave with his own sacred hands. This man, this Monster
(to show what a monstrous thing every living man is sure to be, at the instant
that he deserves to be forsaken by the omnipote^t mercy of our Lord God) made
such have to hell, as that he suffered not his eyes to sleep, nor his eye lids
to slumher, till (having entered into a part with those perfidious Jews) for
thirty pieces of silver he put himself upon betraying, and by a kiss, this
Lord of life, into the hands of death.

This Lord The love of our Lord to us in the loss of Judas.
gave way to this inestimable offense against himself, that it might be a
great and lovvd warning Piece of meeknes, for as much as he vouchsafed to
suffer; and of humility and fear, for as much as Judas presumed to do. To the
end that no privilege of favor, or possession of present virtue, might make
any man rely upon his own strength, which is al but weakness. 2. Cor. 7.
But that, adhering to God by faith, hope, and love, we might work our
salvation with a filial sear, and a tre^bling joy. For the whole race of
mankind, was nothing at all in the way of nature, and to nothing it would
instantly all return, if it were not conserved by the omnipotency of God, as
by a kind of continual new creation. And, in the way of grace, we are all
less then nothing, and the holiest soul which ever was, might instantly
plunge it self in sin, if it were abandoned by Gods grace.

If then we have our being, both in the state of nature, and of grace, by the
particular favor of our Lord God; it follows, that the more graces he gives,
and the more favors he shows to a soul, so much the more, must it be
subject to him. And they are to serve, but as so many bills of debts, vvherby
it is bound to find how base and beggarly a thing it is of it self; and
consequently how profoundly humble, and grateful, it must be to our Lord,
who only knevv how to enrich it. For our Lord is a great God, and we are
vveake, unworthy things, who can give him nothing by way of retribution;
but only a continual, and faithful, and humble acknovvledgment, that we are
How we are to entertain the memory of Gods favors, and of our own sins.
nothing vvorth. And as, through his infinite goodness, we may call to mind
even our greatest sins with much comfort, when once we have done true
penance, for them; so through his infinite greatness the soul which receives
favors, and visitations of him, in particular manner; must think of them with
great apprehension and fear, unless they be intertayned with much humility,
and improued by Prayer, and other industry.

The grief which our Lord JESUS had, for every single sin of the whole world
was excessiuely great as we have showed. How excessive therefore must it needs
have been, to see this hideous sin of this Apostle? And by the measure of his
grief, we may find the measure of his former love; for love it was which made
him grieve. The thing which might comfort him in that affliction, was to
consider, what an innumerable number of souls, would take warning by this
sin of Judas. As soon therefore as that treacherous kiss was given, and that
our Lords sacred words and inspirations were contemned, by that miserable
creature; our Lord JESUS, went on, toward the troop, enquiring whom they
sought. And when they told him that it was JESUS of Nazareth, Joan. 18.
he instantly answered, that he was the man.

But as, on the one side, they saw him a man, so on the other, he then gave
himself, Gods truest The Majesty of our Lord Jesus, even when he he was
mortal, and seemed miserable
Name, of Ego sum, I am; though they understood it not. But he thought good to
let them see, that he had somewhat in himself of the God. And so resolving to
try all imaginable ways for the mollifying of their marble hearts; and
perceauing that the mildnes which he had used with Judas, succeeded not; he
gave such a Majesty to those two words as served to cast them to the ground. We
may imagine heerby with what terror he will appear, when he comes as Judge,
who, in his very Passion, wherein he meant but only to suffer, could so declare
his power. We may also well perceive heerby, that they were strangely confirmed
in malice; since a miracle of that nature, being wrought upon the persons of
themselves had no means to make the^ rise to penance. But they rose, by the
permission of God, to continue in their sin; and to ask our Lord the same
question a second time; and a second time to receive an Answer, to the same
effect. Our Lord Our Lord had no care of himself, but much of his Apostles.
Ibid.
adding further, by way of commandment, that they should suffer his Apostles
to retire themselves, whatsoever they might have a mind to do with him.

And it seems to have been impossible for that divine Lord, to have cast his
thought upon any creature, to whom he must not be showing mercy. For when S.
Peter, (in detestation that they should presume to lay hands upon his Master)
had picked out one of the busiest of them, Joan. 18.
and had cut of his right ear; our Lord was so willing to suffer, as to
mislike the impediment, which his disciple was about to give. And by a touch of
Malchus ear, with his omnipotent hand, he cured that enemy, who came to lead
him to the Passion; having repressed his friend, who went about to hinder it.
And even as they were binding him, he made no resistance at all; he reproached
them not by declaring their sins; he vpbraided not the miracles which so
abundantly he had wrought upon them, or theirs; he framed no quarrel against
them, but only this action of unkindness; Luc. 22.
That he bauing employed himself so much, upon instructing, and teaching them,
to their good liking, in the Temple; they should now come forth against him
with swords, and Clubbes, as they would have done against some insole^t and
bloody thiese. As if he had said. If you come indeed, to seek the true
Redeemer and Saniour of your souls, you shall find, to your comfort, that I am
he. But if you look for some Traitor, or seditious enemy of God and man, your
level is ill laid. Though yet, for the glory of God, for the exercise of all
virtue, and for the recovery of the world from hell, and sin, I am content to
be mistaken for such a one. Yet nothing could induce them to relent. But, as
the manner is with men, who when they are desperately resolved to do a thing
which their conscience tells them, that reason requires them to forbear; the
greater the force of that reason is, which is pressed against them, the more
eagarly are they inflamed, and even blinded with rage to work their will.

As soon therefore as they had apprehended and bound him, with far greater
cruelty then any Christian heart knows how to imagine; it cannot be chosen, but
that they would dragge him, more like a dog then a man. Not What soever
incommodity they endured was reueged by the upon our Lord.
that he went unwillingly, but because the press must needs be great; and they
were also, in blood, against him; and would all, so desire to be the
executioners of some particular affliction, and affront upon him; that they
could not but hinder one another. And then, if any of them were iustled, if any
chanced to st^ble, or fall; upon whom would they revenge themselue, but upon
him, who with patience (which was indeed divine) permitted himself to be
carried, in that painful journey to the house of Annas, under that cruel
cudody, which the accursed Judas had advised them to keep him in.

Of the blow which was given upon the face of our B. Lord in the high Priests
house; of the fall of S. Peter. How our Lord was taxed first of Blasphemy; and
of the excessive Love of our Lord, in dll these particulars.

CHAP. 60.
SHALL I need to say, that it showed an infinite kind of love in our Lord, that
he would vouchsafe to be presented before Annas, and then before Cayphas, at
their several houses, Matt. 26. Luc. 22. Joan. 18.
and before all that race of persidious Jews, who the^, very the^, co^spired
his death? That he, being the fountain of wisdoms and knowledge, and the
King of glory, would for our sakes, be arraigned, and be contented to pass
under the censure of those slaves of the devil, who was his slave. And he,
in their prosecuting of that suite against him, to maintain that invincible
patience, and profund silence, notvvithstanding all their clamours; and so
seldom to have opened that blessed mouth of his? He referred himself that
first time, when he was examined about his Doctrine, to the judgment of
themselves, Joan. 18.
who had heard him teaching in the Temple. And when, for saying but so, (in
the way of anvvere to the high Priest) a barbarous wretch, Ibid.
who was attending in that Court, and knevv that he should please his betters
by it, stroocke that face, with his polluted hand, which the Angels do so
reuere, and rejoice to see, he did not damn him, nor strike him dead, 1. Pet.
1.
which yet most easily and most justly he might have done; nor so much as
sharply rebuke, or reprehend him for it, though it were so lewd an affront,
as is never wont to be put upon any slave, in the view of Justice. But he
asked him only, with great meeknes, why he struck him, if he had spoken well;
and if he had spoken ill, Ibid.
why did he not inform the Court against him? By which kind of plea, our
Lord, though he were the Creator of all things, did not assume to himself,
the least advantage above the vvickedest, and basest thing alive. That so by
suffering, he might show how much he loved us. For the more he suffered, the
more rich the Church was to be of merits, and so the more copious our
Redemption.

Whilst these things were acting, Psalm. 120.
in the house of Cayphas, S. Peter, who at the apprehension of Christ our Lord,
was fled away, with the other Apostles (for Our Lord was ever in care to
give us comfort.
our Lord JESUS was content to be wholy abandoned, even by his dearest
friends, that it might serve for our comfort, when we are forsaken by ours)
could find no resting place for his thoughts, till together with S. John, he
came after our Lord, to the house of Cayphas. But (whether it were, that his
countenance complained of some perplexity; or that the manner of his speech, or
habit, made it be thought, that he was a Disciple of Christ our Lord) he was
questioned by diverse, and he denied his Master to them all, and said with
oaths and protestations, Marc. 14.
that he did not so much as know the man.

A great offense in it self, and a just punishment of a former fault, which he
had made in presuming upon his own strength. For that unspeakable love
which he bare to our blessed Lord (which was not only, as of a friend to a
friend, or as of a Disciple to his Doctor, but of any indulge^t father, who
might half doat upon a Son) did seem now to him, to be so co^natural to
his very soul, as that he thought, he could not loose it, but with his life.
Whereas in very deed, it was the mere gift of God. and for such he ought to
have acknowledged it; and so, distrusting himself, he should have confided in
our Lord. It was therefore pleasing to our dear Redeemer, to permit that
denial, out of infinite love both to S. Peter, and to us; though it could not
but go, the while, very deeply to his own tender heart; that S. Peter who
was not only one of his friends, but of his fauourities, should forswear, that
he did not so much as know him.

He How our Lord did love S. Peter even in suffering him, thus to full. Ibid.
loved S. Peter, in suffering him thus to fall, for thereby he taught him, how
to stand more firmly afterward, which is never to be done by any soul, but
upon the ground of humility. He loved him also most deerly, in making him rise
again so soon, both by the show of his corporal presence, to the others eyes
of flesh and blood, and by the sweet pure light of his grace, which was
imparted to the eyes of his soul. And that light had so much heat also with
it, as to draw up the vapors which powered themselves down afterward, at full
speed, through his cloudy eyes.

Our Lord be ever blessed, for his own infinite goodness, who, in the bitterest
of those sorrows, showed such mercy, and had such memory, both of him, and us.
For thus the world is filled with Sea-markes, which instruct us how to sail
through the Tempest of this life, toward the safe port of heaven. That when we
pass by a Judas, we may take heed of avarice, and envy, because it ends in
desperation. And when we pass by a S. Peter, we may forbear to fall upon
self conceit, which will put us upon many sins, and which afterward will
cost, and can be only cured by penance. It was also an act of excessive charity
in Christ our Lord, to let him feed upon the experience of his own frailty;
that so, having a resolution to make him the supreme Pastor of his Church, and
to give him the keys of pardoning, Matt. 16.
and reteyning sins, he might easily pity others, since he had fallen into
so deep a pit himself; and all others also, might be kept very far, from
presuming to confide in their own virtue, since even S. Peter was not able to
secure himself from growing worse.

But as for those A defense of S. Peter from the reproach which sectaries would
lay vpnn him. Luc. 22.
wicked people, who in the hatred they have to the Catholic Church, would
impute to the head thereof, that in this denial of his, he had lost his faith;
they are not so much as to be heard. For the holy Scripture insinuates no such
things, but the very contrary; since Christ our Lord himself declared how, he
had prayed already to his eternal Father, that S. Peter's faith might never
fail; and moreover, the voice of reason, and the stream of all the holy Aug.
de correp. and gra. c. 8. Chryshom. 81. in Matthew. Theophilact. in c. 22. Lucae^
and alij passim.
Fathers, does condemn that error. And we see how soon he returned to bitter
penance for his fault. And it was far from the love of our Lord, to suffer,
that this most excellent Apostle, should fall outright into infidelity, who
had never offended him before, but venially, and only out of too free a heart.
Nor even now, but by the mere mistaking of the confines of Grace and nature,
which were not so well set out, till afterward, by the coming of the holy
Ghost.

And of this we are certain, that before, he had loved our Lord most
unspeakably tenderly; and at a clap he had left all the world Matt. (9.
for him; and had cast himself into the very Matt. 14
Sea, to approach him; and at the apprehension of our Lord, he had drawn his
Joan. 18.
poor, single sword in his defense, against so many hundreds of Armed men; and
he had wo^ded one of the hoa^est of them; and it was nothing but even Mare 14.
the very passion of love to our Lord that seized his heart, which could carry
him, so instantly, into so apparent danger, as it must be for him to put
himself in the high Priests house, when he was but then newly come, from
wounding his servant Malchus. And though this sin of denying our Lord JESUS,
were a very great one; yet all the devils of hell, cannot make it more, then
of mere frailty; and his penance for it, began almost at the very instant,
when it was committed, and that continued till the last moment of his life. At
which time, he gave, instead of tears, his blood upon a Cross, as our Lord
had done for him; but with his head turned downward through humility. And the
holy Scripture shows, Luc. 24.
how our Lord appeared to him alone, after his Resurrection; and we hear not
that he once rebuked him, for that former sin. And before his Ascension, we
are very sure since the holy Ghost it self has said so) that, our Lord making
S. Peter declare the love which he bare him, at three several times, before
the Apostles; he gave him the charge both of them, and all the rest, who would
be either lambs or sheep of his flock. Joan. 15.


Now since our Lord himself (who was offended, and who best can tell, how
deeply) did so sweetly and so magnificently forgive, and forget S. Peter's
sin, it is but a sign of a cankered and malicious mind, to be exagerating
the same upon al occasions. And let them, who are so insolent in taxing this
Prince of the Apostles for his sin of frailty in denying Christ our Lord who
is the head; Note.
at that time when truth could be discerned, but as by the light of a candle;
Let them, I say, take heed, that daily themselves be not committing far
greater sins, against the same truth, whilst they are not only denying, but
blaspheming and afflicting it in the body of Christ our Lord, which is his
Church; which truth, Isalm. 19.
they yet may see, as by the light of the Sun. For in she sun, God has
placed his Tabernacle, which S. Augustine understands of his Church.

The wicked Priests, suborned false vvitnesses against our Lord; but he would
not so much as reproach them for it; and much less convince them of lewd
practice; nor enen open his mouth when it might any way have been, in his
own discharge. Only when Cayphas coniured him in the name The high seuerence
which our Lord did carry to the name of God. Matt, 26.
of God. to say whether he were the Son of God or no; both because he had the
place of high Priest at that time, and yet further, for the high reverence
which he carried to the holy name of God, his answer was express and
clear, though short and meek, That he was the son of God. And heerpon they
declared him to be worthy of death as a blasphemer.

O false painted face of the world, how vain and deceiptfull are thy
judgments! and how many are there now a days, who if they should see a Cayphas
sit with great solemnity, authority, and attendance, upon the cause of Christ
our Lord, who were co^temptibly standing at a bar; and should here a Cayphas
affirm, that he were an ennemy to the word of the Lord, or the State, would
infallibly join with him against our Lord; and be drawn by those vain
appearances, to believe for the time, that they said true. But whatsoever the
thought of the people was of Christ our Lord, his enamoured heart, did so deadly
thirst after their good and ours, upon any terms; as that he, being God, did
not abhorro to be accounted a blasphemer of God; so that by the application of
that precious merit to us, we might, of slaves, become the Sons of his
eternal Father. And The love of our Lord Jesus to us, made him easily ouercom^
all difficulties. Ibid.
howsoever it was an unspeakable detestation of that thing, which reigned in
his most reverent soul; yet was his love to the name, and imputation thereof,
in effect, as unspeakable, since the more deeply he had cause to be auerted
from it, the more abundantly he deserved by it, for us. But the Priest cried
our, Blasphemy, what need have we now of any witnesses? Those hypocryticall
eyes were cast up to heaven, the garments were rent, and our Lord, without his
answering any one word, was esteemed and decreed, by them all, to be worthy of
death. We have read of Saints who have been armed with patience against all
other affronts; but when they have been called Heretics, they could not choose
but break their pace, and declare that they detested that imputation. But
here the Saint of Saints could be content to be called Blasphemer, and yet to
make no demonstration, that he took the least offense thereat.

The abundant, and most bitter scorns, which our B. Lord endured with
excessive love, in that night precedent to his death.

CHAP. 61.
EXCESSIVE was the indignity, and dishonor which Christ our Lord endured at
that first examination, by Annas, and Cayphas; which yet will seem, but a kind
of nothing, if it be compared to that which followed, in the rest of that
woeful night, when our Lord was imprisoned in the high Priests house. And if,
at his being taken, he were as well bound by ropes, as the Traitor Judas could
devise; there is no doubt but that now, they would lodge him in a dungeon low
enough, and load his delicate body, with as many irons, as it could bear.

It is true that the Prophet Hieremy, had been thrust down into a deep well;
and the Prophet Daniell into a Lake of Lions; and the Patriarcke Joseph, was
cast into a cesterne; and the The servants of our Lord were comforted by him in
their afflictions, but himself would feel none in his.
Martyrs of Christ our Lord, have suffered insufferable kinds of torment; yet
whatsoever affliction, or fear they were subject to, the hand of God was
there, either to deliver, or at least to comfort the^ therein. But our Lord had
here resigned al comfort; he had resigned that hour, that is, the whole time
of his bitter Passion, to the Prince of darkness; and he had suspended the use
of his own power, for as much as concerned the receiving of any sensible
consolation at all. I would therefore be glad to know, what dolorous, infamous
affront that could be, which, in that night of shame and sorrow, was not put
upon our blessed Lord, by those instruments of the devil.

If whilst he was yet abroad at liberty, whilst he was rauishing them with his
divine words, even in spite of their perverse hearts, whilst he was both
dazeling the eye of envy, and hypocrisy with his sanctity; and amazing them by
the Majesty, and obliging them by the mercy of his miracles, they would yet be
finding means to snarle against him, and to undermine him; what kind of
quarter is it likely now that they would keep with him, when all the miracles
which he wrought, were to let them outrage him, as much as they would, and all
the language which he used, was that invincible silence which he never brake,
in all that nights bitter durance.

If whilst he showed so many tokens of his being the Son, or at least a man
of God; they would yet take occasion from the facility and suauity of his
conversation, to esteem him as a drinker Matthew. 11.
of wine; If from his mercy and love, to the gayning of perverted, and impure
souls, that he was a man who Ibid.
liked to spend his time in bad company; If from his saying that he was
ancient to Joan. 8.
Abraham, that he was proud, and made himself God knows what; If from the
wonders which he wrought, upon the Sabbath, Luc. 13.
that he was an irreligious and profane person; If from seeing that he did
supernatural things at other times, that he performed them by a Luc. 11.
pact, with the devil; If from their observation that his fanctity, and
benignity made the people love him, that Luc. 23.
he was a popular, seditious, and unquiet person; If from his auowing, that he,
Joan. 10.
and his Father were one; that he was an express Blasphemer, and, as such a
one, they were once, about to stone him. If then, I say, they were so insolent,
and arrogant; shall we think that now, they could grow calm, and
tender-harted toward him? When already, they had seen him receive a cruel
buffet from that Sycophant, in the very view of the high Priest; and that the
same high Priest did not so much as once reprove him for it, which certainly he
would have done, if that fellow had but presumed to beat his dog. Shall we
think, that it gave him any credit for them to observe, that one of his
Disciples had betrayed and sold him to the^ for a toy? Shall we think that his
meekenes would appease the rage of those hungry wolves, they having been so
long in hunting, after this innocent lamb? Who in that time of his sheering,
no nor yet in his flaughtering afterward, did not so much, at open his mouth,
to make any one complaint? Or rather shall we not conclude, that they took
offense, even from that very patience of his? Which howsoever indeed, it grew
from no other cause, but only a profo^d root of love, they His very patience
made the^ more outrageous against him.
would yet impute it, either to some witchcraft, which might kindle their hate
against him; or cls to some extreme stupidity, which might urge them on, to an
increase of contempt? Or finally, shall we think that our Lord would change
their minds, to make the^, in some miraculous kind, forbear him (though
otherwise it were much against their will) which privilege, yet he had never
used to help himself thereby in his whole life? It is not credible. It is not
possible. But a most vndoubled truth it is, that those wretches did afflict and
dishonor him, all they could; and that our Lord was not only willing to endure
all that, but all the rest which they could devise.

The holy Scripture it self, does this once, give such a view of what kind of
Banquet was then set before this spouse of our souls, to feed upon; as that
the consideration thereof, which has been taken by devout persons, has made
tempests of sighs rise from their hearts, and floods of tears, flow from their
eyes, through the compassion of his grief, and the admiration of his divine
love, in A bitter Potto^.
sucking down, so greedely, such huge draughts of the scalding bitter stuff,
which in that dolorous night, was put upon him. It tell us, Matt. 2^
that they strocke him with the Palms of their hands; that they did, beat and
buffet him; that they spit upon him; that they hoodwincked him; that they would
be stryking him again; and that they scoffed and scorned him; bidding him
prophesy, who it was, that had strocken him.

But is it possible that the God of heaven and earth, should suffer such
things at their hands, and that for the salvation of us, yea and even of them,
and of all the world? Yea so possible it is, that God would suffer it; as that
it would have been wholly impossible, that any who had not been God, should
have endured it.

Consider therefore here, what variety of affronts they found out for him, and
how every one of them, had a kind of particular reproach belonging to it. They
boxed him, as has been said, with their hands at large; and therein they
treated him, as a man would do some villainous, lying boy. They buffeted him
with their fists, and in that they used him like some idle, and base, wicked
slave. They spit upon him, and so they did, as good as say, that he was an
infamous, and most odious blasphemer, who deserved to be the outcast both of
God and man. They blinded him, and the^ they boat him again; and to make
themselves merry (as a Lord of mis-rule is wont to do in a jolly Christmas)
they would bid him Prophesy, who had beaten him; and thereby they called him
fool, and sot. And they alluded to the wickedness, of which they would needs
suppose him to have been guilty, in aspiring to be accounted a Prophet, by the
people. Such was The invincible love of Lord, did conquer the power of all
their rage.
the excess of their rage; and our Lord, the while, uttered not one word of
reproof, nor shevved not one gesture of mislike; though his thoughts were not
silent, but well employed. Yet not upon securing himself from their wrongs,
but upon sorrovving proso^dly for their sins.

To have seen any creature in that woeful case, would have moved any cruel
heart to pity; how much more to have seen (though it had not been, as he was
also God, but only man) that excellent beauty of the divine countenance of our
Lord, so abhominably defeated, and even murdered (as it were) by those
perfidious Jews. For murdered it was by those cruel buffets; and instead of
odoriferous and precious gumms, it was imbalmed in their nastly, and impure
spittle. And it may also be accounted, to have been buried, in that beastly
cloth, vvhervvith they blinded, those svveet-sad-eyes.

The least of what they did to him at that time, does inuolue such a deal of
indignity as is beyond al conceit; but How infamous an affront it was for them
to spit upon our Lord.
yet that of the spitting seems to exceed the rest. It is an odious, and
infamous kindof affront, not used to any flaue, even by his Lord, who has an
absolute dominion over him. But if at any time it be, it is to show a meeting
together, of the extremity of contempt, and hate, in the heart of him, who
desires, by this ugly means, to show it self. Nay when we do but spit, for
the mere discharge, and ease of nature, we procure to do it so, as that no
person of respect may, so much as see it. If by error it should fall upon some
stool, or andyron, or even but upon a man's shoe; he is not well, till it be
wyped. And therefore I do not wonder, if they forbear to strike, or even to
touch his face, after they had so desiled it, till first, they had put a veyle,
between. The true place of spittle, is either the ground, that instantly it may
be trodden out; orelse the fire, where, in a moment, it may be consumed. But
now this unwholesome excrement, which being delivered out, upon necessity, is
not suffered to continue upon the meanest, and basest creatures, or clothes we
wear; was thought good enough, to dwell upon the most precious parts of the
person of Christ our Lord. And although the Prophet Isay, might mean (by that
great diffiguring of our Lord which he foresaw and foretold) the whole troop
of torments which came upon his divine person; yet it seems that this of his
spittle, was pointed at by him, in particular manner.

The holy Scripture does further say, that they uttered many other most
blasphemous things against him. But whether it were that it would exceed the
bounds of modesty for us to hear of the words or deeds themselves which those
miscreants used; or else, to the end that every one might have the greater
merit, to contemplate in pious manner what they were; the holy ghost thought
fit, to wrap them up in silence. Which certainly was done upon high design,
and great mystery; and S. Hierome says, that till the day of Judgment should
arrive, we were not fully to know, the strange means, whereby that night, they
vexed our Lord, in the house of the high Priest.

Yet whatsoever, they either did or said, it is certain, that the very things
themselves, were not so odious, in the sight of God, as was the ground from
whence they grew. An The scorns which they put, upon our Lord, were doubled by
the root of malice, from which they came
itch they had, at the very roots of their profane hearts, in chafing, and
scratching whereof, by doing those detestable dishonours to our Lord, they did
triumph, and spring with a most petulant, and pestiferous kind of joy. And so,
on the other side, though the very outrages themselves, were far more enormous
then we can conceive, which declare the infinite patience and humility of
Christ our Lord; yet the liberal heart of love wherewith he offered them all to
God, for our good, and wherewith, he (behoulding us all at that very time) could
have been content to suffer more, as afterward we shall see he did; is that
which ought both to comfort, and confound us most.

How our Lord was solemnly adjudged worthy of death for Blasphemy; and of the
death of Judas; and how they send our Lord to Pilate.

CHAP. 62.
BUT then, as the importunate malice of them, who had our Lord JESUS in charge,
kept him far enough from taking any rest; so the Priests and elders
themselves, might not so well be said to be gone to sleep, as to bed; through
the rage of envy, which, in all likelihood, kept them both waking, and
thinking, that every minute was an age, till it were day; at which time, they
intended to persecute our Lord to death. They did therefore all, Confestim mane,
Marc. 15.
at the very point and peep of day, call themselves together, in the form of
a Council. Where the wicked Cayphas (giving account to that whole assembly,
of what had passed, the night before, amongst those fevv which could be
gathered together, upon the sudden) did again, with the same hypocritical
show of piety, press our Lord, that for the reverence of the living God, he
would declare to them, Whether he were the Christ or no Our Lord, out of his
knowledge, that whatsoever he should say, they would netther believe him, nor
answer him, nor yet dismiss him, would willingly have forborne his answer;
but being pressed by this coniuration, he declared to them yet once again to
this effect, That he was the Christ. And that once the time would come, when
they would know it to their cost; and believe it, when it would be too late;
when they should see him sitting, at the right hand of the power of God, and
coming down upon the clouds of the air. Here upon they Our Lord Jesus, the
God of life, condemned to death.
solemly pronounced him to be an express blasphemer, and that he was worthy
of death. And so they instantly carried him away bound to Pilate.

Whilst the meaner sort were loading him with a thousand wrongs, the grauest,
and greatest of them, (who would needs go with him, to testify the excess of
their malice, (though it be not the use of men of rank, to cheapen
themselves, by accompanying criminal persons in the public streets) would
not fail to hold most hypocritical discourses: As protesting, in their zeal
to the law of God, how much it grieved them, that the Pagan Judge (to whom
they were going.) should be forced to know, that amongst the men of their
Religion (which the prisoner was) there should be a creature so impious, and
so blasphemous, as most wickedly they accused him to be.

Our Lord JESUS, in the mean time, was not to seek for patience, in the
bearing of whatsoever affront they could put upon him; nor would he who had
endured the greater, refuse the less. Now a The sin of the Jews was
greater against our Lord, then that of the Gentiles.
less offense it was in them, for him to be presented before a Pagan, and
profane person, who had no knowledge at all of the true God, or of his law;
then before a congregation of men, who had the custody of his ancient
Testament, and for whose salvation and perfection, (they being his own chosen
people) he was particularly come into the would. And so, the more favored they
had been, the more faulty they were, in persecuting Christ our Lord; and that
even for no other cause, but only for the very zeal which he had of their good.

They might have considered, how earnestly they had co^curred to the sin of
Judas, and therefore they should have feared his punishment; which was the
falling into a greater sin. For when he saw that they were then going
actually to procure the death of Christ our Lord; and when he began to look in
upon himself, and upon what he had done; and then discerning clearly, the
deformity of his sin, which the devil had before, procured to hide; he hunge
The lamentable of death of Judas. Matt. 27.
himself by the neck, and his body brake in the middle, and his bowels fell
about his feet; and instantly his soul sirnke down, into the lowest place of
hell.

How would that accident strike the heart of Christ our Lord with sorrovv? For
as our Lord is incomparably more sorry for our sins, then for his own pains;
so was this, a greater the^ that fin. For to finish in despair of Gods
omnipotent mercy, is the most grievous sin, which man is able to commit. It
struck, I say, our Lords heart with grief, yet those vvretches were not
touched by it, toward remorse. But notwithstanding that Judas restored to
them, the price, whereby he had been wrought to act that treason, and did
declare himself to have sinned in betraying that innocent blood, they neither
relented in themselves, nor took compassion of him; but seornefully made
answer, that it was not a thing which belonged to them, and that all was to
run upon his account.

A memorable example, of how truly and miserably, they are deceived, who serve
the world, the flesh, or the devil. For Consider seriously of this truth.
whatsoever may be promised before hand, yet in fine, when the turn is served,
no care is taken of their comfort, but they may with Judas go hang
themselves. And so they do many times, and more, I believe, in our only
country of England, then in all the rest of Europe put together. Matt. 29.
But the thirty pieces which Judas restored to the Priests, were not cast into
the Treasury, but employed upon the Purchase of a place to a pious use. And S.
Augustine notes how it was by a most particular providence of God, Sermon. 128.
de coena Dom apud Ariam.
that the price of the blood of Christ our Lord, should not serve for the
expense of living sinners; but for the burial of deceased Pilgrims: that so,
with the price of his blood, he might both redeem the living, and be a
retraite for the dead.

The hate of those malicious Priests, and Elders to Christ our Lord, and
consequently his love to them, and us (since for their particular, and our
general good, he was content to endure so much at their hands) appears yet
more plainly, by other circumstances. For the time when they persecuted our
Lord, was the day of the greatest solemnity and devotion, of the whole year.
It was the feast of the Paschal, when all the Jewish world was come to
Jerusalem, Luc. 22.
to assist at those sacrifices, and ceremonies of the the law, in the Temple.
And as the affronts were so much greater, then if they had been done at a more
private time, and the malice of the high Priests, so much the more eager since
they could not be persuaded to put it of, to a less busy day; so was the love
of our Lord excessive even heerin, who was contented with the publicity of his
shame, at that time; because, by means thereof, the notice of his Passion
together with the miracles succeding it, would the more speedily be spread; and
more readily believed, shortly after, throughout the world.

The circumstance of Pilates person, does plainly also show the particular
rancour of their heart; since they hated Christ our Lord so much, as that it
made them earnest, and glad, to show themselves subject to that Roman Justice.
They detested the subjection which they were in, to Rome; They loved not Caesar
whom they took to be a Tyrant, and Usurper over them; they loved not Pilate,
whom they knew to be a most corrupt, and wicked Judge; they loved not the
exercise of his Judicature, which served but to refresh the memory of their
own misfortune, in their having lost the use of that power. But their
predominat malice to Christ our Lord, made them content to gnaw, and swallow
all such bones as those.

When Pilate was come sorth, they began to make their charge against the
prisoner; accusing him, in bitter terms, of most odious crimes; but still (as
the manner of such persons is) only in general terms. Which yet, out of the
The base conceit which the jews had of Christ our Lord.
base conceit they had of Christ our Lord, and the pride which they took in
themselves they thought would have sufficiently induced Pilate to proceed
against him. And so indeed, they did as good as say, when afterward being
pressed to produce their proof, they insinuated that it was more then needed.
For if the man had not been wicked, they would not, Joan. 18.
said they, have brought him thither. And withal, they did not so much as
vouchsafe, to give our Lord any particular name, but they only said, Inuenimus
hunc etc. We have sound this fellow, disturbing the peace of our people, Luc.
23.
and forbidding, that Tribute should be paid to Caesar, and declaring himself
to be a King.

Yet Pilate, being moved by the sight of the person of Christ our Lord, did
(beyond his custom) forbear to make such have, as, at the instant, to
pronounce an unjust sentence against him; but he took him into his house, hand
to hand. And finding upon the speech, which passed between them, that our Lord
had no design upon the honors, and advantages of this world; nor Our Lord had
noprete^ce upon any other kingdom then that of heau^.
pretended to the exercise of any other kingdom, then that of heaven (to which
he endeavored to draw men by teaching them to obey God, who is the supreme
King thereof) and the Judge for his part, not caring what became of heaven or
heavenly things; Joan. 18.
he came quickly forth again, and declared that he found the man not guilty.

How Pilate examined our Blessed Lord; and how he sent him to Herod. Of the
scorn which Herod put upon him. How the returned him to Pilate; and how Pilate
resolved at last to scourge him.

CHAP. 63.
BUT they persisted in their malicious clamours, and protested that the
prisoner had been sowing rumors, Luc. 13.
and making stirs throughout all Jury, beginning at Galiley, and proceeding
as far, as that very place. Now Galiley, was belonging to the jurisdiction of
Herod, who had been the murderer of S. John Baptist; and between Pilate and
him, Ibid.
there had been ill A curtesy of a Courtier.
quarter, till that time. But he chauncing to be then at Jerusalem, this
Pilate, put a Court-tricke upon him; for he sent the prisoner to him, as if it
had been out of a kind of respect; whereas chiefly it was, because he would
feign be rid of the cause.

To Christ our Lord, nothing came amiss, who still, with his accustomed
humility, patience, silence, obedience, and most ardent love, and desire of the
salvation of mankind, did apply himself to renounce any gust of his own, and
gave himself all away to theirs. And this true Prince of Peace was content to
undergo all that pain, and to endure all that scorn, which would be put upon
him, both at Herod's Court, and in the way, Ibid.
between him and Pilate, upon condition that so, he might be an occasion of
reco^ciling the emnities of those two, though both conspired to his prejudice.
For he knew that by that curtesy, Ibid.
which Herod would take so kindly at the hands of Pilate, from that time
forward, they would be friends.

This Herod was a famous, infamous person for his sensuality, his cruelty, and
a world of other vices. And for as much as he had heard, often speech of Christ
our Lord, and of the reputation which he had, both for his wonderful works,
and for his admirable wisdom, he had an The curiosity of Herod. Ibid.
extreme curiosity to satisfy himself, in those two points. In conformity
thereof, he earnestly desired to see some miracle of his working. And for as
much, as concerned the fame of his wisdom, he procured, (by a world of
questions, which he asked) to see whether truth would answer, to the voice
which ran of him.

But our Lord JESUS, who was not come into the world to make men sport; but to
do them good; nor to satisfy the curiosity of their heads, but to impart true
sanctity to their hearts would not vouchsafe to loose one word, upon that
wretched King; nor cared he (through his love to be suffering for us) to defend
himself against all those impudent lies, which by the Priests and Elders, were
thundered out, in a perpetual storm of words against him. Yet even Herod
himself could not be so unjust, as to allow of the plea, which was made in
accusation of him, for as much as concerned the substance of his cause; but yet
The fall and foolish judgment of the wife men of this world. Ibid.
conceauing, (by occasion of his continual silence) that either he was some
silly fellow in himself; or else perhaps, that in comparison of him, our Lord
thought himself to be of far inferior speech, and wit (and therefore would
not discredit himself by saying any thing) he did contemn him with his whole
guard of soldiers, after a most disdaineful manner; and in token thereof, he
returned him to Pilate, with a fools coat upon his back. This act amongst
the rest, bred an extraordinary contempt of Christ our Lord, in the peoples
mind; in regard that Herod and his Court, were esteemed as a kind of Touch,
whereby men might be known distinctly, and justly, for what they were. But
howsoever, this contempt did our Lord vouchsafe to undergo; and this coat of
scorn was he content, and glad to wear; for our confusion, in respect of our
former vanity; and for our instruction, how we are to carry our selves in
future occasions. Which Agreat lesson of many virtues at once.
must not be, to stand upon the reputation of our sufficiency, wit, or
knowledge; we, who are but worms and flies; when the King of glory, the word,
the increated Wisdom of Almighty God, whereby all things were made, is content
for our sakes, to cast himself before the eyes of our Faith, all contemned and
derided, as any Idiot, or natural fool might be. Nor are we to care, though
our patience be accounted fear; or our humility baseness; or our silence
simplicity. Nor, when it concerns the service of God, and the good of souls,
are we to shrink from our duty, and good desires, though all the world should
despise, and hate us for it.

But when Pilate found that Herod had not thought him worthy of death, he was
glad of that occasion, and pressed it hard upon the Jews; as knowing indeed,
that it was not the zeal of Justice, but the rage of envy, which had incensed
them against him. Sometimes he questioned our Lord JESUS, to see if any thing
would come from him, in the strength whereof he might acquit him. But our Lord,
who desired nothing less, then what might tend to his own discharge; and
nothing more then what might tend to our advantage; was so profoundly and
inuincibly silent, as did amaze the Judge. Marc. 25.
And woe had been to us, if this silence of our Lord had not been exercised by
him; through the merit whereof, the eternal Father will look with mercy, upon
those millions of sins, which be howerly committed, through the impertinent,
indiscrect, and uncharitable, impure speech of men.

Sometimes again, the Judge would be using all the art he had, to make them
desist from their desire of his ruin, Marc. 25. Luc. 23.
and in particular he thought of two expedients. The former of them was, to
punish him so cruelly out of very pity, as that, with the sight thereof, they
might be moved with compassion toward him. So that he resolved to have him
scourged; and to that end he delivered him over to the discretion of his
soldiers, who had none. The torment of Christ our Lord, Audi Piiac 120.
in this mystery of his flagellation, is excellently pondered by Father Auila.
He faith therefore to this effect. That Note this for it deserves all attention.
if a man would exhibit a spectacle, whereby the lookers on, were to be moved
to love; that man would take care, to give it all those advantages of grace and
beauty, which were any way, to be attractiue of love. If he were to present an
object, whereby the spectators were to be strocken with fear, he would not
fail to accompany it, with such instruments, and demonstrations of terror, as
might affect, and afflict their minds with fear. And so here, since Pilates
care, and study was, how to win those implacable Harpies, from that hungar,
and thirst, after the destruction, and death of Christ our Lord; no doubt can
be made, but that he would adorn, and dress him, in the most lamentable
attire of torments, which he could devise; that so by the sight of that
excessive misery, he might convert their perfect malice into some little mercy.

This design of his, he was obliged to communicate with the Executioners, who
were to be his souldlers, for else he had not been true to his own end. And
then, I will leave it, to the reasonable imagination of any creature, if such
an insolent race of people, as that uses many times to be (having received an
express direction from their Commander, for the execution of such a cruelty,
upon a prisoner, who was so persecuted by all the principal men, and
Magistrates of his own profession) were not likely to show cruelty enough,
upon that precious body, of our blessed Lord.

Of the cruel Scourging of Christ our Lord, and how with incomparable patience
and charity, the endured the same.

CHAP. 64.
THEY strip thim therefore, into the same nakedness wherein he was borne; and
wherein he had never been seen, but in his infancy; nor then, but by the sight
of the Angels, and those far purer eyes, of the All-immaculate virgin
mother. They stripped him I say, who in all the days of his blessed life, had
never seen so much as any part of himself discovered naked, but only those
hands which were still employed in showing mercies. There are millions of men
and women, in the holy Catholic Church, who in their high love of purity, do
never so much as look, even upon their own face in a glass, and much less
upon any naked part of their body; excepting only in the occasions of mere
necessity, when they shift their clothes; yea and then, they do it very
sparingly, and with a kind of horror, even to see themselves. But from those
necessities Christ our Lord was still exempt, who in all his life, did never
shift or change his clothes. And that Euthym. in cap.. 27. Match. Maldonat. in
cundem loium, and omnes recentiores co^muniter.
Garment, which was wouen without any seame at all, by those pure hands of his
sacred Mother, did miraculously grow, together with the body it self. Now in
the love of mortification and purity, all the Saints of the Church, must not
compare with him, wherein he exceeded them all, more then heaven, does excel
the earth.

If therefore there be amongst us so many thousands of sacred virgins, who would
rather give up their lives, then they would once expose their naked bodies to
open view; Let us beg of our Lord, by his own supreme purity, that he will
give us to understand, and make us sensible at the very roots of our hearts,
of how The excessive affliction which it must give to our B. Lord to be striped
naked.
great a torment it was to him, in the way of shame, to be stripped stark naked,
before those Pagan soldiers; and to let that precious banquet of his pure
humanity, be fed upon, and devoured by those petulant and profane eyes of
theirs? How great a torment was it to thee, O Lord, in the way of shame; and
yet withal how meekely did thou endure it, and how much joy did it give
thee, to be sacrificing the merit thereof, to the eternal Father, for the
impetratio^ of all that Angelical purity, which has flourished since that time,
in so many mortal bodies of flesh and blood?

They tied him then to a pillar, as naked, as I have here bescribed; as if
there had been danger, that either like some slave he would have run away; or
else like a child he would be shrinking, and declining the strokes, wherewith
they had resolved to load him. But he was inwardly bo^d so fast, Ose. 12.
with such cords of Adam, which were chains of love; as that in comparison
thereof, those outward cords, were but as threads of a spiders web, which would
have been far from holding him to that pillar against his will; him, who
makes the foundations of the earth tremble, and the pillars of the world shake,
with the least breath of his Nostrills, whenever he thinks fit to work upon
the world, by way of terror.

They began then to scourge our Lord, Joan. 1^.
with excessive cruelty. And as a violent tempestof hayle, would destroy a
fruit tree, which were in flower; so did those cruel men, not only blast that
divine sweet beauty of our Lord, by breathing upon it, with the filthy air of
their lascivious, and scornful tongues; but they brake through it, with those
scourges. They clasped and circled him in, with every blow; as so many snakes
would do some precious, and odoriferous plant; which yet were so medicinal
withal, as to be able to cure a whole world of men, of a whole world of
diseases.

It is able to grieve any civil noble heart. to see, in Italy, and especially
at Rome, how the barbarous Goths, and Vandals, (when like an inundation, they
ouerflowed those flourishing fields of the world) did leave the marks of their
long nails behind them, in the ruins of so many sumptuous buildings, and
curious statues. But what has any sumptuous building, or any curious statue to
do, by way of comparison, with that precious humanity of our Lord. That Temple
of the holy Ghost, which the fulness of the divinity did substantially inhabit;
Colos. 2.
and that superexcellent Image, that double Image of the eternal Father. For
an image he was of God, even as he was but man; but then again as God, he was
an Image begotten not made, by the increated understanding of the eternal God.
And what comparison the^, ca^ there be, between the barbarousnes of those Goths
and Vandalls, with these men of blood, who drew this holy house, into such
decay.

They did not only How the house of Gods humanity was handled.
unfurnish it, but they procured to beat down the walls, and they made so
many wide windows in it, with their rude hands, as by which, the soul would
infallibly have flowne out, and forsaken it, if it had not been held fast
perforce, by the tie of love; that so it might live to endure the rest of
torment, which was provided for it. A strange kind of ornament it was, for that
garment of his precious humanity (being hypostatically united to the divinity)
to be so thick ouercast, and imbrodered with stripes, instead of stitches, as
that it could now no more be know, but only by the eyes of Faith, of what
stuff it was made. Which caused the Prophet Esaias, who foresaw him in this
woeful trance, to declare that he was not to be discerned, for who he was;
but mistaken for some base, leprous person.

The blood ran flowing out of his body, through the force of their fury, as
formerly it had done in the garden, by the reflectio^ which he made upon the
worlds impiety. But not a word was heard to fall out of his sacred mouth,
wherewith he did even kiss those very rodds; since by their afflicting him
whom he contemned, he made a bath of delight and ease for us. A bath of blood
that was, which being united to the divine person of the Son of God, was
adored by all the Angels, as the blood of God; and The infinite value of the
least drop of the blood of Christ our Lord.
whereof the least drop was able to have redeemed millio^s of worlds. And yet,
on the other side, it was drawn out of that precious body, by cruel and
contumelious scourges; it was spilt upon the ground and trodden upon, by those
base unbelievers. And this infinite Lord, was content to accept this torment of
the flagellation with excessive love, and in particular manner, he accepted it,
in satisfaction of the sins of sensuality, which had been, and would be
committed in that kind, throughout the world. We may therefore see, whether our
carnal pleasures, and the delights of sense, be not wicked things; since the
pardon thereof, was to cost the Son of God so dear. But as it will work our
pardon, if we apply it to our souls by tymely penance; so if we shall
continue to please our selves by those transitory and impure delights, which
did put our Lord to so deadly pain; what kind of vengeance shall we think
that is, which will be sure to seize us, both in body and soul.

How our blessed Lord was crowned with thorns, and blasphemed, and tormented
further, with strange invention of malice: And how he endured it all, with
incomparable Love.

CHAP. 65.
YET this was not all; for the soldiers who had received commission to scourge
him in so bloody manner, to the end that by that cruelty the pity of the Jews
might be awaked; took the bouldnes, out of their own Capriccio, to put the
most ignominious, and withal most bitter torment upon him, which ever, in the
world, had been conceived. When therefore they had wearied themselves in
scourging him, and there was now no more place for new wounds (since all his
sacred body, was grown to be as it were one continued wound, or rather a kind
of Cake, of blood) they untied him from the pillar; they gave him leave to
cloth himself, though they had almost taken away the strength wherewith he
might be able to do it; and they lent him, for the present a little rest, till
they had resolved, what they were to do. And because the Priests and Elders,
had charged him with procuring, by favor of the people, to be made a King,
whom they had found by experience, to be so subject to themselves; they Why
they resolved to crown him with thorns.
thought it would carry a good proportion to the supposed crime of his
ambition, if they could find some means, to make him a conunterfeit kind of
King, and to afflict him in point both of ease and honor; by the appearance of
all those ornaments, and demonstrations, of respect and service, which are
indeed of honor to true kings, when they are truly meant; but to him they were
of excessive affront, and pain.

They made him then, with his hands fast tied, sit down, all naked in most
servile manner, for now they had stripped him, the second time. And calling
their whole troop of Guard together, they clapped (in imitation of the Princely
robes of a King) a purple mantle, Matt. 27. Marc. 15. Ioau. 19.
about his back, which could not choose but stick to his sacred flesh, for
there was no skin between, to part the^. They put a Reed into his hands,
instead of a Scepter; and a plat of thorns upon his head, instead of a Crown.
They did then, with incredible joy of heart to see his misery, salute him, and
say, All hail, O King of the Jews. Then would they be taking the Reed out of
his hands, and they would beat the Crown more deeply into his head; and then,
spitting in his face, they kneeled down, and adored him, in show, as they
would their King. All this did Christ our Lord endure for us, and he did it
with a kind of infinite meekenes and love; not complaining thereat, nor
declaring the least mistike thereof, either by pitying himself or blaming
them. But he confounded thereby (and that after a most puissant manner) the
arrogant pride of earth and hell; offering up The Coronation of our Lord had a
special aim at the pardon, and cure, of the sins of Pride.
his own humiliation in propitiation for all the sins of the whole world,
and especially for such as were committed in the way of pride, and for the
obteyning such grace, at the hands of God, by means hereof, as might enable
his true servants, to imitate his humility.

It ought to fill our souls with extreme confusion, to find that we, who
profess to be the servants of our Lord, are yet so dull in devising means how
to express our reverence and love toward him. Our wits lie clean another
way. And even in Prayer, we have sometimes, enough to do, to entertain this
spouse of our souls, with abundance of so much, as mental acts of love; and
much more difficulty we find to perform them afterward by way of practice. Yet
here, these enemies of God and man, are teaching us, by their lewd example,
(whose wits did serve them but too well) to increase the torment of our Lord at
an easy rate, unto themselves. For when they had stripped him naked, in the sight
of so many impure eyes; and scourged him so cruelly, as that it might seem
almost impossible to give any increase, either of shame or torment; behold how
full they are of strange invention; and their malice finds means to devise
such exquisite ways to augment them both, in such a measure, as makes all that
seem little, which was done before.

It is true A comparison of his present scorns with the former.
that before, he had most blasphemously been spit upon, but it was at midnight,
and in Cayphas his house, and but only by his keepers. But here it is done,
almost at noon day, and in the Vice-Royes Court, and by a whole troop of Pagan
soldiers. He was then already come, from being most cruelly scourged, over all
his most beautiful and most sacred body, which gave him pain beyond all
expression; but now, behold they have recourse to his divine head, which
seemed as if till then, it had escaped their rage. And so, that, being the most
sensible part of all the rest, and indeed the very source, and seat of sense,
the former torment was not so great, as it might have been. But here, with
hands, which they arm with iron grauntlets, they wreath sharp thorns, of
great length, into the form of a hat, Joan. 19.
(which carries also the form of an Imperial Crown) and they clap it hard
upon, and into his head, which they beseige, as it were, round about, with
torments, far exceeding all humane conceit. It is true that before, he had
been stricken, at several times, in the high Priests house, both with the fist,
and with the flat of the hand; but now his head is beaten, not with their hands
(for they could not have so much as touched him, without wounding themselves)
but the Reed, which, whilst it was in his hands, served for a note of scorn,
being taken into theirs, became came an instrument of excessive pain. For
laying load with it upon his head, their cruelty was so witty, as to be able
(and that without any labor at all to themselves) to make at once, as many new
wounds in that most sensible part of the whole body, as there were thorns, in
that cursed-blessed-Crowne.

A fence of The great torment, which those thorns, must needs give our Lord.
thorns made with care, is able to keep wild beasts within the prison of a
Park, as well as if the enclosure, were of wood or stone. And although they
have hides, which are like houses, thatcht with hair; yet they dare not put
themselves upon the passing of such pikes as those. If a single, and short
thorn, do but enter into the most dull and fleshy part of the hand, it puts a
man out of patience, till it be plucked forth. And if it chance to get, between
the flesh, and the nail, it makes a shift to go for a kind of torment. And
many times, it breeds the loss of a nail, and sometimes of a joint; and it
has fallen out, that it has kept men so long from sleep, as to cast them
into fevers, and so to deprive the^, by degrees, of life. What torment then did
our blessed Lord endure, when that fair Common of his forehead, grew subject
to such an enclosure of thorns, which embraced, (as with so many cruel arms)
not only that part, but all the rest of his divine head, round about?

We have seen men wounded in so sensible parts of the body, that the Tents
which are put in, do give them more pain every time when they are dressed, then
even the very wounds themselves would do. And it grows sometimes so far,
as to make the^ swoone. And who shall then be able to comprehend the
unspeakable torment which now was caused to our blessed Lord, who had so many
wounds in that fo^taine of his quick feeling; and so many several Tents, as
there were thorns, which did not only search the wo^ds but make them. And
every one of them growing so much deeper, and consequently bringing more parts
of the head (which till then had been untouched) into the same confederacy of
cruel pain, as those bloody men would have a mind to strike him, at several
times, over the head, with that Reed.

And thus it was clearly, and completely fulfilled of Christ our Lord, that; A
plant a pedis vsque ad verticem capitis, Joan. 1.
from the very sole of the foot, to the very crown of his head, there was not
a spot, free from bitter pain. He felt Our Lord felt that in his body, which
the Prophet David and all sinners feel in their souls. Psalm. 17.
that, in the universal torment of his body, which the Prophet David found,
concerning the miseries of his soul; when, in the bitterness thereof, he thus
expressed himself. Non est sanitas in carne mea a sacie irae tuae: non est pax
ossibus meis a facie peccatorum meorum. There is no health in my flesh by
reason of thy wrath, nor there is no peace in my bones, by reason of my sins.
And verily it seems, as if it had been an express prophesy, of the degrees
whereby the torments of our Lord should grow up, at length, to the top of
torment, toward the appeasing the wrath of God by the propitiation which he
would offer for the sin of man. Since as soon as they had deprived the whole
mass of his sacred flesh, of health and beauty, by that cruel scourging; they
put themselves upon an invention, how to pass into, and pierce his bones, (in
the most noble and precious part of him, which was his head) by that bloody
Crowning. To such excess as this did the sin of man in general arrive, and
to such an outrage did those wretches in particular extend themselves; and with
such an extasis of love did Christ our Lord apply his mind, to the salvation
(for as much as might concern him) of the whole world; as for that purpose, to
bear this infinite kind of pain and shame with an infinite kind of love and
joy, in the Superior part of his soul.

How we ought to carry our selves in the Consideration of the Ecce Homo,
Behold the man; and how our Blessed Lord did carry himself both interiourly
and exteriourly at that time; and especially of his invincible silence, and
contempt of all humane comfort, for Love of us.

CHAP. 66.
BEING thus dressed up, he was led out by Pilates order to be seen, and pitied
by the people, if that poor man might have had his will. Our Lord might then
have served well, for the very devise, and earacter of torment; and so he was,
and as to such a one, the word which Pilate gave him, Joan. 19.
was Ecce Homo: Behold the man. And verily it was no more then needed, that
Pilate should say he was a man; for as they had used him, he had scarce the
resemblance of such a creature. Himself had professed by the mouth of his holy
Prophet I am a worm, and no man. Psalm. 21.
A worm which being trodden upon, did not repine; that we, who indeed are the
true worms, might not be oppressed by our invisible enemy, but be adopted, Romans
8.
by the merit of his humility and charity, into the liberty of the glory of
sons of God. A worm, but a silly worm, which spinns herself to death, for
the good of others; and co^uerteth leaves (which may serve for an Emblem of
the vain heart of man) into a substance of use and honor.

And though Pilate did not speak immediately to us, when he said behold the
man, yet this once, we will do as he desires. And not only will we behold
him, but it shall be against our wills, if ever we behold any thing else, but
only for the love of him. We will behold that man, who became man being God;
and who being man, grew yet so much lower then man, as to be the outcast of
men; to the end that we, who are the worst of men, might grow partakers of the
divine nature. Isa. 53.2. Pet. 1.
We will behold that man, to adore him with all the powers of our soul; and
to lament the sad case into which our sins, and his love to us, have cast
him. We will behold him, and we will wish withal, that upon the price of all
our lives, we were able to do him any one faithful service. We will behold
him, as our sovereign King, though here he vouchsafed to become a subject to
the basest slaves. We will behold him, as our lawgiver, and yet our law; our
sacrifice, and yet our Priest; our Redeemer, and yet our Price. We will behold
him with profound reverence, that so we may reuerse all the acts of shame, and
pain, which he accepted for our benefit.

By the What we are to contemplate by the eyes of Faith, in this mystery of the
Flagellation of our B. Lord.
eyes of faith and love, we will behold his glory through that Crown of
thorns. His stole of immortality, through that purple robe. His scepter of
omnipotency, through that Reed of scorn. His incomparable beauty, through the
spittle, which desiled his divine countenance. And instead of those counterfeit
acts of homage, which those Idolatrous soldiers did perform; we will cast our
selves all, before him; with entire humility, and trembling love. Esteeming our
selves worthy of a thousand Hells, for A costly remedy of a great disease.
having needed such a costly remedy of our miseries, by the innumerable sins
which we have committed. And whereas those wretches procured even to break his
heart, with the fool scoff of Aue rex Iudaeorum, we vow our selves to praise
him thus, both with heart and tongue; All hayle, O thou true King of Christian
Catholics; All hail, thou Son of God, and of the Virgin. We see thy
sorrows, and they fill our souls with sadness, and we are wishing, if it were
thy will, that we were so happy as to partake thereof. O that our sighs were
able to make a veyle, wherewith to cover thy nakedness: and our tears, a bath,
wherewith to wash away thy uncleanness; and our throughts, a bed of flowers,
wherewith to refresh thy faintenes; and our actions a banquet of fruit,
wherewith to recover thee from that weakness, wherein we see that our sins have
laid thee. At least, dear Lord, let us not be so miserable as to continue in
those sins of ours, since they are the cause of this excess, which has
been wrought upon thee. But do thou make the roots of our hearts tie
themselves hard, about thy sacred feet, that so like living plants, they may
grow up under thee; being watered by any one drop of thy omnipotent blood;
distilling either from the piercing thorns of thy divine head, or from the
stinging scourges of thy precious body.

These corporal pains whereby we see that the body of Christ our Lord was so
ouerloaden, is that which Pilate bad the Jews behold. And whatsoever effect
it wrought with them, it breeds a very astonishme^t in us, not only in respect
of what we see, but much more, by that which we are taught to believe, and
infer by this object of our sight. For, as according to that of the B.
Apostle, Romans 1.
the invisible things of God, that is, his infinite wisdom, with the rest of
his divine attributes, may be discerned, after a sort, by the understanding,
through a consideration of the visible things which he has made; so by the
unspeakable pains which we see inflicted upon the sacred person of Christ our
Lord, who is the lively image of God, and the Exterior sufferance with
patience is a great sign of great love
exterior meekenes wherewith he bare them, we may grow into contemplation of
the excellency and perfection of his charity.

Howsoever therefore the exterior of his flesh and blood; howsoever the divine
countenance which he carried, being all co^pounded, between extreme sorrow and
extreme shame, upon the sense of that contempt and torment, be an object which
ought to draw us all, running after it; yet, if our Lord would give us leave to
diue so deep, we should wonder much more, at the interior of his soul, then
at the exterior of his body. Happy were we, if we had eyes wherewith to look
into that heart, which had so rich a mine of patience as could never be drawn
dry, by all the malice which was exercised by those laborious, and malicious
hands. For how much soever we see; there is more and more, and yet still more
to be seen; and whatsoever we can say, or think, is very far from being
enough. And we are still to remember, that whatsoever the fruit of virtue be
in all the actions, and passion of our blessed Lord, the root from whence it
rises, is ever most pure and perfect love. No interest, no weakness, did work
on him, but only an ardent desire of the glory of God, to be manifested in the
procuring of our eternal good.

The strength and purity of this love, does most lively appear by the solitude
and silence wherewith he suffered such hideous things as those. To A most
pregnant sign of purity, and perfect confidence in God, not to care for
comfort from creatures.
receive crosses so, as not to desire or care, I say not for praise, but not so
much as for any comfort from any creature; is a clear and pregnant sign of
pure love, and perfect considence in God. If so we can be content to suffer, we
have cause to cast our selves at the feet of our Lord, with humble thanks,
Cant. 2.
for drawing us so close, after the odours of his precious ointments. But the
world is far from this, and our weak nature is willing to uphold it self,
by the wavering reed of humane consolatio^s, which it will needs conceive, to be
a staff strong enough to support us. But we quickly find our error to our
cost. And as, if we did cast our selves upon God, he would not retire himself,
to let us fall; so by leaning upon the comfort of creatures, he permits us then
to sail, out of most tender mercy, that afterward, womay learn to stand fast,
in him.

The love even of the most ardent Seraphim is of little heat, if it be set by
the love which reigned in the heart of Christ our Lord, whilst he was scourged
and crowned; and yet their love may well be great, since it grows out of an
immense joy, which they have in the fruition, and feeling of that ever present
and infinite good, which is God. But here, our Lord did, as it were,
infinitely excel that love of theirs, though all the sensible object, which
the inferior part of his divine soul had, were the affronts which came from
the affliction wherein he was at that time; and the top of shame and torment,
which so instantly afterward, he was to find, in the consummation of his
Passion, upon the Cross. And what the^ can here become of any love, which we
conceive our selves to bear, toward this Lord of love; since ours, is so full
of frailty, and misery, and unfaithful dealing? What a kind of nothing will it
prove, if it be all compared with one only spark of this pure precious love;
qui attingit a sine vsque ad sinem fortiter, and disponit omnia suauiter; Sap.
8.
Whereas ours, does nether reach home, nor last long, nor is it of any intense
degree, but so very luke warm, that unless the heat of heart, and the thirst
of our Lord were very great, he would cast us out of his mouth, and not suck
us in, as he does, that so we may be incorporated into himself.

The Jews prefer Barabbas before Christ our Lord and Pilate, through base
fear, gave sentence of death against our Lord; and with incessant Love, he
endured all.

CHAP. 67.
OExcessiue cruelty, of those envious hypocritical Jews, for the appeasing
whereof, the mercy of Pilate was even constrained after a sort, to be thus
cruel. He showed him to them, being scourged, and crowned, after this bloody
manner; with hope that having drawn from him such a stream of blood, and
tormenting him still, with that crown of thorns, it might have satisfied the
thirst of their rage. Together with that spectacle of pity, he made a
protestation of our Lords innocence, but it would not serve. For they, as if
already, they had been confirmed in malice, in hell it self, did still demand
with a constant, and general clamor, that he might be crucified. Matt. 27.
So All turned to the disadvantage of Christ our Lord.
as this design of Pilats came to fail; and nothing had been gained thereby,
but the shedding of almost, all the blood of Christ our Lord (one drop whereof
was a millio^ of times more worth in true acco^t the^ as many creatures and
worlds as God himself can make) and the piercing of that head, where lay the
wisdom, of the wisdom of God. We may yet see, by the way, that though
Pilate had a great desire to free him, in regard of his innocence; yet even
that desire, was accompanied with an extremely-base conceit, of Christ our
Lord: Since he resolved not, to maintain his cause, but thought him a fit man,
upon whom conclusions might be tried; and to put him, at a venture, to the
sufferance of that intolerable scorn, and pain, rather the^ he would speak
one resolute word in his behalf. Our Lord, all the while, had the wisdom
wherewith to weigh every one of those thoughts of his, to the very uttermost
that it could bear; and he had patience to endure it; and above al, he had the
love wherewith to offer it, to his eternal Father, for our discharge.

Yet Pilate still went on, with a velleity, or cool kind of appetite, to save
his life; and he set another Project on foot, which he thought might
peradventure take effect, and that was grounded upon this custom. The Jews,
Matt. 27. Marc. 17. Luc. 23.
were wont, in honor and reverence of their great Passover, to free some
prisoner, who was liable to death, by the hand of Justice. There was at that
time, a seditious murderer in prison, and he was called Barabbas. Now Pilate
was of opinion, that putting the question between Christ our Lord, and that
wicked man, they would never have been able, to let that murderer weigh down
our Lord JESUS, in the balance of their pity. But he was deceived, and they
demanded the saving of Barabbas; and cried out amain (when there was speech,
of who should be dismissed) Non hunc, sed Barabbam, not him, but Barabbas; and
when there was speech of what should be done with JESUS, they said; Toll,
Toll, crucifige eum. Away with him, Away with him, let him be crucified.

If then, our A deep wound inflicted upon the tender heart of Christ our Lord.
blessed Lord were not wounded with grief, he never was, nor could be wounded.
That he should live to see the day, wherein that people, which was his own
flesh and blood; which had particularly been chosen of God; which he instructed
with so much care; which he had cured of all diseases with so much power; that
people, which so lately before, upon that day, which now has the name of
Palme-sunday, had exhibited to him the greatest triumph in toke^ of homage
which perhaps had been seen in the whole world; Matt. 21. Marc. 11. Joan. 12.
That now I say, it should so abase him below a Barabbas, a seditious, and
bloody thief; notwithstanding that Pilate who was a Pagan, and in other
respects, a most wicked man, did let them see, that yet he was a Saint in
respect of them, by entreating them rather to dismiss the King of the Jews,
Note this contrapositio^.
then him; and on the other side, that Christ our Lord, should with so profo^d
meekenes, endure such a height of scorn, without showing that he misliked it,
without oncce reproaching the wicked life of that malefactor, by so much as
setting out the innocence of his own; without vpbrayding the ingratitude of
that lewd nation, by so much as saying that he had never murdered any of them,
as the other had done; but to let them do their worst, by way of offense, and
he the while to do his best, by way of patience, and love; and even then, to
give up to God that very act of his acceptance, both for Barabbas, and for
them (who were much more faulty, then that wretched man;) what shall we say
here, but that the heart of our Lord was grown a whole world of grief and
love; and that we are miserable, who cannot even consume with the very thought
thereof.

But woe be to us; for we are so far from this, as that even we our selves, are
the body, whereof that wicked race of Jews was a figure. For so often do we
also prefer Barabbas before Christ our Lord, as we choose the forsaking of God,
for the committing of a mortal sin, of whatsoever kind it be. Nay therein, we
do prefer, even the very devil, before God himself. And yet so infinite is
his love, as that still he bears it at our hands, as then he bare it at theirs.

But shall we now lend an eye, to our Lord JESUS, as he was procuring to pay
the debt of Pilats curtesy to him, or rather of that less malice, then was
uttered against him, by those Jews. As God; he did cast into the heart of
Pilats wife, a vehement desire, that her husband would not cooperate to his
destruction, as he was man; yet the frozen heart of that miserable creature,
would not kindle it self, by such a spark. But the Jews pressing hard, and
and pretending; Luc. 13. Joan. 19.
that Christ our Lord had made himself a King; and protesting that they would
have no King but Caesar; and withal that The same argument preuayls too must in
these days.
if Pilate should dismiss Christ our Lord, they would prove him to be no
saithfull subject, and friend to Caesar; the unjust weak man, was forced by his
own vicious fear, to give sentence against our Lord. Nor would he go one
foot out of his pace, nor put himself to the trouble of defending his own
innocence, against the calumniations of the Jews, which yet with all ease he
might have done, in case they should have complained against him. But he rather
chose to condemn innocence it self, to that reward of wickedness; and life to
death; and he permitted, that charity should be tormented by the hands of
implacable malice and envy. Luc. 23.
For the holy Scripture says, That he delivered him over to the will, and
appetite of the Jews, He destroyed his own words by his deeds. Matt. 27.
washing first his hands, and protesting by that ceremony, that he was innocent
from shedding the blood of our Lord JESUS. Whereas the ignorant hypocrite ought
rather to have cleansed his heart, from so great impiety, as it is for a Judge,
to neglect his duty, for humane respects.

What hope might then, Christ our Lord conceive, that any other thing could
befall him, then the very quintessence of that worst, which might be devised?
Since they were to be his guides, into what Labyrinths of torment would they
not lead him? How would they not incense the vulgar, by telling certain grave
and well countenanced lies, whereof we have some dregs, remaining to these days
of ours? what bribes would they not fasten upon those soldiers, that so they
might add the uttermost of any circumstance which might increase his shame and
torment? And our blessed Lord saw it all; and if therein he had seen a million
of times more the^ that, he had a heart prepared to bear it all, upon condition
that it might do us good.

How our Lord did carry his Cross; and of the excessive Love he showed in
bearing the great affronts which were done to him, in his journey to Mount
Caluary.

CHAP. 68.
THEY did therefore then, take of his purple Robe, and put upon his back his
own former clothes, that so, as he went, the world might know, for his
greater scorn and shame, even by the first appearance, that it was he. And
then they loaded his weak and wounded shoulders, with the Cross, whereon he
was to be crucified; which was a point of barbarous and unwonted cruelty. For
whereas men are accustomed, out of mere humanity, to hide the instrument of the
execution, from other criminal persons, they did not only not hide it in the
case of Christ our Lord, but they made him carry it, as if he had double
deserved death. But the Cross was so very heavy, and he was grown both
thereby, and otherwise, so deadly weak, that not being able to walk under it,
they constrained another to assist him. Luc. 23.


Now when we see that Christ our Lord, who was so enamoured of the Cross, was
yet unable to fetch strength enough out of his own weakness, for the carrying
it, we may well imagine that the world went hard with him. And It is the
pleasure of God that we help to bear the cross of Christ our Lord.
withal we must know, once for all, that since his Cross was not wholly to be
carried by himself alone, he will have all his servants assist him in it; and
embrace those Crosses which shall come, for the exercise of our patience, and
the testimony of our true love in whatsoever form the good will of God shall
be pleased to send them. Whether they be in that of sickness, or shame, or
banishment, or loss of goods, or spiritual desolation, or corporal torments,
for the cause of Christ our Lord, or in fine, though it should be death it
self.

The place to which they led our Lord, and where they meant to crucify him,
Luc. 23.
was Mount Caluary, without the city of let usalem. As he was going, his
misery seemed so great, and he was so disfigured with dirt, and sweat, and
blood, and so weakened with the excess of affliction (he whom formerly the
world had been so much obliged to) that the object wrought upon many women, who
were less ill disposed. And as they were following him in the midst of a
mighty troop of men, who went to see him put to death, they did bitterly
bewail his misfortune. But our Lord, Ibid.
though in his heart he accepted their compassion of him, in grateful part; yet
Our Lord Jesus had no gust but in suffering for us.
through his love to suffer, and to suffer home, for the love of us, he refused
to take complacence in that pity of theirs. And he advised them to transfer
their care of him, to a consideration of themselves. Letting them know the
calamities which were coming toward them and their posterity; and that if he
who was innocence it self, were so afflicted for the sins of others, how
grievously should men be punished for their own.

This was then the advice, which with perfect love he gave to them, and in them
to us and all the world; Whet we are to look for comfort in afflictions.
instructing us how to seek for the comfort of our afflictions, not in the
pitiful tears, or moaning tongues, or fawning entertaynements of others; but
in the Testimony of a good conscience, a strong hope in God, and a faithful
obedience to his holy will. Ibid.
And by his asking, If such things as those were executed in the green wood
(whereby he insinuated himself) what would be done to the dry wood? whereby he
aimed at them) he does, with the oracle of his own inviolable truth, stop up
the mouths of wicked, and profane persons. For they say, that the Green wood
(which is Christ our Lord) did suffer all, upon his own person, and that, as
for them (who are dry wood) they have nothing to suffer for themselves, but
that it suffices to believe, that he suffered all. But here our Lord is
express in showing, that our sight of his miseries, in the way of punishment,
must spur us up to make us bitterly lament our own miseries, in the way of
sin; and that the seeing or believing of those afflictions endured by him for
us, would not serve our turn, unless we applied them to oursoules, by true
contrition.

By these external acts of love, and by thoughts, when the occasions of acting
failed, did our Lord go wearing out, that long way between Pilits house, and
Mount Caluary. Having Our Lord was compassed in on every side by great affronts.
the perfidious Priests and Elders on the one side, and the profane scoffing
soldiers on the other. The executioners were close at his heels; the public
Crier leading him the way, and proclayming him for a seditious, and a
traiterous person in the ears of all that world. The people would be running
sometimes before him, and sometimes behind, (as the manner is in such cases)
shouting out, and reproaching him, every one according to his own fancy, or
rather phrensy. And they who could not follow him in the streets, would not
sail to place themselves in the windows; making up (like some kennell of
wide-mouthed dogs) the full cry of Traitor, Devil, Sorcerer, Drunkard, Idiot,
False prophet, Hypocrite, Blasphemer, and a hundred reproaches more then these,
which their immortal malice, would be sure to dart out against him.

And besides, it is very probable, that they would accompany these bitter words
with barbarous deeds; for what should hinder them, since they had all power in
their hands and such springs of poison in their hearts? They below kicking him
on, as they would have done some mad musled dog; when through the excess of
weakness he was scarce able to go; and they above, whilst he was resting, would
be casting vncleanesses upon his sacred head.

Our Lord the while, had his holy eyes cast down, but his heart was raised; his
hands were bound, but his affections were at liberty, and enlarged. He went
fulfilling the Prophesies; Isa. 53.
Sicut homo non audiens, and sicut mutus non aperiens os suum. Like a man who
had not been able to hear, what they said against him; and as far from
speaking to them, as if he had been wholly dumb; and as S. Gregory says, Greg.
in 3. psalm. p^enitent.
Qui cogitationes iniquorum nouerat, blasphemantium voces non audiebat. And he
who knew even all their wicked thoughts, would not so much as seem to hear
their blasphemous words. To confound our great impatience, or (to speak more
properly) our want of Faith and love, when we will not, for the glory of God,
and in imitation of his divine example, (who endured so infinitely much for us)
endure the least reproach, or so much as any touch that way, without reply, and
perhaps, revenge.

The Crucifixion of our Blessed Lord; his quick sense, and several pains
distinctly felt: and of his unspeakable patience, and Love to us therein.

CHAP. 69.
THE hour was then all run out, and our Lord JESUS, who, according to that of
the blessed Apostle, Philip. 2.
Thought it no wrong to esteem himself equal to his Father, did empty
himself, not only by taking the nature of man upon him, but he did also,
humble himself withal, to death, yea, and to the very death of the cross,
which was the most opprobrious of all others. They had stripped him thrice
before, stark naked, in the Court of Pilate. First when they went to scourge
him; and then, when they put on the Purple Robe, and after when they disrobed
him, and led him toward the Cross, in his own clothes. And now The fomer
scorns were put again upon our Lord, but with circumstances which did much
increase both his pain and shame.
they did the same again, but with the addition of two circumstances, which
did extremely increase both his shame, and pain. For his garments were even
baked, as it were, to his sacred body, both by the length of time, which had
occurred between his beginning and ending that last, and most dolorous
procession of his, between Pilats house and Mount Caluary; as also by the
weight of the Cross, which during part of that time, lay with intolerable
pain upon his shoulders; and lastly, by the binding of his arms and hands,
both to his body, and to one another. These clothes being grown so fast to
his flesh, and plucked off, by those rude hands, with as much rigor as they
could tell how to use, must needs increase his torment to a strange proportion.

It could not also choose, but that his sense of shame was also raised to a
great height. For before, that sacred humanity was seen, but by as many as
could throng into Pilates Court. But now, upon the top of Mount Caluary (as if
it had been, at a kind of general day of Judgment) Romans, Grecians, Pagans,
Jews, and they of all the Provinces of the East, Priests, and people, men and
women, of all conditions, and ages, and in fine, an Epitome of the whole world,
was present.

For the increase of his confusion, and to hide the hateful spots of their
injustice, they led, in his company, two murdering thieves to execution, that
Why they lead him in the company of thee us.
their notorious crimes, might make some impression or influence of bad aspect,
upon the innocence of our Lord JESUS. And to the end that the worst in all
respects, might not be wanting to him, they resolved that his Cross should
stand in the midst of the other two, Marc. 15.
as in the more honorable place of infamy. This cross they now brought him to;
and as before they laid it upon him, they laid him now, upon it. It was already
bored through. And if perhaps they had made those holes, which were meant for
his hands, further off from those others which were deputed for his feet, the^
the length of his body would bear; they must be feign to add to the rest of
his torments, that other of the rack, to make the^ reach: For their particular
comfort, who for his sake should be afflicted in the same kind, by the
persecutours of his Church.

The executioners being there, with their ha^mers and nails, did extend and
spread him upon that hard bed of death; and they transpierst those hands of
Charity, and those seete of humility, and purity, with sharp strong nails,
driven in, by a multitude of blows; making his precious body the very anuile,
whereupon the hammer of our Our sins were they which crucified our Lord by the
hands of the Jews
sins, did by the hands of those crucifiers, beat so hard. If any one of them
relented, at the sight of that divine sweet sadness, through the compassion,
which such an object as that, could not easily choose but exact, even of
Tygars; it tended but to the increase of his pain. For the more kind they
were, the longer they were likely to dwell about doing that office, and so the
more cruel they fell out to be. If, on the other side, as they wo^ded his
hands, with theirs, so they had also in their will, a vehement desire of his
destruction, and death; that cruelty and sin of their heart, went straight to
his; and wounded him worse, through his love to them, then, through their hate,
they wounded him. So that, whether they were cruel to him, more or less,
being considered in themselves, yet in regard of him, all wrought by All
wrought by way of increasing torment to our Lord.
way of increasing torment.

The extreme parts of our body, which be our head, our hands, and our feet,
have all those veins, and arteries, and sinews, shut up, and as it were,
driven by the direction of nature, into a narrow compass, which go at ease,
through larger parts. The fleshly parts of the body, are dull, in comparison of
those others; and indeed so dull, as that, compared with these, they can
scarce, in effect, be said to feel. Yet who is he, that, if (being a person of
honor) he were content that his flesh should be pierced, or but eue^ the typ of
his ear should be publicly bored through, for another fault, would not
think that he had wrought a kind of wonder of love. But now, the sinews are
they, which are truly sensible, of sharp, and stinging pain. Whereof we see
the experience, in them who are subject to the toothach. Which, as it is the
thing that makes dogs mad; so even men, are little better, if indeed they have
it in extremity; and all, but because some one sinewe is fretted, by the
descent of rhewme, which remains about the root of a tooth. The torments
therefore which our blessed Lord endured, as before, by his Crown of thorns,
so now by the nails of his hands and feet, what were they but great things,
which want a name; since they were suffered in parts, which were the proper
seats, as a man may say, of the sesitiue soul, where the sinews meet; and
whereby the whole body after a compe^dious manner, might be most afflicted.

To this let us add the consideration of this other truth which was once
touched before. That through the perfection and purity of his complexion, and
constitution, Christ our Lord had incomparably, a quicker sense of feeling,
then any creature who ever lived. Again, let it be weighed, how he was a
continual Master of himself, and was never to be put to any such saynting,
as men sometimes are subject to; who by any great excess of lasting pain, are
brought from any feeling at all, thereof. Yea the reason of Christ our Lord was
so far from being tra^sported in the least degree, as that he felt Our Lord
did feel every one of his pains as distinctly, as it he had felt but only one.
the remainder of every one of the buffets, which had been given him, and of
every one of the stripes of his body, and of every one of the thorns of his
sacred head, and of every one of the nails of his blessed hands and feet, in
as distinct, and clear, and several a manner, as if he had suffered but that
one only single pain, whatsoever it were. So also the several causes which
afflicted his mind, did neither yield to one another, nor drown nor master
them of the body; but every single grief of his mind, was as distinctly felt
as any one of the^ alone could be. Whereas when others are subject to several
pain, and grief; the maister-paine is that which carries away all their
thoughts from the rest. As a vehement fit of the Gout, or Stone puts away all
remembrance of an ague; and as a very killing grief of mind, will make a man
forget any bodily pain.

Yet all this pain, or rather all these multitudes of several, and most
exceshue corporal pains, (together with a clear beholding of the deadly and
undeserved malice wherewith they inflicted them upon him) were not of power,
either to wind him up into the due estimation of his own sovereign dignity,
which was so profaned; or to let him down into any diminution of his charity;
or to make him behold mankind, (which by their sins must all be accounted to
have conspired together more or less, to his death) with any other eyes then
of endless pity, though, by insta^ts, they wentin creasing their cruelty. For
howsoever a man might think, that what they had already done, must needs be al
which they could do; and that nothing more remained to be devised, which might
add to the misery of our blessed Lord; Yet see a while, how far the rage, and
wit, of cruelty, and of envy, is able to reach. For, by The torments of our
Lord still increased.
rearing the Cross up aloft in the air, that it might fall with more strength
and force into that hole which had been made of purpose for it in the earth,
and that so it might be able to stick fast therein; what a dissolution must the
whole frame of the body of our Lord, needs find, in all the joints thereof.

Infallibly the parts of his precious body were all disioynted. And least it
should be thought that this were but a pious, and only possible imagination,
without further gro^d; let it be remembered how David said of these persecutors,
in the person of Christ our Lord, Psalm. 21.
Dinumerauerunt omnia ossae mea; They numbered all my bones. Which cannot well
be done, when they are fitted to their natural places; but when they are once
well put out of joint, they push forth, and appear to any eye, with ease. And
in another place it is said of him in his own person, Ierem. 23.
Contremuerunt omnia ossa mea, which implies such a general kind of commotion
of all the bones, in the skin, as so many stones would be subject to, in any
bagg if it were well shaken.

Nay his torments were moreover of that kind, as that during all those full
three hours, wherein he was hanging upon the cross, they increased of
themselves, by the natural weight of his own body. For that weight, made
fresh wounds, both in his hands and feet, by making the former grow higher and
wider, and the whole frame of his body, more out of joint. We How the torments
of Lord were renewed.
have seen already, how the wounds of his head, had bin renewed and increased
by those blows of the Reed; and so also even, by the very weight thereof, they
went increasing every minute. We have seen how the wo^ds of his body which were
given him by those scourges, were renewed by the often putting on, and off his
clothes. And now they were all increased, by the excessive cold, which his
nakedness gave him, through his coming so lately, from that fire of heat,
which his flagellation, his coronatio^, his procession, and his creeping, or
crawling up the hill, had cast him into. And that cold was also augmented
afterward, by another miraculous accident which was growing upon the whole
world at once, as I must shortly show. And here we see how the weight of his
precious body, does still increase the torment of his sacred hands and feet,
and consequently of the whole body it self.

Of the excessive torments of our Lord, and how he was blasphemed by all sorts
of persons, and of the divine patience and Love, wherewith he bare it all.

CHAP. 70.
THIS passion was so highly beyond all president of former ages, and persons;
as that our Lord himself, (though he used, at that, and all times else to
carry his sufferance in profound silence) did yet inuit us thus, long before,
to the consideration thereof, Ierem. 1.
by the mouth of his holy Prophet, O vos omnes qui tra^fitis per viam,
attendite and videte si est dolor, sicut dolor meus. O all you who pass by the
way, observe and see, if there be any grief, like this of mine. Vent, says
another, in the person of Christ our Lord, in the Passion, Psalm. 68.
in altitudinem maris, and tempestas demersit me. I came into the depth of the
Sea, and I have been even drowned in the tempest. He came into the depth of
those thoughts, whereof the holy Prophet said, Psalm. 91.
that they were too very deep: Nimis profundae factae sunt cogitationes tuae.
A Sea it was rather of mud, then waters, and he was plunged, Psalm. 68.
in limo profundi, and non est substantia; into that pit of mire, from which he
could nether be free, nor find any resting place, for his feet, therein. Nor
is it strange, that he should say that he was drowned, when upon the Cross he
came into the Tempest indeed; since we find that in the garden, where this
Tempest was only present to his imagination, it had almost cost him his life.
The imagination of fearful men, does often, by way of anticipation, represent
things worse, then they prove indeed, because they seem to feel, whatsouer
their weak hearts are induced to fear. But in the mind of our Lord JESUS
Christ, it could not be so, for he foresaw things, just as they were to prove;
and that bare foresight, had cast him into that bitter Agony; it had made him
power out a sweat of blood; and it had forced him to say, Marc. 14.
that his very soul was sad even to the death. A wonderful thing it were,
that a coal of fire, should be buried and drowned in water, and yet should
continue still to burn. Christ our Lord is this The vnque^ch. able love of our
Lord.
living coal, of the fire of love; for though he were all steeped, and soaked,
and even drowned in the water of affliction for our sins; Cant. 8.
Yet, aquae multae non potuerunt extinguere caritatem. The siery coal of his
love, could not be quenched, by those many waters. Nay as wind does kindle
other coals, so did these waters of tribulation, kindle this of his love to us.

Already upon his condemnation, the Title or cause of his death, was delivered
in writing by Pilate, to be fixed to the instrument thereof, which was his
Cross. This title carried these words, Matt. 27. Luc. 23. Marc. 18. Joan. 19.
Jesus Nazarenus, Rex Iudaeorum: Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. And for
so much as concerned the intention of Pilate, it was delivered by a kind of
chance. But the superior providence of God, did ordain for reasons of
infinite wisdom, that it should be so. And although the wicked Jews were
scandalized thereat, and would feign have had it changed, from affirming
positiuely, Ibid.
that he was king of the Jews, to a saying only, That he had said so; yet
could they not be gratified therein. The words were written in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, which were the mother, and maister-tongues of the world, and so
were to continue to the worlds end. And now they were consecrated, in most
particular manner, to the public service of our Lord God; and as such they
are, and will be used in the holy Catholic Church, whatsoever is muttered by
the adversaries thereof, who are also the adversaries, both of the sign of the
material Cross of Christ, and of the living Cross also, which is
Mortification and Penance. But, the while, though Almighty God had his ends
heerin for our good, (as has been said) yet their malice went by other ways;
and they used it to no other purpose, which was only for the increase of his
ignominy, in the eyes of them, who seeing such a glorious Title above, and such
a dolorous and dejected person underneath, Matt. 17. Marc. 15. Luc. 23. Joan.
19.
might the more readily, and profoundly contemn him, and our Lord did with
excess of charity stoop to all.

The soldiers, whilst he was suffering, had so little care, or thought of him,
as that instantly they were at leisure, to fall to rifeling for his clothes.
And they who made no difficulty to break through, and tear his sacred body,
from head to foot, took care not to break, or cut his seam-lesse coat. Our
Lord was still content with all, and not only was he resolved to give his life
for their souls, but he gave way, that his clothes should apparel the bodies
of his persecutors. He had said before that our bodies were more worth the^ our
garments. Matt. 6.
And if this be true in our case, how much more infinitely true, was it in his.
Both because, through our Pride, our clothes be richer the^ he ever wore, and
because our bodies are so much baser, the^ that most pure, and precious body of
his. But these wretches did cast up their account after another fashion,
marking all things else, with great Figures, but esteeming this Lord of all
things for a mere Cipher.

The sacred Text does further note, that they, being appointed to watch and
guard him whilst he was hanging upon the Cross, were so far from bearing any
part of his sorrow out of pity, as that they set Barbarous wretches.
themselves down at their ease, which a man would scarce have done, at the
death of any common rogue; especially if it were a death of torment. Let Pagans
take their pleasures for a time, when the Son of God, is suffering such
bitter pain for them. Let the profane soldiers of Pilate (who figure out the
libertines of this world) sit down, and take their ease, notwithstanding that
our Redeemer, made choice of pain; and by choosing it, did facilitate and
sanctify it, upon his own sacred person, to our use.

But as for us, who are Catholics, and Caualliers of Christ, let it be far
from us to doat upon delights, which he avoided, and to abhor affronts and
pains, Bernard. ser. 5. in festo omnium SS.
an uncomely thing, for any inferior member of a body, to hunt after commodity,
and ease, when the head of the same body should be crowned and pierced with
thorns [Pudeat sub capite spinoso me^brum fieri delicatum.] Our head is
crowned, and we are not living parts of his body, but the Canker of heresy
has consumed us, or at least the Gangrene of sensuality has killed us, if we
suffer not, together with this head by true compassion; which true compassion,
implies, not a pitying, but a joint suffering, according to our strength of
body, and the dictamen of true love, to the beloved; and which if it be true
indeed more easily your may persuade the soul which has, it not to live, then
the body not to suffer.

The mortal life of our blessed Lord was drawing on apace toward an end; but
yet for the little while that it was to last, he was not content with that one
Cross alone, to which he was nailed by the cruel hands of those executioners,
but he admitted also of other crosses, to which he was shot, by the blasphemous
tongues of all those kinds of people which were present. They had put him out
of the reach of their fingars, that he might hang as he did upon Irons, in the
air. But yet they gave him not over so, for they wounded his heart, with most
blasphemous, and bitter scoffs.

The people which past in troops, Matt. 27. Marc. 15. Joan. 19.
before him, did, with serpentine tongues, and countenances full of scorn, cry
out (vah) to him. And they accompanied it with the most contumelous gesture,
and iogge of the head, which they could devise, as the holy Scripture it self
does insinuate. And that interiection, with the words that followed, do as bad
as say after this manner: Thou wretch, thou hypocrite, thou ugly impostor; thou
were talking of wonders, but to what an end has thy wickedness brought thee,
now at last? Thou had a mind to be a King, but what beggar is so base as not
to be thy better? might it please your Majesty to come down from the cross,
that we, your most humble and faithful servants, and vassalles, may do you
homage? Thou talkedst of being the Son of God, and the Savior of the world;
Will it please your Divinity, to be good to your Humanity; Will it please you
to let your Charity begin at home, and to save your selle? Thou talkedst of
what thou could do, if thou were disposed; and that the Temple, was but a
toye; and that thou were able to put it down and raise it up again, in a
trice. Might your Omnipote^cy be entreated to begin with throwing down that
Cross, and to cast away those nails; and by iuggling, to play least in sight,
as in former occasions you have been known to do. Vah, wretched, wicked thing,
the worst of creatures, the out cast of the world; we hate thee, we abhor
thee, we despise thee, we spit at thee, we defy thee. The earth has refused to
be trod upon any longer by those pernicious feet of thine; the heaven is
walled up against the entry of such a miscrea^t as thou. There is no place for
thee but hell, dye therefore quickly, and be damned,

These are infinite blasphemies, and we all abhor them all, as we do the
devil himself; but infallibly, they are but triuiall things in comparison of
those others, which were darted out indeed, against our blessed Lord upon the
Cross. For A demonstration that the blasphemies which were uttered against our
blessed Lord were most enourmous things, though the holy Scripture touches
them in in few words.
since they acted their worst by the way of doing, they would be sure not to
fall short in saying. And the rage they had, would quicken up their wits; and
the excessive wrongs which then already, they had done him, would exact at
their hands, a making good of what was past, by the uttermost most
demonstration of how deeply they detested him at that present. The high
Priests besides, are recorded in holy Scripture to have put scoffs upon him,
after a particular manner, and they said to this effect; This fellow, had a
gift to help other folks, but he has not the trick to save himself. If
he, he the King of Israel, let him come down from the Cross, and we will
believe him. The good man did put his trust in God, but if God have a mind to
him, let him take him.

The barbarous soldiers also were still upon their old haunt of scorning him;
Ibid.
having been bribed, in all appearance, by those wicked Jews, even from the
beginning when he was scourged, and crowned with thorns. And they were so void
of pity, as to be offering him vinager, though they did, but even that in
jest, and scorn, at that time whereas wine was wont to be given to all men, who
were placed in that deadly trance. Yea and even one of those very thieves, who
then were suffering death together with him, took time not to think of his
own torments or imminent death, together with the danger of eternal
damnation which he was in, through the lust he had to be like those savages
under whom he suffered; and he would needs be then at leisure, to reproach,
and blaspheme our blessed Lord.

How our Lord Jesus did exercise the Offices of Redeemer and Instructour upon
the Cross; and of the three first words, which with incomparable Love, he
uttered from thence.

CHAP. 71.
SVCH was the cruelty of all kinds of people against our Lord, as he was
hanging upon the Cross, and such was the affliction, which in the inferior
part of his soul he felt, upon every one of those particular pains, and
scorns. Nor was there so much, as one single word, a sign, gesture, or a
thought of malice, in any one of all those many hearts which went not to his, by
the way of grief. Yet see also how it wrought in the way of love. As soon as
the Cross was reard, and that already they had set al those marks upon him,
which were to carry him to his grave; and that still he was hearing the bitter
scoffs, and blasphemies whereby they profaned his sacred ears; he went
exercising two of his chief offices, in a most admirable manner, and in a most
eminent degree.

These Our Lord Jesus the Mediator of our redemption and the Doctor of our
souls by by way of instruction.
were, to be the Mediator of our Redemption, and the Doctor, in that Chair
of the holy Cross, for our instruction. He then turned himself in most
gracious, but most dolorous manner to his eternal Father; beseeching him to
forgive al their sins, who had any way concurred to that death of his. Father
(says he) forgive them, for they know not what they do. Ibid.
Of God, as God, he knew not how to hope for such a favor, in respect of them,
and therefore he coniures him by the tender name of Father; that so he
remembering him to be that most beloved Son, Matt. 3.
(he in whom he was well pleased) he might be merciful to those wretches,
whose cause he had vndertake^ to plead. For, howsoever they had found in their
hearts to give him so many wounds of death, with so much scorn and rage, yet he
could not find in his, to forsake them in their sins, but to beg that they
might have grace to return by penance. And because he easily foresaw, that the
crime was so enormous of it self; his unspeakable charity went seeking ways,
how to excuse the grieuousnes thereof, by taking a part from their malice, and
ascribing it to their ignorance who committed it. And he who in that Agony in
the Garden, prayed but conditionally, that the bitter Chalice of his
punishment, might pass from him, had so much more Out Lord had far more care
of us, the^ of himself.
care of them, then of himself, as to pray, in absolute terms, that the
Chalice of Gods fury, might not come to the^. Not only he did it in absolute
terms, but he did it, at his death; when Fathers are not wo^t to refuse their
sons. And he did it more over, in the midst of those excessive torments, when
even enemies use to gratify one another: and he did it by way of represe^ting
so good a reason for the obtaining of his suite, as whereby he would convince,
and oblige the Eternal Father to grant it.

It was true that they knew not, that he was the natural Son of God; but
that ignorance was their fault, and a just punishment of blindness, for their
other sins. And the works which he had done, did manifest him to be, what he
said he was. And though he had not been the Son of God, yet their own
conscience told them, that he could not but be a man of God, and of a most
innocent and holy life; and therefore they ought in reason to have been very
far from intending such a ruin, as they brought him to. There was therefore,
much to be said against them, and little for them. But yet our Lord, through
his infinite love, did let pass that much, Hebr. 5.
and laid hold of that little. And he was heard by the Father for his
reverence. And many of those miserable men, were converted by the mighty hand
of God; and not only many of them, but many millions of our souls in after
ages are daily converted, in the virtue and strength, of this holy Prayer. Now
withal, this sovereign Doctor did then read many lessons in one. Namely The
instuction which is given us by this prayer of Christ our Lord.
that we must excuse the faults, and much more, the disputable cases, which
occur by way of question, whether or no our neighbors have done ill; yea and
even we are to pardon our greatest enemies, in admiration and imitation of this
divine charity of Christ our Lord. For whatsoever affronts or wrongs, they may
be offering to put upon us; who sees not what fleabytings they must be, in
comparison of the woe, into which our Lord was cast, upon the cross? Besides
that he was the King of glory, and did suffer for us, who were the most wicked
slaves of Satan. Since therefore we were forgiven, being the enemies of God,
and who were in all reason, to be condemned, to hell fire, for our many and
most grievous sins; what rigor shall we not deserve at his hands, if we
forgive not our enemies, for love of him.

Now to let us see withal, how far he was from loosing any thing in the
sight of God, by enduring the bitter pain and ignominy of the Cross; he tells
us, in language plain enough, that the Father who before, had delivered all
power into his hands, did mean nothing less then to resume the same, and he
showed even then, that he was God. For instantly he The admirable mercy of our
Lord to the good Thief. Luc. 23.
subscribed the petition of the Good Thief (who rebuked the blasphemy of his
companion, and besought our Lord that he would remember him, when he should be
in his kingdom) with such a gracious Fiat, and upon one single, and short
request, as may abounda^tly let us see, that we serve no less the^ an infinite
God; and that it costs him nothing, to give kingdoms; or rather that it costs
him much; but that he is content to impart them to us, at an easy rate. Yea
even as easy as it is to ask, so easy shall it be for us to have, if death
prevent us of being able to do other works of penance. And besides we learn
by this, that our Lord is so liberal, and so full of love to our felicity, as
that he takes no day with us (if the disposition which we bring, be good) any
more then he did to this happy Thief, who here did make so good a full point
of stealing, as that after a sort, he may be acco^ted to have stolen away the
kingdom of heaven; and he obtained, that this sentence should be pronounced by
the mouth of truth it self, It shall be so, and this very day, thou shall be
with me in Paradise.

O infinite goodness of our Lord, who had fogotten as it were, to speak when it
co^cerned him to have answered for himself; but who had never yet learnt to
hold his peace, when his speech might concern the comfort and salvation of
such as desired the same. Hereby we may clearly find the great force of Grace,
which at an instant, is able to make a great Saint of the greatest sinner. So
that, as we may not presume of Gods mercy at the last hour of our life,
because we see what became of he wicked Thief; so by the good Thiefes example
we are bound not to despair thereof. Withal we may well perceive in the person
of Christ our Lord, who was wholly innocent; and of the good Thief who was
grown penitent; and of the wicked Thief, who was hardened in his sin, that
There is no kind of people which is not in this life to bear a Cross. Bell.
de sept. verbis
in this life of trial, there is no kind of me^ who can expect to live without
their Cross; as here we see, that all three sorts of men, are crucified. Good
men have their Crosses, and so have the bad, and so also have they who, of bad,
grow good. But with this difference it goes, that the Crosses of good men, end
in glory, and of the bad, in everlasting torment and shame.

Now since our Lord was so merciful to this good Thief, though he had led all
his life in sin; how much more would it concern him not to be unmindful of
his dearest friends, and especially of his all-immaculate mother, and his
beloved Disciple. This Mother and Disciple had found him out, as he was passing
between Pilats Court, and Mount Caluary. For as much as concerns the excessive
grief which had dominion over the heart of the sacred Virgin, I shall have
opportunity to speak hereafter of it; and for the present I only take occasion
heerby, to love the love of our Lod, who, by ordayning, that his blessed Mother
with S. John, should be present near his Cross at the time of his Passion
(besides the enamoured penitent Saint Mary Magdalen, and Mary of Cleophas, and
Salome) was pleased to add, to his own former grief, this second grief,
which consisted, in that he saw them grieve. And especially in discerning, with
the eyes of his mind, the fulfilling of that sad prophesy of Simoon, who
foretold that the sword of sorrow, Luc. 2.
should one day pierce the very soul, of his blessed Virgin Mother.

He had no will to call her Mother, in regard that he would not wo^d her yet
more deeply, by putting her in mind of such a seeming miserable Son. But
especially he forbear The reason why our Lord did not call our B. Lady, by the
name of mother from the Cross.
to use that name, because he being so odious in the eyes of all that wicked,
and abused world; it could not choose but to have been of great disadvantage to
her at that time, to be known, and considered for his mother, by so many as
were spectators there. But he did that in other words, with admirable charity,
which did liberally provide for the comfort both of her, and the whole world.
For he gave this blessed mother of his, to be the mother of S. John, and in his
person of all mankind, by these words of his, Woman, behold thy Son. And he
gave to S. John, and to all the world in him, a title of calling and knowing
the sacred Virgin, by the name of Mother, when he said to him, Behold thy
Mother. Ibid.
So sweet a song did this dying Swan of ours deliver, and so rich did he make
his holy Catholic Church, when, departing out of the world, he left it such a
legacy as this, whereof hereafter I shall speak a part.

Of the darcknes which possessed the world, and the excessive desolation which
our Lord endured with incomparable Love, whilst he was saying to his eternal
Father, Deus Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me?

CHAP. 72.
ALL these former several words, so full of divine consolation, and
instruction, were uttered with unspeakable love, by our blessed Lord, soon
after the rearing of his Cross, with himself upon it. And then did a kind of
darkness ouerspread all the earth. Matt. 17. Marc. 15.
It was not possible that it should grow, at that time, by any natural cause
of an Eclipse, for then it could not have lasted so very long, that is to say,
three whole hours, Ibid.
Ab hora sexta, vsque ad nonam. Besides that the Sun and Moon, were then in
such relation, and position (in respect of one another) as that the Sun could
be, no way Eclipsed then. And, in fine, if this darkness had grown by an
Eclipse, it could not have reached to be universal over the whole earth; as
yet the holy Scripture says it was; and so it has been testified, and proved,
not only by the Eua^gelists, (whose word is of all authority with us
Christians) but also by S. Denis Areopagita, See this Apud Bell. de 7. verb.
Dom.
Lucianus the Martyr, Tertullian, and others, who wrote thereof at once, in
several parts of the world. Besides that Phlegon a Pagan (which may serve for
the confusion of Jews and Atheists in this point) affirms how in that year,
and upon that very day, and hour, when our Lord did suffer, The day was turned
into so express night, as that the stars were then seen in the firmament.

This The reason of that miraculous darcknes which did ouerspred the earth
darkness was drawn upon the world, by the miraculous power of God, to declare
the perfect innocence of our Lord JESUS, and the enormity of their sin who
had condemned him; and whose sentence he reuersed, after this omnipote^t
manner. And as in some respects, it could not but be of excessive terror to
see a Noone day turn Midnight, as it were at an instant; and that, without
any natural cause at all: so yet, it was an effect of the infinite love of
God, and of the former prayer of Christ our Lord, when he beged the forgiveness
of their sins. For this was then a means of the conversion, and of the
penance afterward of all that troop of people (as S. Luke affirms) whereby
the greater part of them is only to be understood) who continued till the end
of the Passion. Luc. 27.
For they saw the wonderful things which happened, and they returned into the
city, beating, every one, his breast, through excess of sorrow. And so every
one of them, went raising a Trophey, to the infinite mercy of our Redeemer, The
infinite mercy of our Lord God.
who gave such abundance of effectual grace even to the^ who had made
themselves his deadly enemies, and that before he was taken down from the
Cross, as if it had been, even in reward of all their wickedness, and cruelty
against him.

But as now the whole world was ouerwrought with a material darkness, by the
miraculous hiding of the sun (which did such homage to the Creator of all
things, as by absenting it self, to make a kind of ve^^e whereby his nakedness
might the less app^^^e) so also were the hearts, in effect, of the wh^^^ (...)
^^orld and especially of those cruel perso^^ tours, grown spiritually dark,
by the abundance of sin, which puts out the light of grace, whersoeuer it
enters. Now to these two kinds of darkness, which were at that time in the
world, and worldly men; another kind of obscurity did correspond, in Christ our
Lord; in such sort, as that we may securely affirm, that since the world was
created, and inhabited, there was never any such general darkness as that. For
by the light (as a man may say) of that darkness, even half an eye would
easily discern, how mightily, the Power, the Wisdom, the Sanctity, the
Angelical beauty, the Princely Majesty, the divine Dignity, and the
incomparable Felicity, and glory, of the true and natural Son of God, The
darcknes of desolation, of Christ our Lord, and how his supreme dignity was
also obscured.
was obscured at that time. The sun was doubly gone, for besides the darkning
of the material Sun, himself, who was the true Sun, seemed no more a
Sun but rather a moon, and that all Eclipst. For as the Moon when she is
Eclipst, though she have her globe all bright toward the heaven, yet is it all
blake toward the world; just so, Christ our Lord, though in the superior part
of his soul, he saw God, and was as high in glory, as now when he is reigning
in heaven, yet in the inferior part thereof, there was a most profound darkness
and desolation.

This drew out of his mouth, those words of the Psalm, whereof it seems he was
in co^templation at that time. Matt. 27. Psalm. 21.
Deus Deus meus, vt quid dereliquistime: My God my God, why have thou for saken
me. Misterious words; which were uttered, to show the unspeakable affliction
of Christ our Lord. Who for the greater glory of God the Father, and through
the excess of his love to us; and for the more abundant propitiation and
satisfaction of our sins; and for the more complete crowning of his own
humility, patience, and supreme purity of mind; was pleased to want all kind of
prorection, which might be of any comfort to him. In other respects he was (as
has bin said) so conjoined, and united to Almighty God, as that it was wholly
impossible, that even for any one instant, he should ever be separated, or
abandoned by him.

For, as God, he was united by way of Essence, to the Father; as man, he was
united to the Divinity, by hypostaticall Union; Bell. Ser. de sept. verbis.
as a soul, which saw the face of God, from the very first instant of his
Conception, he was united to him, by the Union of glory. And as that vessel of
sanctity, which was not only all filled, but ouerflowed by the holy Ghost,
whose guifs he received, not according to any set or limited measure, but
beyond all measure; I say, as he was this vessel of sanctity, he was united to
God, by will, and Grace. And from any one of these Unions, not only could he
never be separated indeed, but not so much as doubt, that he might be so. To
say therefore that he was forsaken by God, in respect of any of those former
ways of Union, is grievously to blaspheme the God of heaven and earth; and to
profane the dignity and Majesty of the soul of Christ our Lord; and impiously
to interpret and attribute that excess of his divine charity, to the deepest
dishonor which he could rece^ue; as that most wicked Calvin Lib. 2. Instit.
cap. 26.. 10.21.12. and in harm. mc. 27. Matthew.
Sectary has presumed to do. Affirming that our Lord despayred of Gods mercy
upon the Cross, when he uttered those words. And that he felt the very pains
of the damned in his soul; the greatest whereof, is the knowledge, and feeling
of having lost Almighty God.

And although he will pretend, that he exalts the mercy of God heerby, since
God suffered his Son to endure the very pains of hell, for the relief of
man; yet, (besides the hideous blasphemy which these words do even of
themselves inuolue) the wretched Heretic is so blind withal, as not to know,
or so wicked as not to confess, A demonstration where. by that blasphemy is
defected.
that the dignity of Christ our Lord was such (in regard of the hypostaticall
union with the divinity) that any one single sigh alone of his, being applied
by faith and charity, had been of merit to save innumerable millions of worlds
of me^, though every of them had been as wicked, as that most wicked man
himself. If therefore one only sigh had been enough, for the redemption of the
world; then certainly, those other many, and most sublimely accomplished acts
of virtue, which that happy soul of Christ our Lord, did work, through the
whole course of his divine life, being acco^panyed by those unspeakable
torments which he endured, with a kind of infinite love to us in his sacred
passion before his death, will make his redemption of us, most superabundantly
copious, without needing to have recourse to any such impious and heretical
blasphemy, as that miserable man sucked from the author of lies, to be
dispersed by the disciples of his lewd Doctrine.

The Catholic Doctrine, and the truth is that which has already been
declared; That our Lord JESUS was content to be deprived of all sense and
feeling of divine comsort, which he expressed by those dolorous words of his.
And his pleasure also was, that we should be told, that he uttered them, with a
loud voice. Ibid.
To Why our Lord spoke those words with a loud voice.
the end that even from the most remote corners of our hard hearts, we might
hear the^, and adore him for them. And now, as he asked not that question with
a loud voice, as if the eternal Father could not have heard him if he should
have spoken softly, so neither did he ask it at all, as not knowing, or
needing to be certified why he was so forsaken by him; since our Lord knew all
things. And how should he be ignorant of that which so much concerned himself,
he who knew the secrets of all hearts, and how the eternal Father would dispose
thereof; Colos. 23
and in whom the all treasures of knowledge and wisdom were heaped up. But he
asked that question, to the end that we might seek for the Answer of it; and
seeking it, might find it; and finding it out, might learn to know both the
grieuousnes of sin thereby, which was so sharply punished upon Gods own only
Son; the infinite torments from which we are to be delivered by such a costly
means; the inestimable value of grace, for the purchase whereof, to our use,
Christ our Lord was content to sell whatsoever he could part withal, both in
body, and reputation, and even in the inferior part of his very soul; the
unspeakable glory of the kingdom of heaven, which was only to be opened thus,
by the Golden maister-key of the infinite love of Christ our Lord. For upon the
only turning of this key toward us, those locks, do all fly open, wherein the
eternity of selicity, is treasured up for us, in the house of God.

Of the excessive love which our Lord Jesus did express by the silence and
solitude wherewith he endured those unspeakable torments upon the Cross: and
how, the while, he was negotiating our cause with God.

CHAP. 73.
THIS Passion, opens the door of eternal felicity to us; but here we see,
how for the time, it did shut the gate of comfort against our B. Lord. For
between the end of his three first speeches, and this complaint which he made
to his eternal Father, which was the first of his four last, there passed
upon the point of three full hours; during all which time, this Son of the
Virgin did not once so much as open his blessed mouth. O that our Lord, would
here grant the suite of his humble servants, whilst they desire to have some
sight, and taste of that dolorous condition wherein then he was lodged for our
sins. O that we might partake some little part of that amazement, wherewith all the quires of heavenly spirits did abound; when they saw, their Creator planted
in the air upon a Cross, deformed from head to foot with torments, profaned
with blasphemies, and attended in silence by darkness; and yet withal, so far
from taking revenge of any dishonor that had been done him, as that he suffered
still, with entire submission, and with invincible love both of God, and man.

But that which still, me thinks, makes the rest more strange, and wherein more
of the God appears, is that strange kind of silence The admirable silence of
our Lord, and how he did not once co^plavne either of his pains or our sin.
whereof I spoke before; and that total absence of expressing any manner of
complaint, by so much as any one word, yea or even sigh or groan. It was said
before, that our Lord himself had invited the world to behold the case wherein
he was; and if we were content to do so, upon the summons of Pilats Ecce homo;
how much more are we to six our hearts upon this tragical figure of our own
making; now that we are called to it by Christ our Lord. I cannot think of
this strange spectacle, what me thinks I would, nor can I yet say, what I
think, but in weak and cloudy manner. Our Lord give us grace to think and
say heerof, as we ought, and that we any do, as he deserves. But certainly
since he has given us such faculties of mind, as wherewith to wonder at strange
things; his meaning is, that we should employ them upon such an object, as is
his bottomless heart, in this time of his hanging upon the Cross. For then, was
he sacrificing himself, upon that Cross, as upon the Altar of whole world, at
once. Then The infinite affairs our Lord did negotiate upon the cross.
did he, as it were, shut himself up for the Redemption of mankind making
dispatches which he sent, by moments, to the mercy and Justice seat of God;
and speeding of all his memorialls, concerning the erection, and propagation of
his Church, the illuminating of Pagans, the mollifying of jews, the reducing
of Heretics, the instruction of all souls, the propitiation of sins, the
satisfaction of all pains, the impetration of all graces, and the retribution
of thanks, for all benefits. There did he adore God in highest contemplation,
there did he prostrate himself with profound humiliation. There did one of the
extended arms of his soul reach to the Angels in heaven, and the other to
Lymbus below the earth; and his heart, the while between them both, was
embracing the whole race of mortal men, with desire to make them all one, with
him, in that kingdom of glory, upon the purchase whereof, he was then
disbursing his heart blood.

He had nothing but deadly sorrow by him, but he saw that joy before him, which
he was eternally to take in the glory of God, and good of man. Hebr. 2.
And therefore, Proposito sibi gaudio, sustinuit crucem confusione contempta. If
ever his heart did appear to be an infinite kind of thing, it was in those
three hours of torments desolations, and silence. He was, at that time,
withal the world or rather with as many little worlds as there had been, were,
and were to be reasonable creatures in it; but there was not any one of the^
with him, in the way of giving him, the least sensible comfort. So that we may
conclude, that his Father, and Son, and servant David, did most truly, and
literally prophesy of him when he said, Psalm. 10^.
Vigilaui The sad solitude of Christ our Lord.
and factus sum, sicut passer solitarius in tecto. He was kept well awake, like
a solitary sparrow upon the roof of a house, which knows not whither to
retire it self; being strocken by the voice of thunder, and frighted, on every
side, by the flashes of lighning; and battered, even to the very brains, by an
impetuous storne of rain, and hayle. O thou innocent lamb of God, which
take away the sins of the world. Thou Lamb of God who art also God, and
becamst a La^be; that so thou mighest not only have wool whereof to be fleeced,
for the covering of us; but blood also, which thou were glad to shed, for the
giving of life to us. And how deeply are the souls of us thy servants wounded,
to see this multiplication of thy miseries? How cordially are we afflicted,
that we can but be astonished at this solitude and silence, and those vast
torments of thine? Or rather how much are we ashamed that we scarce say true,
even when we say that we are sorry for them; since we are so wicked withal as
that we give them not leave, to work those effects upon our souls, for which
they were suffered upon thy precious body? How long shall we be the slaves of
sin, since thou have fought so hard for our liberty? How long shall we care
for the contentments of this life, since thou, who art more to us then millions
of lives, did for the love and example of us wretches, contract and tie thy
self to such an endless shame of reproach and torment? How come we to be so
miserable, as that we are able so much as to live, when we see that thou, who
art the King of glory, and the God of life, art thus going to dye? Would not
less, dear Lord, have served the turn, for the accomplishment of our
redemption; but that thou must needs be thus obnoxious to such a vastity of
anguish, as now we see thee in? Less would have served to satisfy the justice
of God, since by reason of the Hypostaticall union, any one act, or sigh of
thine, would have ouerbought many millions of worlds from hell. But nothing
could satisfy that unquenchable heat of thy heart, unless thou had endured
all this Chaos of confusion and torment. Because thereby, not only our
salvation, but our sanctification also, was to be more nobly wrought, more
sweetly, and more honorably for us, more gloriously for God, and therefore more
gustfully and delightfully for thee, in the superior part of thy soul,
howsoever in the inferior, it cost thee dear.

Of the unspeakable thirst of our Lord which he did endure, and declare with
incomparable Love to man.

CHAP. 74.
THERE remained now a Prophesy, to be fulfilled concerning the thirst of our
Lord upon the Cross. The torment of extreme h^gar, is sometimes so great, as
that we read of strait and long sieges of towns, where the inhabitants have
been driven by the rage thereof not only to eat unclean beasts; but even
mothers, have devoured the very children of their own body; yea and even the
flesh of their own Lymms. And yet most certain it is, (and we take a kind of
taste thereof, by our own daily experience) that every one of us who have, at
any time found our selves in extremity both of hungar and thirst, have felt the
thirst incomparably more troublesome the^ the hungar. The great torment of
great thirst beyond that of hungar
Such again as have traveled sundry days, in some dry and barren deserts,
(as it happens to many, in the Southern and Eastern parts of the world) such as
have felt the malignity of burning fevers, do well understand what I say. Nor
is there almost any treasure upon earth, which some such man would not be glad
to give, for a glass of water. Now thirst is otherwise also caused, by excess
of labor, by heat, by grief of mind, by pain of body, and especially by
the spending of much blood. And we seldom let blood, when we are taking
Physic (though it be but in jest) but it serves to give us increase of thirst.

How ardent then must the thirst of Christ our Lord needs have been; in whom
alone, all the causes of extreme thirst did meet? For during all that day, and
the whole precedent night, he had been perpetually in torment, And besides his
Agony, and bloody sweat in the garden, he had been dragged, and buffeted, and
all inflamed, by those cruel scourges, and thorns. And lastly he had been
bored through with nails, upon which he had now, hunge almost three hours,
with streams of blood continually flowing from him; and his spirits were
exhausted by a world of deadly sorrow at his heart, to increase his thirst. This
torment he endured, all that while, without once, so much as saying, that he
endured it. Nether did he express himself now at last in this kind, through
the delight he meant to take, or pain he mea^t to drive away by drinking: for
already he was, even upon the very pitch, and brimme of death. And he who in
all that time, had been swallowing up the want of drink, in silence; could
easily have extended his patience, to those next minutes, which were to be the
last of his life.

But The reason why our Lord declared his thirst.
this Lord of ours, was pressed so close by his spiritual thirst, of suffering
as it were infinite things for the love of us, and for the gayning, and
instructing our souls, by these examples of his invincible patience; as that
it made him contemn, and even forget his own material thirst, though it were
to him of excessive pain. This Original of Religious Obedience which is
Christ our Lord, does also show heerby, the form wherein Religious persons are
to express themselves to their Superiors. Which A good lesson for Religious
men.
is, not to be, so much by way of earnest desire, of that which they would
have, as by way of declaration of that, whereof they are in want; and when that
is done, the Superiors are to proceed as they see cause. For so did Christ our
Lord forbear to desire to drink; and he only said, That he was thirsty, to
those soldiers, who were made his Superiors, by his own admirable humility
and charity: submitting himself entirely to their wills who were bribed and
bent to do him all the mischief they could. For when he told them of his
thirst, what was it which they could find in their hearts to give him? The same
thing which they had offered him before in jest, and in the way of scorn, the
same they were content to give him, now in earnest, for a conclusion to all
their cruel courtesies.

When they were going to crucify him, they would not give him wine til it were
distempered with Gaul, Matt. 27. Marc. 25.
which is the Emblem of malice and bitterness. And now that he is giving up the
Ghost, they present him with a sponge full of Vinegar, which is the Emblem of
rage, and sowernes. O uncharitable wretches! and who made you, of men, such
savage monsters? But O infinite Charity and meekenes, and patience of Christ
our Lord, who accepted of al, without the least reproof of their impiety. And
as at the foot of the Cross he had refused to drink of that Gaul, because it
was mingled with wine, to the end that he might be suffering, whilst he lived,
without any drop of the wine of comfort; yea or so much as the being known to
want it; so now, that he was upon the very point of death, he refused not to
drink of that pure vinegar, because it was all sharp and sower.

He left those draughts which should have any mixture of comfort in them, with
Crosses, for those Martyrs, whom, he meant to make glorious by following his
divine example. And by his taking the vinegar of tribulation, he did convert it
into the wine of strength and comfort, after a contrary manner to that whereby
wicked men are wont, through their ingratitude, to turn the wine of his
blessings, into the vinegar and Gaul of sins against him. Abusing the
abundance of his mercy; and making that a motive of their wicked liberty, which
would tie any honest heart, so much the more inseparably, to his service. He
also drank this vinegar, to The many excellent reasons why our Lord was
pleased both to endure and to declare his thirst.
the end, that as already he had sanctified the mortificatio^ of the other
senses, by his example, for the instruction and consolation of his faithful
servants; so also they might be taught by this, to be far, and very far, from
all superfluous care of meat and drink; and much more, from all inordinate
delight therein; since all the sweet meats, wherewith our blessed Lord, was
pleased to make up his mouth in this mortal life, was but a draught of
vinegar, out of a sponge, at his death.

By this drinking therefore, he enableth us to be content, with course, and
common, and unpleasant meat and drink; and by the merit of his thirsting,
after this corporal drink, he has killed and quenched our spiritual thirst
after vain, and vicious delights, which nourish and feed up our souls in
sin. And so also, on the other side, (according to S. Augustines exposition
of the sixty eight Psalm) our Lord JESUS, did not only declare his extreme
thirst, of corporal drink, but also his ardent thirst after the salvation of
his enemies, and of all the world. How infinitely therefore shall we be without
excuse, if we give him not to drink of our good deeds, since he is so greedy
of them, and was so tormented for want thereof. Yea, and how worthy shall we be
of all reproach and pain; if he, having begun to us in so sad a Cup, with
desire and thirst of our good; we shall not procure to resemble him by
thirsting, both in body and soul, after the advancing, and increasing of his
Glory.

Of the entyre consummation of our Redemption, which was wrought by Christ our
Lord upon the Cross; and of the perfection of his divine virtues expressed
there.

CHAP. 75.
OUR Lord JESUS, having drunk this vinegar, declared, that whatsoever had bin
prophesied to be accomplished by himself, was now fulfilled; and he signified
it by saying this word, Consummatum est: All is fulfilled. And as he, who only
refreshes and fills the soul of man with whole floods of joy, was already
content to be tormented with thirst; so now, for the apparailing of our souls
with the life of Grace, he was ready to deuest himself of the life of Nature.
He had formerly complied with the care which he had of our instruction, and now
we have seeue how he has accomplished our Redemption, by his Passion. By
means of this Passion he finished the building of his Church. And since he had
formerly laid a note of folly, Joan. 19.
upon such a man as should begin to raise a building, and not bring it
afterward to perfection; our Lord, who was the increated Wisdom of the
Eternal Father, must needs be far from falling into any error, of the same
kind. And indeed it was wholly necessary, that, in his great goodness to us, he
should not deprive us of such a divine example of perseverance, as now we have
obtained, by the Cons^mation of his course of Passion, upon the Cross; since
All labor is lost without perseverance. Deuteronomy. 23.
without perseverance, all our labor is but lost. Our Lord did therefore
persevere, and he did perfect that which he had begun.

If the works of God, are most truly said to be entirely perfect, his Passion
was to be so, in most particular manner; which amongst these other works, is
said, with a kind of eminency, to be his work. Now what sufferance could be
more perfect, in the way of humility then for the Lord of life and glory, most
willingly to endure a death of excessive contumely and shame, at the hands of
his Rebellious Sons, and most wicked slaves? What more perfect in the way of
patience, and purity of heart, then to suffer, without the access of any
imaginable comfort, as Christ our Lord, vouchsafed to do? What more perfect,
in the way of conformity and obedience, then, without once harkening to the
inferior part of the soul, to range the Superior, to the will of God; not
only with solid patience, but with supreme joy? What more perfect in the way of
Charity, then to endure the extremity of affront and pain for his mortal
enemies? And at the very time, when those enemies were tormenting him, for him
to be protecting them, and negotiating their cause with bitter sighs, in the
cares of almighty God? What more The incomparable perfection of the work of
the passion of our Lord.
perfect, in the way of contemplation, then, in such distress, to be looking
at ease so many ways at once, from the death and contumely of a Cross, as if
it had bin from some tower of recreation and delight. To have God himself, and
all the world so perfectly and clearly in his eye, and all at once? To be
offering every grain, of all the Passion, in forgiveness of all the sins of
the whole world; whereof then, he saw every one more distinctly and clearly,
the^ any man did ever see any one of his own. What more perfect in the way of
diligence, in giving us direction how to carry our selves, then that, when
himself was so deeply wounded by those incomparable torments and affronts, he
would furnish us, with such divine documents and examples drawn from his own
sacred person. Whereby we may become victorious in all our combats; and find the
edge of our afflictions so abated, as that they should never cast us upon
despair.

What thing is more perfect in the way of corporal sufferance, then so to
suffer, as that there may be nothing which suffers not. There is nothing higher
then the head, and we have seen how the head of Christ our Lord did suffer, by
that hideous crown of thorns. There is nothing lower then the feet; and we
have seen how the feet have suffered by cruel nails. There is nothing of a
man, more wide or large then his hands spread abroad, at the arms end; and we
have also seen, how he suffered by nails driven through his hands. Those
hands, wherein he said that, he Isa. 49.
had written us, and Joan. 12.
whereby he would draw us toward himself, with divine pity, when once he
should be exalted upon the Cross. In fine, there is nothing more then all; and
we have seen how he has been scourged all over, and pierced, and fettered,
and spit upon, and boxt, and buffeted, and bored, and beathen through with
Iron, for the pure love of us. And even whilst he was hanging upon the Cross
in expectation of death, he vouchsafed still to be affronted, and blasphemed,
beyond all moral belief; and he, the while, even when vinegar was given him
to drink, in that torment of thirst which he endured, did regorge in the
deernes of his love to us.

He perfected How our Lord Jesus did perfect the figures and sacrifices of the
old law upon the Cross whereof he also fulfilled the prophesies. Luc. 22. 1.
Cor. 11.
the imperfection of the old law in the law of grace, which he did promulgate
here. He perfected all the Sacrifices of the old Testament in this Sacrifice
of himself upon the Cross; the memory whereof he had already commanded his
Priests to perpetuate, by the daily oblation of his own precious body and
blood upon their Altars. He perfected all the Prophesies, which were made
concerning his own life and death. He perfected all those figures which had
been delivered of him in the old Testament, for the disposing of the minds of
the faithful, toward the belief of their Messiah, who was the^ to come.

We have here the history of Noe. For as he was made drunk, Genes. 9.
by the vine which he planted, and had his nakedness discovered by his children;
so was our Lord stripped naked, more then once, as we have seen, and that by his
children, of whom his Prophet in his person said; Isa. 1.
Filios enutriui and exaltaui, ipsi autem spreuerunt me. I took care to breed,
and bring up my children, and they took pleasure to despise and dishonor me.
He was also inebriated by the love which he bare to his people; which, like a
vine he planted with miracles; and pruned with Doctrine, and watered with
blood. And that vine inebriated him also, with another kind of wine, the wine
of torments, and reproach, wherewith he was stuffed, and cloyd. By which kind of
liquor, although he were not (because he would not be) disgusted, yet we have
heard him by his Prophet thus complain of this vine, after a most dear, and
killing manner; Isa. 5.
Expectauit vt faceret vuas, fecit autem labruscas. I expected that my vine,
should have yielded me wine, for the comfort of my heart; but it yielded me
nothing but veriuyce, which has set my teeth on edge. We have here a better,
then that Number. 21.
Brazen serpent, the sight of whom, will cure the bytings of all those
serpents, which are our sins. We have here the true David, who killed that
Giant 1. Reg. 17.
Golyas (being a figure of the Prince of darkness) with the five stones of his
five sacred wounds; and he cut of the Giants head, with the Giants sword;
conquering the Devil by death, which was his weapon drawn by sin. The same
might be showed in all the other figures, which were delivered of our Lord in
the old Testament, and which were perfected, and fulfilled upon the Cross. So
that our Lord might justly say, Consummatum est: The work of my Passion, the
work of man's redemption, both in regard of the thing it self, and of the
manner how it has been wrought, and borne, is perfect, consummate, and
complete.

Of our Lords last prayer, to his eternal Father: of his excessive grief and
love expressed in the separation of his soul from his body; and of the grace
and beauty of the Crucifix.

CHAP. 76.
THERE did now remain no more, but that our Lord JESUS having taken care of
the whole world, and having particulerly powered forth those several
benedictions upon it, from that treasure-house of the Cross, should also
commend himself into the hands of the eternal Father. A te principium, tibi
desinit, might the soul of Christ our Lord, say to God. He began his Passion
with the invocation of his Father, Luc. 22.
in the Garden; he continued it, by praying to him, when the Cross was erected
with himself upon it, and now he concluded it, by recommending himself into
his hands, and still under the sweet and gracious title of his Father.
Instructing us thereby in all our actions, and especially in such as are of
moment, and most of all, when we are either endeavoring, or enduring any
thing, which does immediately concern the glory of God, and the true good of
men (as this mystery of our redemption highly did) to prepare our selves by
Prayer, before we begin to eleuate our minds often to God, whilst we are in
working; and to press with instance, Ibid.
when we are concluding. Father (says he) into thy hands I commend my spirit.
1. Cor. 6.
And if we will procure to be one spirit with him (as S. Paul exhorts us all to
be) already How we assure our selves to be commended by Christ our Lord. Hebr.
5.
we may perceive, that Christ our Lord did no less pray for us, then for
himself. He prayed, as the same Apostle said else where, Cum clamore valido,
and lacrymis: with a loud cry and with tears; and therefore it is no marvel,
if he were heard by the Eternal Father, both for himself and us. But yet so,
as that we must concur with him, and suffer, and pray, cry out, and weep for
our selves, and for our sins; since he has traced out the way of doing it,
for the sins of others. But the misery is, many times, that whilst we do so
often usurp this holy Prayer of our blessed Savior, whereby we protest our
selves to commend our spirit into the hands of God, we do but commend it only
in word; or at the most, we do but give it, with one hand, and take it back
again with the other; and indeed, we deliver it over to his enemies by sin,
or at least, to strangers, by fulfilling vain and less good desires. Whereas
if we would do it, as Christ our Lord was found to do; we should no sooner
bequeth our selves to the service of our Lord, but that instantly, we would
take a long and everlasting leave of a wretched world.

Our Lord, when he had given his spirit to God, expired. Luc. 23.
And we if we expire not, if we dye not to the sins and vanities of this
life, the spirit will be still where it was, and we do but say we give him
that, which indeed we reserve for others, or at least for our selves. But that
other kind of alienation, (b) There will be no true life and liberty, unless
there be a true death to imperfection, and passion.
is the only way to have a true possession of our souls. Seruire Deo regnare
est. This bondage, does only, bring perfect liberty; This kind of expiring by
death, does only inspire us with true life. Christ our Lord, for love of us,
did leave (as we have seen) his life of nature, that we might be animated by
the life of grace. And woe be to that wretched man, who shall rather choose
death then life, and such a life as has been bought to our hand, by parting
with such a jewel, as was the life of Christ our Lord.

He had unspeakable cause to love his life, but we have no cause at all to be
in love with ours. The reason why we may punish, and even hate, (as one may
say) our bodies with a just, and holy kind of hate, is because otherwise they
will be giving ill counsel to the soul. The In what case we desire a
separation between the body and the soul. 2. Pet. ^.
reason why, in some cases, we may wish (so far as may stand with the good
will of God) to have this Tabernacle of our flesh and blood dissolved by death;
may be, because we do highly apprehe^d a fear of sin, and so we may be glad
to dye the first death, when we hope our selves to be in good state; least
afterward we may dye the second. And besides, we have reason to long for the
sight of God, from which we are exiled, in this Pilgrimage. But Christ our
Lord, did ever see the face of God; and the Superior part of his soul, was as
glorious, and as closely united to the Diunity, in the bitterest torments of
the Cross, as now is it, at the right hand of his Father. And besides, there
could be no danger, that ever that impeccable soul, could sin. As therefore
there was no cause, why Christ our Lord should of himself desire, or even
admit of any separation of his soul from his body; so whatsoever motive it
were, that should induce him to it, that must necessarily be acknowledged for a
great one. For never did, nor never could any creature, in any reason, so
deerly, and delightfully love the conjunction between his soul and his body,
as Christ our Lord loved his. Nor consequently, could any, or all the
creatures, so much apprehend and abhor any separation of the body, from the
soul, as Christ our Lord would have apprehended, and abhorred that of his; if
some mighty reason, had not moved him to it. Because The reason why Christ our
Lord must needs love the conjunction of his body and soul after a most eminent
manner.
no creature, nor all the creatures put together, had ever found any body, so
sweetly, so continually, and so perfectly obedient to all the dictamens of a
holy soul, as our Lord JESUS, had sound his body; and this is the only, or at
least the principal reason, why any man should love his body.

So that, for Christ our Lord, to endure that the conjunction of such a body
and soul, should be broken for how short a time soever) was the Cross beyond
all the corporal Crosses which he endured in his Passion, concerning himself.
Yet of this he admitted, as we see. And since there was no power which could
oblige him to it, in the way of force; it does clearly appear, that he
performed it, upon a commandment of love. For love is the King of all
affections, and disposes of them all, at pleasure. And amongst several loves,
the Superior love is still the King, to whom all inferior loves give place.
If then Christ our Lord, did so deerly, and so justly love his own precious
life, incomparably more then any of us, can, by any possibility, love ours; and
if yet that love, were content to yield to his love of us; and that indeed he
dyed of pure and perfect love (which is yet declared further to us, by that
sweet declyning of his head when he gave up the ghost) let us endeavor to
conceive, what an infinite kind of love, this was.

And let us beg of him, by his own precious wounds, that he will make us, in
all things as like himself, as he desires. And that as a means thereunto, he
will print himself thus crucified upon our hearts; and that the eye of our
mind, may be ever looking, at ease, upon this sweet figure; the The grace and
beauty of the Crucifix.
sweetest that has been seen, or can be conceived; the fittest to move all
the affections of a Christian heart; whether they be of compassion, or
admiration. And verily I think, that it is not only faith, which brings us to
be of this belief; but that (even abstracting from the quality of the divine
person) of Christ our Lord and the cause for which he suffered, (which yet
indeed, are the things that subdue us most) the very figure it self of an
excellent man, so exposed to public view upon a Cross, is the loueliest, and
the noblest Image and piece of Architecture that can be devised. The head being
inclined downward toward a kiss of peace, and the arms extended abroad,
which show that it is wholly against their will, that they embrace us not,
because they are nailed. And the whole frame of the body, carrying and
conuaying it self down by degrees into a point, after such a lovely and
graceful manner; as that not only the eye of Christianity, but even of
curiosity it self, can desire no more. But The strait obligation of
Christians to our Lord Jesus Christ.
as for us, to whom it belongs, in a far superior kind to this, it will
become us to adore him, who suffered so for us, withal the powers of our
soul; and to wish, that, in some proportion, he would make us able to pay our
debts, by even dying for the love of him, as he vouchsaft to do for love of
us. In the mean time we may well be humble, and wonder how we are able to
believe such things as these, and yet to live.

Of the great Love of God, expressed in those prodigious things which appeared
upon the death of our Blessed Lord. Of the hardness of man's heart, which keeps,
no correspondence with so great love. Of the blood, and water, which flowed out
of the side of Christ our Lord: and how he did in all respects, power himself
out, like water, for our good.

CHAP. 77.
IT pleased the greatness, and goodness of Almighty God, that immediately before
the death of Christ our Lord, Matt. 27.
the veil of the Temple should rend it self; that the earth should quake;
that the stones should cleave, that the Sepulchers should open, and many of the
dead should rise, and show themselves in Jerusalem; and The use of the
prodigi^^ which appeared upon the death of our Lord Jesus.
so these things might serve, for a figure of the great conuersions, from the
obstinacy and death of sin, which were to follow upon the death of our B.
Lord. As also to the end, that those inanimate creatures might reproach the
ingratitude of them who had life and reason; and that the people of the other
world, might condemn the vast impiety of them of this, who had murdered thus,
the Lord of life.

Now the same action lies, against all sinners of these days, as well as
against them of those. For whosoever do commit any mortal sin, do (by the
testimony of S. Paul) their best toward the recrucifying of our Lord Jesus;
Hebr. 6.
and they prefer Barabbas before him, as has been said. And howsoever the
finne of those persecutours, seem to have been greater then ours can be, in
regard that they, concurred not only maliciously, but immediately, to his
destruction; yet, for as much as they did not, though they ought to have known
expressly, that he was the Son of God which we acknowledge, and believe him to
be (and because the holy Ghost was not then descended as now he is, into our
souls, or desires to be, if we be ready to receive him,) that sin, which
would be less in it self, is greater in us. And we are not worthy to live, if
we fly not, from all that which gives disgust, and dishonor to such a Lord; and
if we suffer not with him, who suffered so cruel things for us. We shall else
be liable to that sad complaint of S. Bernard. For (speaking against the
hardness of man's heart, which refuses to relent toward the true love of God,
whereas yet those very stones, and earth relented) he says most sweetly thus:
Bernard. sermon. de Pass. Dom.
Solus homo non compatitur, pro quo solo Christus moritur: Christ our Lord dyed
for man alone, and yet man alone takes no compassion of Christ our Lord; whereas
yet other creatures, for whom he dyed not, had compassion; that is, in their
kind, they suffered with him.

The The deadly malice of the Jews to Christ our Lord, which ouerliued his
death.
malice of those Jews was such, as to think all that nothing, which we have
here described to have been inflicted upon the person of Christ our Lord, when
he was alive. And therefore they thought that he could not be dead so soon.
Joan. 19.
Bloody wretches they were; For if malice had not put them out of their wits,
they would rather have wondered, how he could have lived so long; considering
how barbarously he had been treated. But though he were dead, their contempt
and hate was still alive; and a Captain looking on, Ibid.
had so little pity, as to pierce his sacred side with a Lance, and to
execute cruelty upon his Corpse; which no Civil person would have done upon
the carcass of a beast. Our Lord, before he dyed, forsaw what they meant to
do, and resolved to suffer it; and so to gain the glory of ouercomming by
suffering, and by being overcome. And he was pleased, Romans 5.
that where their sin and malice did abound, there should his grace, and love
superabound.

For behold, he had reserved certain blood and water next his heart; and the
Eagle S. John, who had eyes wherewith to behold the Sun, did see it issue out
of his side. He delivered himself in these words; Joan. 19.
Et continuo exiuit sanguis, and aqua: That instantly blood and water did issue
forth. As if he should have said, that they had lain there to watch their time;
to the end, that as soon as ever the ouerture should once be made, by that
point of the Lance; they would instantly not fail, to spring out, and spend
themselves for the good of man. For through the opening of that wound Benjamin
was borne, Genesis 35.
though Rachel his mother dyed in travail. And the Church of Christ our Lord,
does proceed from thence; and like another Eve, it was framed out of the side
of our B. Savior, (who was the second Adam) when he was dead, as the former
Eve, was framed out of the side of the first Adam, Genesis 2.
when he was sleeping. And therefore no marvel if the Church of Christ our
Lord, and all her lawful and faithful children, do carry a most profound
internal, tender love and reverence, to the Cross of Christ our Lord; and
especially to this sacred wound of his side; as to the country from whence she
came, and whether she procures to go. And in conformity of this love, the
same Church is careful, to be still refreshing our memory of this Cross making
the The frequent use of the holy sign of the Cross.
sign thereof in all her Sacraments, Ceremonies, and Benedictions; and teaching
her true Catholics, not to be ashamed thereof, but to bless our selves often
according to the custom of all ancient Saints, with that holy sign, upon our
foreheads, upon our mouths, and upon our hearts; that so the whole man, may be
ever walking in remembrance of this mystery; and that so we may be the better
disposed to bear with patience and love, any contempt, or pain (that is to
say, any spiritual Cross) which the holy, wise hand of God, shall think fit
to send us, and to do it for his sake, who dyed upon that material Cross.

And now we have seen by all this holy History of our Lord JESUS, that whether
he be alive or dead, he is all ours; and in despite of sin he will make us
also wholly his; if we will, but now and then consider how he sold and abandoned
himself for our benefit. Psalm. ^^.
It was said by his servant in his person, Sicut aqua effusus sum: I am powered
out, and spilt like water, which every base creature treads upon. Now water
besides, is a most obedient kind of thing. It easily takes what impression you
will; it applies it self to whatsoever place you will put it to. Look back
therefore, and see, if our Lord have not been powered out like water. What place
or posture, or what kind of punishment, did he refuse, which they would put him
in. Or what thing was that, which they would not make him subject to, which
either the head could inue^t, or the heart inflict, or the hand could act. He
seemed not in that part, to have been so much a man, as a very thing, a passive
substance, a liuelesse instrument, a pile of grass, in the presence of a great
wind, upon which they had all power to work their will; for he had given his,
away. He turned head at nothing, but accepted of all the scorn and pain,
which they could load him with.

In the How our Lord was subject to all kinds of oppression.
Garden we have seen how for want of others, he was his own executioner, and
took such sad thoughts into his heart, as himself was not ashamed to express.
In his apprehe^sion or taking, he was subject to the fury of a popular tumult,
though it were co^tenanced afterward, by the lying face, and tongue of Justice,
in the house of Annas, and Cayphas, to make that seem laudable, which indeed
was damnable. He was subject in that house, to the hypocrisy and envy of the
Priests of his own Law, together with the indignity, which the Sycophant did
him, by that blow, upon his divine face. In the imprisonment of that night, he
was wholly subject to the courtesy of those keepers of his, who had only a care
not to kill him, before day, that then they might after a manifold kind of
manner. In the examinations of Pilate, he would submit himself to the
Tribunal of a Pagan; and in that of Herod, to the scorn of the secular power,
of his own Religion. And both there and afterward, in Pylates Court, to all
the torments and shame, which could be devised by those disolute soldiers. In
his way to Mount Caluary, he would be silent to that world of clamor, and when
he was arrived to the top of the hill, those bloody executioners were not so
insolent and cruel in comma^ding, as he was mild, and ready to obey.

If How entirely our blessed Lord would needs submit himself to al kind of
insole^cies.
they had a mind to bind him, he meekely offered them his arms, for that
purpose. If they had a mind to box and beat him, and to pluck him, by the
venerable hair or beard; if to spit upon his divine face, he never so much as
turned it, either from their rage or scorn; but they strocke and spit, upon
him at their pleasure. If they had a mind to strip him stark naked, they did
it, and he replied not against it; though I nothing doubt, but that it was the
greatest torment which he endured; and they stripped him, not only once, but
four several times, and the last time of the four, did continue till that
happy syndon, his winding sheet, received, and shut him up, from their eyes.
If they had a mind to scourge him, he let them do it in most bloody manner,
which transformed that unspeakable beauty, into a kind of leprousy, at an
instant. If they would resolve that his imperial head should be also wounded;
and that after a manner, both of torment, and reproach beyond example; he did
not so much as ask, by what commission they did it; but he submitted that
divine head, to a crown of long and piercing thorns. If, not content with
that, they were yet desirous to renew his pains, and to give him, at once,
many wounds in that most sensible part of his body, and that as often as they
should list, he lent them a Reed wherewith they might do it, by striking him
upon the head, at theirfancy. If yet they should resolve to pierce his body
through and through, in the most lively parts thereof, with cruel nails, he
extended his hands and feet, to admit what soever they could devise to do. If
they had an humor to scoff and to blaspheme him, he had ears wherewith to
hear them; and yet he had a heart wherewith to pray for them, whilst they were
cursing him. So truly, and so entirely did he power himself out, as any water
might be spilt, which costeth nothing. He powered forth his sighs, and prayers
in the presence of God; and his tears, in the view both of God, and man. He
powered forth his blood, both, through the anguish of his mind, and through the
torments of his body. He powered forth his honor, in being so profanely
blasphemed, and so opprobriously spit upon, and in being so shamefully, and so
often buffeted, and stripped of all his clothes in the sight of all those worlds
of people; and lastly he powered forth his precious life, which he resigned,
into the hands of his eternal Father.

A Conclusion of this discourse of the Passion of Christ our Lord; and the use
which we are bound to make thereof: For the greater that the love and mercy is
which he expressed therein, the more excessive will his rigor be, for our
contempt thereof.

CHAP. 78.
BUT howsoever this water of the fountain of life, were spilt, with strange
liberality for our good; yet there fell not one drop, for which we shall not be
called to a most strict account, if we be so wretched, as not to save it from
being lost. For we The mystery of the Passion and death of Christ our Lord,
does look very many ways at once.
are to understand, that it was not any one only part, which was represented
by Christ our Lord upon the Cross; but they were very many; and it co^cernes
us much, to mark the^ all. Not only does the infinite mercy of God shine
brightly in this mystery; wherein we see that his own increated Son was
content to die for the salvation of man; but his infinite Justice also, does no
less appear; since it would not be satisfied with less then the death of
such a Son.

Not only may we here discern, the pity, which he bears toward sinners;
but he gives us also as clear a prospect, upon his unspeakable detestation
of sin; since for the abolishing thereof, he was then to employ no less then
the very death of God. And since Christ our Lord, being the increated wisdom
of the Eternal Father, would needs undergo all those torments, for the
remission and extirpation of sin; it is a clear demonstration, that he felt
the weight of our sins, more heavily, then he did his bitter and opprobrious
death; since no wise man would accept to suffer a greater pain, for the
excusing of another, which were less. So that, as by the humility and charity
of God, which is so lively expressed in the crucifixion of our Lord JESUS, we are
obliged to love him, and to imitate his Humility and his Charity; so by the
consideration of that Majesty of God which we may discern, and of the high
purity of his nature, and his great hate of sin, we are taught to reuere him,
and to tremble, 2. Cor. 5.
and to carry firm resolutions to serve him with all fidelity, and care; and
rather to die a thousand times, then once to presume to offend him in the least
degree.

S. Paul declares to us, that Deus erat in Christo, mundum reconcilians sibi;
The How Christ our Lord is the Mediator between God and man.
ommpotent God did descend to be united to the humanity of Christ our Lord,
that so he might reconcile the whole world to himself; and yet nevertheless
they are few, who will be reconciled to salvation by our blessed Saviors
death; in comparison of the multitudes which are to perish. For so our Lord
assured us saying. Matt. 7.
The way to heaven is a hard and narrow way, and few will dispose themseues to
walk in it; but the way to perdition, is a wide and easy way, and it will be
walked in by many.

Now this straight way, was the life and Doctrine of Christ our Lord, according
to what himself had said, Joan. 14.
Egosum via, veritas, and vita: I am the way, the truth, and the life. So that,
it is not the only death of Christ our Lord which saues the world; but that
death, must be applied to us by such means as the wisdom of God has
ordained. This means, consists in our meeting with God, in the person of
JESUS Christ our only Lord. For as God descended down by him, so by him, we
must ascend up toward God. For this cause, he is said to be medius, and
mediator, the middle person, and mediator between God and man; and indeed, the
only true medius terminus, whereby we may ever grow to a good conclusion.

The desire of Christ our Lord, is to raise us thither, according to his own
divine promise. But a man is not drawn to spiritual things by force, or by
the paces of his feet, or by the knowledge of his head, but by the prayers,
and pious affections of his heart, and the reformation of his life, by a
faithful cooperation, with the grace of God.

So as, if we mean to reap the benefit of this Passion, we must first Belief
of the mystery of the passion of Christ our Lord.
believe, with a supernatural and undoubted faith, that it was performed by
God and man, for the redemption of the whole world. We must then reflect
Consideration.
upon it, with most cordial and profound love; detesting Detestation of sin.
our sins which were the causes of his suflerance; and resolving (as I was
saying) to dye a thousand deaths rather then to offend him, who was so much
offended by them. We must Reflection upon the virtues of Christour Lord.
consider the admirable vertties which he exercised with divine perfection,
upon the Cross, and in the whole course of his holy life and death; his
humility, his patience, his meekenes, his silence, his purity, his conformity,
and his Charity. And we are carefully to consider, that it was in his power, to
have suffered as much as he suffered (if he had been so disposed,) without
letting us known, the manner of it. But he was pleased to do it, in the eye
of the world, to the end that the world might see the pattern of all that
virtue, which it was to imitate. And that, as by the substance of his death, he
would redeem us, so by the circ^stances and manner of it, he would instruct
and oblige us to his love.

For this it was, Matthew. 2.
that when the Angel revealed to S. Joseph, that the Son whom the sacred
virgin should bring forth was to be called JESUS, he assigns, a reason of
giving him that name, the Office which he was to have, in saving his people
from their sins. And as there are belonging to sin, a guilt, or fault, and
a pain or punishment; so was this JESUS, to deliver his people from them both,
and not to be a Savior by halfes, yea, and by the lesser half, in delivering
them only from the punishment of hell, as Libertines make themselves believe,
but especially to free them, by his grace, and the holy example of his life and
death, from committing the very sins themselves, as was (...) the (...) of
(...)
showed before.

For the application also of this death and passion, to the salvation of our
souls, we must be led by this example, to suffer such Crosses with patience,
as our Lord, by the hand of his Eternal, and Fatherly providence, shall have
appointed us to embrace, as the way and means of our salvation. Our Lord, in
his sufferance upon the Cross, did sanctify and facilitate all the Crosses
which should ever come to mankind. And as it is most true, that to all such, as
apply this Passion to their souls by faith and love, the eternity of their
torment in hell, is converted by virtue of this sufferance into the temporal
pains of voluntary penance, or else of sickness, sorrow, poverty, shame, and
the like imposed by our Lord God; or else into the pains of Purgatory
(supposing that they have not satisfied in this life:) and though the temporal
Crosses which they endure, are withal, made light thereby; so we be to the
world for giving life to men, who are so unworthily wicked, as to An unworthy
and most wicked er^our.
think that Christ our Lord has suffered all, and that men have, in effect, no
more to do, but to believe that he did suffer it.

How can such people think that God is wise, if he should have committed such
a folly? How can they think that he is Just, if he would have fallen into such
a partiality? How can they think that he is holy, if he should have exercised
such impiety? Nay, how can they think that he is merciful, if he should have
acted such a part of cruelty, as it would have been, for him, to take his own
very Essence and substance, his own increated understanding, the second person
of the most glorious and ever blessed Trinity; and to knit that person, by
hypostaticall and indissoluble Union, to the body and soul of the son of the
All-immaculate Virgin Mother, by the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost; and to
make him lead a life, which, as, on the one side, it was of unspeakable
sanctity (for which he could not choose but love him, more then innumerable
millio^s of worlds;) so on the other, it was laden with misery of many kinds,
and it came, at last, to end in such a death, and Passion, as we have here
described; and all this for the saving of most wicked souls from hell; who, by
the account of these men, should still remain in the servitude of sin, and
Satan, whom yet this Lord came to overcome; and that he should carry and
conduct them to heaven, to be coheires with him in that kingdom;
notwithstanding that in this world, they had not endeavored to imitate his holy
and painful life, nor had been truly careful to fulfill his law; nor had
conceived any cordial, and fruitful grief, for having transgressed it; and
much less had voluntarily embraced, for his love, some part of those
mortifications, and pains, and crosses, wherewith his precious life and death
did so abound.

Take heed of such dangerous and impious opinions as these, and withal, do
not think your self free from them, by only saying that you are so; unless
you believe withal, in the very bottom of your heart, that voluntary
mortification, and penance, and patience, and humility, and charity, are
virtues wholly necessary for a Christian man. And that the Passion of Christ our
Lord, is not to be applied, but by this means. No Who are true lovers of the
Cross of Christ our Lord.
creature shall be saved by the Cross of Christ our Lord, but he who shall
love this Cross; and no man does truly love it, who will not rather die then
crucify our Lord again upon it, by committing a mortal sin; and no man does
greatly love it, who for the love of our Lord, does not also abhor all
venial sin; and who does not voluntarily deprive himself of many
commodities, and delights, which even lawfully he might have used; and who also
will not embrace, not only all such pain and shame, as cannot be avoided
without sin; but many other contradictions and austerities, to which yet he
is not bound, but only by the law of love. This love does work like fire, in
the hearts of such as are devoted to the Crucifixe; and our Saints lives are
full of great proofs thereof; and how much soever they pay, they think it very
little, in comparison of the very much they owe.

The blessed Apostle S. Paul has expressed this truth very plainly and
largely, in these few words, 2. Cor. 5.
Charitas Christi vrget nos; 2. Cor. 5.
The Charity of Christ does urge us on. As if there, he had said, (as he did
abundantly else where, to this effect) The love of Christ our Lord, and the
memory of the bitter things which he endured, for his wicked creatures, does
spur us on to suffer much for him. I do not, beat the air, but I beat my
body, 1. Cor. ^.
least preaching salvation to others, my self may become a reprobate. 2. Tim.
2.
It is true that we shall reign together with Christ; but it must first be
true, that we must suffer also with him. It is true, that I am an Apostle, and
more then an Apostle, and that the son of God himself, came visibly to call
me to his service; Act. 9.
and declared me to be a vessel of election, and that I should carry his name
before the Kings and Nations of the world; and that I was rapt up into the
third heaven, where I was made partaker of such high mysteries, 2. Cor. 12.
at it is nether lawful, nor possible for me to utter; But yet it is true
withal, that all they who will pretend to be true Christians, must crucify
their flesh with the concupiscences thereof; Galat. 5.
and they must put on Christ our Lord, as they would put on a garment; Romans 13.
and frame the same Judgment of things which he framed, and live by the same
spirit which lived in him. That is to say, both the inward, 1. Cor. 12.
and the outward man, must be so composed, as that wheresoever he goes, he may
carry with him the very odor of the piety if Christ our Lord. 2. Cor. 2.
And for my part (says he) I am ever carrying the mortification of Christ
lesus in my very body, 2. Cor. 4.
that so in this very body of mine, his life may be made manifest to men.

To this effect, spoke the B. Apostle in several parts of his Epistles; and
he indeed, was a true lover of the Cross of Christ our Lord; Romans 5.
and this love made him so glory in tribulations, and mortifications, and
afflictions, for the love of the same Cross, as that he thus, cried out:
Galat. 6.
Away with glorying in any other thing. The same does also belong to us
according to our proportion: and if we fail heerof, we must condemn our
selves for ungrateful creatures, and procure to mend. As knowing that
otherwise, we do our best to make our Lord loose the labor, which he took
for us. For (as the incomparable S. Austen says) to this effect Christ our
Lord, De vera relig. cap. 16. apud Ariam.
to give us the example of all virtue, took upon him all those painful, and
contumelious things, whereby virtue might be exercised and obtained. He was
pleased to be poor, that men might so be drawn to despise those riches, which
they loved, to their so great prejudice; for as much as they are instruments
whereby they purchase and procure delights, which destroy the soul. He refused
to be a tempor all King, that so men might despise places of honor, and
command, which they had, with so great anxiety, desired. He admitted of all
kinds of affronts, and shame, to the end that men, who were wont to fly from
them, through pride, might undergo them with humility. He suffered wrongs, and
so great wrongs, as it was, for him, who was most innocent, to be tormented,
and condemned, to the death of the Cross, for a malefactor, to the end that
men, might be able to suffer wro^gs with patience. He accepted of grievous
things, being scourged, and crowned with thorns, and he was afflicted many
other ways, to the end that men, who abhorred torments, might embrace them,
when they should be necessary toward virtue. He accepted, and loved the
Cross, which was the most painful and co^tumelious death of all others; to
the end that men might admit of any such kind of death, as God should send. All
those things, by the desire whereof, we took occasion to sin, namely riches,
pleasures, and temporal honors, he brought down, into a base account, by his
abstayning from them, and so he taught us to despise them. And all those other
things, by the flying whereof we fail of virtue, and fall to sin, namely
affliction, contempt, and pain, by his suffering them willingly, and by
embracing them with so ardent love, he made to be amiable, and easy to be
endured. And thus, was the whole life, which Christ our Lord did lead in this
world; an example, and a living Doctrine, of the actions which we were to
perform; and of the virtues which we were to practice. This is said by S.
Augustine.

Therefore (to conclude this discourse, of the Passion of our B. Lord) we have
The sum of this whole discourse of the Passion of our B. Lord.
seen how painful it was; with how great love he endured it; and with how
heroical virtue it was performed. We have seen the end and aim he had
therein; which was, not only the redeeming of us from hell, but the recovery of
us from sin; the inducing us to fly from all inordinate desire of honor,
estate, and vain delights; and to embrace (after his example, and for his
love) the exercise of all virtue, and the mortification both of the inward, and
outward man. Let us take heed that we contemn not the treasures of his
mercies, least we be consumed, by the fiery torrent of his Justice. Let us not
pretend to make him loose his labor, for avoiding of a little labor of our
own. He is the wisdom it self of God, and can tell how to value to a hair,
such a huge indignity as that would be. And of this truth we must be well
assured; for it is not only revealed to us by way of Faith; but it is written
in our hearts, by the law it self of nature, and reason: That The more good God
is to men, the more bitterly will they be punished for the contempt of such
goodness
if a mercy be offered and abused, a vengeance will belong to that offense. If
the mercy be great, the vengeance will not fail to be great; and if the mercy
be infinite, the vengeance also will be infinite.

And though Christ our Lord, be a Lion; and the roaring of a Lion is a
frighfull thing; yet he is also a Lamb; and we have seen how he has been
shorn, and slain; and this La^be is not willingly alienated from his love to
us. But if he be, then laesa patientia vertitur in furorem: The more inuincibly
patient he was, the more implacably furious he will be. And, for my part, I do
not hear, in the whole book of God, any word which strickes with greater
terror, then when it speaks, of the wrath of the Lamb. Apoc. 6.


The holy Gospel describing Christ our Lord upon the Cross, says, that they
blasphemed him as they were passing by. Many blaspheme him by their deeds, who
do not so by their words; Matt. 27.
but having an Aue Rex in their mouths, they strike him with the Reed in their
hands. If we desire instead of blaspheming to do him service, and so to be
happy both in heaven and even here; our way will be, not to pass so lightly
by his Cross; but there to behold, and contemplate him at good leisure. For
how miserably shall we be out of countenance at the hour of our death, if our
conscience may justly then accuse us; that we could not so much as find in our
hearts now and then, to think of those bitter things which the Son of God,
and God, did find in his heart to endure, and that with infinite love, for our
salvation.

Our Lord Our great ingratitude to God will make us see how very wicked we are
otherwise.
JESUS, give us grace, to know, how very wicked things we are. And this
knowledge being once well grounded in us, and our Lord being desired, that for
the love of his bitter Passion, he will make us see the love he bare us in it;
we shall grow to take delight in looking often upon that book with the eyes of
our soul; and so they will be happily shut up from the sight and love of other
objects. We shall then quickly find, that the Cross is no such cruel thing,
as we have conceived; but that it is short and light, and the reward thereof
remains for ever. Besides that the memory of her friends, is honorable
afterward, even with the enemies thereof. Whereas those persecuting Jews, with
Cayphas and Pilate, and Herod, and all the libertines of the world, who indeed
are the enemies of Christ our Lord, Philip. 3.
and of his Cross as S. Paul affirms, howsoever they triumphed for a time,
were soon, either beat down by disgrace like so many bladders, or blsters;
or else blown up, by a little time out of the estimation of God and man, like
so many squibbs. And now they have found their place in hell where they shall
remain as long as God is God; and so will their successors in sin, succeed
them also in their punishment, from which our Lord deliver both them and us.

Of the unspeakable Love of our Lord Jesus, in bequeathing to us upon the
Cross, his All-immaculate Virgin Mother, to be the Mother of us all.

CHAP. 79.
OUR Lord JESUS, having made his last Will and Testament, in that night
precedent to his death, at which time he gave us his own precious body and
blood, not only for the food of our souls, in the blessed Sacrament, but for a
Sacrifice to God in the way of homage, as to a Sovereign Creator, by the
institution of the Mass; and being, that night, and the next day arrived so
far, in the course of his bloody, and bitter Passion; as after innumerable
other affronts and torments, to see himself both naked, and nailed, through
hands and feet upon a Cross; the The love of our Lord Jesus did after asort
increase with the torment which he ^^dured ^^^our (...).
bowels of his mercy were so far from being changed, or cooled toward us,
that the nearer they were to break for grief, the faster he made them beat
for love.

And therefore, as some tender-harted husband would have done, in favor of his
most faithful, and beloved wife, who, having settled his affairs, in time of
health, by way of Testament (whereby he had honorably provided for her estate
and comfort) would yet, when he drew near to death, (in further proof of his
affection) increase her ioynture, by some Lordships; and pluck of his ringe of
greatest price, from his own fingar, that he might put it upon hers: just so
was our Lord JESUS pleased to proceed with the holy Church his Spouse. To
whom, notwithstanding the legacy of his own precious body, which he had given
us already, by Testament; he did also now, when he drew close upon the confines
of death, with incomparable Charity, Our Lord Jesus bequeathed his B. mother to
be also ours, as it were, by way of Codicill annexed to his last will. Luc. 23.
bequeath his sacred Mother to us, as it were by way of Codicille, which he
annexed to that former Will of his.

It has been seen already, how our Lord, upon the deathbed of the Cross,
did utter seven Words, or rather declare himself by seven several speeches,
both to God and the world. In the former three, he aimed at our only good, and
in the latter, to his own; which yet withal, was also ours. In the first of
those three, which was the prayer to his Father, Pater, dimitte illis, non enim
sciunt quid faciunt: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do,
those persecut ours of Christ our Lord were principally intended, by that
divine goodness; but yet withal, those men were a kind of figure, and
represented, after a sort, all the sinners of the whole world in their persons;
and so he prayed for the forgiveness of them all. Luc. Ibid.
In the second which was his speech to the good Thief, Amen dico libi, hodie
mecum eris in Paradiso: I tell thee, that for certain, thou shall be with me
in Paradise this very day, the same good thief was assured of his salvation,
after a most eminent manner; but yet withal, he was a Type, and his person did
express the character of all sinners truly penitent; whom our Lord does
instantly restore to his grace and favor, Joan. 19.
upon their humble, and constant desire thereof.

In the third, which was the speech to his B. Virgin Mother, and his most
beloved disciple, Mulier ecce filius tuus, and then, Ecce matter tua; woman
behold thy son, and then to him, behold thy mother, as this sacred Virgin,
and this Disciple were, in most particular manner, designed to be the Mother,
and Son of one mother; so yet S. John, therein did carry the person of all
mankind, by being made the Son of that most excellent Mother. Such was the
style which our Lord held in his death, and such it had ever been, throughout
the whole course of his life; to speak How the speeches of Christ our Lord,
were many of the^ meant chiefly to such as were then present to him; and yet
expressly also, to such as were to succeed, in the world afterward.
chiefly to the^ who were present, and yet expressly also, to those others, who
were abse^t and the^ unborn. And this truth does abundantly appear by the
Evangelical history: and to doubt heerof, were to say the sun is dark.

Since God was content to be made man for the love of men, we are brought more
easily to believe, that man shall be made a kind of God, in heaven. And so when
we know and consider, that, through Christ our Lord, who is the natural Son
of God, we may all become the adopted Sons of God; yea and so we are, if we
dispose our selves to be like God our Father, and consequently to Christ JESUS
our elder brother, (for that the Father and Son, are so very like, that one
of the^ is well known by the other) it How we are made the brothers of our
Lord Jesus, both by the fathers and the Mothers side.
will seem less strange, and nothing disagreable to the infinite mercy of our
Redeemer, that as he had vouchsafed to make us his brethren by the Fathers
side, who is God; he would also be pleased to make us his brethren by the
mothers side, as he was man, adopting us, in the person of S. John to be all,
the Sons of the sacred Virgin. Nor did that deernes of his love, shine less,
in that he would communicate his mother to us, the^ in that he was pleased,
that al his other blessings, should be common between him and us. And as Joseph
the Patriarch loved his brother, Genesis 41.
by the mothers side with most tenderness; so it seems, as if our Lord would
even oblige himself to affect us, with a greater te^dernes of love, now that
he had received us, as it were into the same very bowels of purity, which had
borne himself.

As our Lord JESUS is our brother, for many reasons, and especially because we
are made his coheyres of eternal glory, in the kingdom of heaven: so in regard
that we are made so, by the benefit and purchase of his redemption, and
consequently that he begot us by so excellent a means to that rich
inheritance; he How Christ our Lord is not only our brother but our father also
Isa. 9. Ephesians. 2.
is also in holy Scripture called not only our brother, but our Father. And so
the holy Evangelical Prophet Esaias speaking of the glorious Title of Christ our
Lord, sets this down, among the rest, that he is Pater futuri saeculi, The
Father of the future age: that is, of Christians, whom by his faith and
Sacraments he would beget to God. This Title of Father cost him very dear; for
was there any Mother, who by the way of natural birth, did bring forth any
child with such excess of torment to her self, as this Father of ours, JESUS
Christ our Lord, did, with excess of anguish and affliction, beget every one
of them, who of the children of wrath, were to be made, by his means, the
Sons of God. And therefore, as in course of natural descent, Christ our Lord
was the Son of the sacred Virgin; so if we consider him, as the Father, and
regeneratour of us all to grace, then our Lord, and the blessed Virgin, may in
some sort, be accounted, rather as the spouses, then as the Son and Mother of
one another.

This way of considering Christ our Lord and our B. Lady, ought not seem
strange to us, since partly holy Scripture, and partly the co^se^t of the holy
Fathers of the primitive Church do so expressly set it forth to our sight. 1. ad
Cor. 15.
For from hence it is, that Christ our Lord is so often called the How our Lord
Jesus is called the second Adam, and our B Lady the second Eve.
second Adam, who was to repair the ruins, which the former had drawn down
about the head and ears of mankind. And hence also it is, that we see it
manifestly insinuated in holy Scripture, and clearly, and evidently expresled
by the holy Fathers, that as Christ our Lord came to supply the place of the
former adam; so our B. Lady, was to us a second, and a better Eve, then the
former, and that she wrought, both for her self and us, as a most elevated
instrument, and partly as a cause of our restitution to that inheritance, which
had been forfeited by the former. But yet with this great difference, that as
between the former Adam and Eve, the Original and prime poison of the first
sin, came chiefly, and primitiuely, from the serpent to Eve, and then in a
second kind of degree, from her to Adam, and from him to us: So between this
latter Adam, and Eve, which is Christ our Lord, and our B. Lady, the root and
ground of that grace, whereby the redemption of the world was wrought, came
originally and fundamentally from God to Christ our Lord, and after a secondary
and isntrumental manner, through her Son our Lord, to our B. Lady.

It is showed, how our Blessed Lady, and Eve do resemble one another, and how
they differ; and our Blessed Lady is proved to be the spiritual mother of all
mankind; and of the merciful providence of our Lord God therein.

CHAP. 80.
THE sin of eating the forbidden fruit was no sooner committed, but God did
curse and threaten the Serpent in this manner: Inimicitias ponam inter te and
mulierem, and semen tu^ and semen illius; ipsa conteret caput tuum, etc. I will
put emnities between thee and the woman and between thee with thy seed, and her
with her seed; and she shall bruize thy head etc. Now this woman and her seed,
is Christ our Lord, and our B. Lady, together withal the faithful who were
to follow. And the serpent and his head is the devil, and all his wicked
members, whether they be Paga^s, Jews, Turks, Heretics, or loose Catholics.
In Our B. Lady was Preordained (...) tri^ph over sin and hell.
this Spiritual war, so great honor is done to our Blessed Lady, by God
himself, that by him it is fore-tould, that she shall be victorious therein.
For howsoever the Sectaries of this age, out of a malignity which they carry
against this euerblessed Virgin will not have it to be read, ipsa co^teret,
she shall bruize the serpents head, but ipse co^teret, that is, Christ our
Lord shall do it; yea howsoever diverse of the ancient Fathers do, according
to the Hebrew letter, read it Ipse, (though not out of any such reason as is
suggested, by these adversaries of her honor) yet it is plain, that the
vulgar translation, which is of the greatest authority of any other in the
whole Catholic Church, and was made by S. Jerome, who besides his sanctity,
was the learnest man in those tongues who lived the^, or perhaps has lived
since, in the world, does read Ipsa, and not Ipse: Apud Canisium l. 5, c. 9.
Ambr. de suga saeculi l. 7. Aug. lib. 11. c. 36. Greg. lib. 1. mor. c. 38. Beda
in Genesim, Bern ser. 2. sup. mis. sus and.
and so also does S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, Venerable Bede, S.
Bernard, and many more. And indeed, whether the lection be Ipse, or Ipsa, the
sense will fall out to be in effect the same. Because if we read Ipsa, the B.
Virgin is to be understood to have this privilege from God, through Christ our
Lord; and though we should read Ipse, yet we know even thereby, that Christ our
Lord was not pleased to do it but by her; and he expressed, for her honor,
that it should be done by the seed of her, and that none but such as are her
seed, shall ever be able to overcome the Serpent.

Upon this reason it is, that the holy Fathers are so frequent, and express,
in styling our blessed Lady, Matter viuentium, The mother of such as live by
grace, as Eve was called Matter viuetium, the mother of such as lived by nature,
though afterward, she deserved both to be accounted and called Matter
morientium, the mother of such as die by sin. Hieron. de Scrip. Eccles. Epiph.
l. 1 to. 2. hist. 31.


S. Irenaens, (whom S. Epiphanius and S. Hierome calls the Successor of the
Apostles, the Disciple of S. Policarpe, and the Martyr of Christ, and who
flourished within an hundred and odd years of Christ our Lord himself) does
often, and at large, and expressly show, the comparison which in some respects
is to be made between our B. Lady, and our Grandmother Eve: Irenaeus l. 3.
contra haeres. c. 33.
but I will only cite one passage, or two out of him. As Eve proouing
disobedient, grew to be a cause of death, both to her self, and the whole race
of mankind: so Mary, having a man predestined for that purpose, (but yet she
being still a Virgin, and being also obediene) was made a cause of salvation,
both to her self, and all mankind. And shortly after, he affirms, That that
knot, which was tied by the disobedience of Eve, Lib. 5. aduersus haeres. c. 19.
was loosened by the faith of Mary. And in another place, he says expressly,
that the Virgin Mary by her obedience to God, was made the advocate of the
Virgin Eve.

Justinius the Martyr (who was yet more ancient then Irenaeus) writes thus of
Eve, and our blessed Lady. In dial. c^ Tryphone.
A man was borne of a Virgin, that so by the same way, whereby disobedience had
entered, by the same, might pardon be obtained. For Eve, being yet a Virgin, by
conceauing that word of the serpent, brought forth disobedience and death; but
the Virgin Mary, after she had conceived faith, with gladness (the Angel
Gabriell bringing her that joyful message,) made answer thus, Be it unto me
according to thy word.

Tertullian says, Cap. 7. carne Christi.
Eve believed the serpent; Mary believed Gabriell; that which the former sinned
in believing, the latter, by believing did blot out.

S. Austen says, that the disobedient Eve deserved punishment, but Mary by her
obedience, obtained the pardon of it. S. Epiphanius, who is his ancient,
says, Lib. 3. haeresi 78.
That Eve was made the cause of death to men; for death came by her into the
world; but Mary was the cause of life, by whom life was begotten to us, and
the Son of God came into the world by her. And where sin abounded, there
did grace over abo^d, and whence death proceeded, thence did life also proceed,
to the end that death might be exchanged into life. And again he says else
where: From Eve all the generation of mankind is descended in earth; but here,
this life is brought into the world by Mary, that she might bring forth him who
lives; and she is made the mother of the living.

S. Chrysostom says, Hom. interdict. arboris ad Adam apud Canis. l. 4. and de
Mar. Deip. l. 16. and apud Coc. cium lib. 3. Thesau. art. 50. super. fignum
magnum and de laud. vir. apud Can. ibid.
death came by Ada^, life came by Christ. The Serpent seduced Eve, Mary gave
consent to Gabriell. The seducing of Eve brought death; but the consent of
Mary, begot a Savior to the world.

S. Bernard says, as to Eve: Thou were too cruel, by whom that serpent did
infuse that deadly poison, even into thy very husband; but the Believing Mary,
did reach forth the Antidote, or remedy, both for men and women. The former
ministered error, this latter the propitiation of error, the former suggested
that offense, and the later brought forth the redemption of the same. Make have
therefore (says he in another place) O Eve, to Mary; Let this daughter answer
for her mother; let her remove the reproach of her mother, let her satisfy the
Father for the mother; for behold if man were cast down by a woman, he is not
to be raised up but by a women. With the same facility I might allege a great
number of other holy Fathers, to prove both the proportions, and disproportions
which run between our Grandmother Eve, and the most blessed Mother of God and
us, the All-immaculate Virgin. But this which I have already said, will suffice
to show, how the one was a type and figure of the other; and that the holy
Fathers of the Church declare, that howsoever they are both our Mothers, in
several respects, yet that the East and West, are not so far off from one
another, as this latter, holy, humble Eve, does in sanctity excel the former.

And now to the point of her being the Mother of us all, see further how De
sanct. Virgin. c. 6. Ambr. apud Bonau in spec. Virg. c. 8^ Cyrillus Alex. hom.
con. tra Nestorium.
S. Augustine says, she is the spiritual Mother of the members of the Church,
for as much as she cooperated, to the end, that the faithful might be borne in
the same Church.

S. Ambrose also says. If Christ be the brother of all believers, how can she
choose, but be the mother of Christ? And so does S. Bonauenture deliver the
blessed Virgin to be, not only the particular Mother of Christ our Lord; but
the universal mother of all the faithful.

And S. Cyrill gives a massy reason heerof, when speaking, as to the blessed
Virgin, he professes himself in these words: By thee all those creatures, who
are retained in the error of Idolatry, are converted to the knowledge of
truth. But the An excellent consideration of S. Bernard, upon the sweet
providence of our Lord God, concerning the B. Vir. cited by Pa. Arias. Bern.
ser. sup. missus est.
holy S. Bernard shall conclude this point when he says to this effect; Christ
our Savior did suffice for the reparation of mankind because all our
sufficiency does come to us by him, and all that also, whereof we have need for
our salvation. Yet was it most convenient for our good and comfort, that he
should be associated, in this reparation of ours, by such a companion as might
be a mother, and such a mother, as that she, being the mother of God, might be
also ours. This holy Saint in the same place does give many reasons heerof,
full of conueniency, and consolation, which here I shall not need to
represent. In his book de imitat. B. Virg.
But it appears clearly enough, that, as Father Arias notes, for the
multiplication of mankind in the course of nature, God framed our first Father
Adam. And notwithstanding that he might have given sufficiency of power to him
alone, for the multiplication of mankind (if he had been so pleased) yet he
would not do it, but he resolved to give him a companion, and helper which was
our Grandmother Eve, according to the sweet disposition of his divine
providence.

In the self same name, Arias l. de imitat. B. Virg.
when the world was lost by sin, our Lord God having resolved to beget and
multiply just men, who might be heirs to the kingdom of heaven, he gave his
only begotten Son to be Incarnate, who by his life and death might beget and
breed us to salvation. And although it be most true, that this Father of ours
is all sufficient by himself alone, to perform this work of our
Regeneration, because he is of infinite virtue; and who according to the rigor
of Justice, does merit grace, and glory for his children; and does obtain
precious favors, and satisfy for all kind of sin; yet nevertheless God was
pleased according to the design of his own excellent wisdom, to give to
Christ our Lord, the most sacred, and most holy of all mere creatures, his
All-immaculate Virgin Mother Mary, to be a companion to himself, in the
spiritual generation of the world, as the mother thereof; who might assist, and
serve him in so great a work. Not by way of praying for us, or of justifying
us, or of giving us grace, or glory, as of her own gift, (for all that, is
proper to the redeemer and Savior of the world) but to the end that she might
concur, to the reducing of sinners by the way of sweetness and love;
interceding and praying for them, and offering up, for their good, all those
excellent operations, and services, which she performed in this life, to her
blessed Son our Lord, and so obtaining celestial favors for them, and
facilitating their way to heaven, by discovering the infinite mercy and suauity
of Almighty God, to the eyes of their mind. And if A clear consequence. 1. Cor.
4.
S. Paul might say, in the word of truth, I have begotten you to the Gospel,
how much more might this blessed Lady say it, in a most eminent manner, who did
bear and bring forth our Lord JESUS, and did both thereby, and otherwise, so
admirably and immediately cooperate toward the salvation of the whole world.

Not only do many particular Fathers ascribe the title of Mother, to our
blessed Lady, but the holy Catholic Church, does jointly glory in calling her
by that sweet name; and esteems her self happy, that she may have recourse to
her, as such. Nor gives she only way to all her faithful children to
acknowledge this maternity of hers in private manner; but in that public
Office, In the Office of the Church.
wherein she celebrates the praise and memory of her Spouse, at all the hours,
both of every day and night, as one who well understands, by that spirit of
sanctity and truth in which she is guided, that no honor does more
delightfully redound to our Lord JESUS, then that which magnifyeth the happy
creature, who gave him a body of her own all-immaculate flesh and blood.

The external Excellencies, and attractiuenesse of our Blessed Lady. The
reasons of congruity which prove her innocence, and purity; and the
innumerable motives, which oblige the world to admire and love her.

CHAP. 81.
TO the end that we may be invited, and encouraged to gratitude toward
Almighty God, for giving his glorions mother to be also ours; and that we may,
both conceive of her dignity and comply with our own duty as is fit, I will
procure to show both what kind of excellent creature she is, in her self, and
of how admirable use and advantage to us. Touching the The glorious and holy
extraction of our B. Lady.
Nobility of her descent, it will suffice to here what S. Bernard says. There
is somewhat of the celestial, Ber. ser. super Signum magnum. Apoc. 12.
which shines in the progeny of Mary: That evidently she is descended of
Kings; that she is of the seed of Abraham; that she is sponge from the stock
of David. And if this be little, let it be further added, that by a special
privilege of sanctity, she was known to have been granted to the world, from
heaven; That long before she was pointed at from above, to our forefathers;
That she was prefigured by mystical miracles, and fore told by prophetical
Oracles. For as much as may further concern the sanctity of her extraction, we
must know that it came from the tribe of Leui, as well as from that of Judah. For
howsoever several tribes were not generally to match with one another, yet
that rule had no place in these two, but the Sacerdotall, and the Royal often
matched together.

her exterior beauty was such, as became the mother of that Son, Psalm. 44.
Ambr. de instit. vir. c. 7. and S. Thom in 3. distinct. 3. q. 1. art. 2.
quaestiuncula 1. ad 4.
of whom it was said, Speciosus forma prae filijs hominum: Beautiful beyond
the most beautiful of the Sons of men. And yet a beauty it was, of such an
admirable holy kind, as that according to the testimony of antiquity, it had
the property to quench all flames of lust in the behoulders. Blessed be our
Lord who has provided so sweet a remedy for our misery. For knowing (as Father
Arias notes, in his book of the Imitation of our B. Lady) that one of our
greatest enemies, was the inordinate love of women to men, and men to women; he
has, for the redress of this inconvenience, given a man to the world (who is
his own only begotten son) and whom women might both love, and even by that
very loving they might become pure and chaste. And so also has he bestowed a
most beautiful woman upon the world, which is this glorious Virgin Mother; by
the love of whom, men might deliver themselves from sensuality, and become the
Disciples of her high purity. For by loving this man, and this woman, men are
spiritually, as it were converted into them, and do give over, after a sort,
to be themselves. And from hence it has proceeded, that since God became man,
and was pleased to be borne of the blessed Virgin, the feilds of the earth have
produced innumerable roses of virginity, both in men and women. And the Church
has been filled with this rare treasure, wherewith the world in former times,
was not acquainted.

There Diverse reasons of congruity which convince the B. Virgin to have been
free, from all kind of spot. Damase. ser. 1. de Natiuitat. Virg.
could be no such defect of power, wisdom or goodness in our Lord God; but that
since he was pleased to take his whole humanity from one Creature, he would
also be careful of that excellent creature in strange proportion. Since the
divinity it self, would vouchsafe to be hypostatically, and indissolubily
united, to the flesh which he would take of her body, in her womb (that womb
of which is elegantly, and most truly said, that it was Officina miraculorum,
the very shop, and mint-house of miraculous things) how can it be, that he
should not preserve her, from all those sins and shames, which the rest of
mankind was subject to? He would not live so long, in that holy Tabernacle of
hers, where she was ever embracing him with her very bowels; and then have a
heart so hard, as to go away, as it were, without paying her any house-rent,
out of his riches. He came into the world to dissolve the works of the devil,
1. Joan. 3.
even in the greatest enemies and rebels to him that could be found; and
therefore he would be sure to prevent the soul of that body, which was but the
other half of his own, with such store of benedictio^s, as whereby the very
air, and sent of any sin whatsoever, might be far from breathing upon her.

Christ our Lord descended from heaven to advance the kingdom and glory of
God, and he could not then, give way, that the heart which had conceived him,
with such faith; and which had adored him with so much love, in her imaculate
womb; and which had so liberally fed him, at the table of her sacred breast;
and lodged him in the bed of her holy bosom; and covered him with the robes of
her precious arms; and which had so diligently attended him, in that
Pilgrimage of Egypt; Matt. 2.
and had served him so purely, both with body, and soul, in all the rest of
his life and death; that this heart, I say, should ever be in case to give
consent to sin, whereby she should, of the spouse of god, have become,
according to her then present state, a lymme of Satan, and be in fine, the
mother of Christ our Lord, and yet a Traitor to him, and both at once.

Nay she was not only void of sin, but abounded The sublime sanctity of our
B. Lady. Luc. 1. Cant. 7.
in sactity, whose sacred womb was foreseen, and foretold, to be Aceruus
tritici, vallatus lilijs. A rich heap of corn compassed in with a fair and
sweet enclosure of Lyllies. And as those Lyllies of her purest body, gave him a
body of such beauty; so did that bread of heaven, abundantly feed, and even
feast her soul, with his plenty. The Prophet Jeremy was sanctified in his
mothers womb, and she was therefore to be much more sanctified, who was to
apparaile Sanctity it self, with a precious body, made by the holy Ghost, of
her purest blood. And being sanctified then, far, and far beyond that holy
Prophet; that privilege must needs serve her afterward, to so good purpose, as
that having been holyer in her mothers womb then he, she grew afterward, when
she came into the world, or rather when she had brought the Savior thereof into
it, to be incomparably much, and much more holy.

S. John The great advantage which our B. Lady had above all pure creatures.
Luc. 1.
Baptist also was sanctified in his mothers womb at the presence, and upon the
very hearing of our B. Ladies voice (as S. Elizabeth does expressly say,) and he
was freed from his Original sin, and endued with the use of reason; and he
exulted, and did exercise the operations of his soul (which was the ground and
foundation of all the admirable sanctity which flourished in that Precursour
afterward) according to the high office to which he was called. So as this
mother of God himself, who was the means of those benedictions to S.
Elizabeth's house, by her presence, must ever infallibly, have been as far
beyond S. John Baptist in sanctity, Psalm. 1.
as she was in dignity. For of him it is said that he was not worthy to vnty
the latchet of our B. Saviors shoo (though yet he were the greatest, Matt. 11.
amongst the Sons of me^) whereas she had been made worthy to give him all the
flesh and blood he had.

It is a most certain rule of what we are to believe, concerning the
proceeding of Almighty God, which S. Augustine gives us in these words: lib. 3.
de lib. arb. c. 5.
Quicquid tibi, vera ratione, melius occurrerit, id scias fecisse Deum:
whatsoever thou can conceive to be best according to the dictamen of
rectified reason, know, that so it is done by Almighty God. Now, who sees not
that it was fitter, and better, that the mother of God, should have been humble
then proud; discreet then rash; believing, then incredulous; and, in fine, a
perfect Saint, then a grievous sinner?

Her glorious person is high enough out of reach, assumed to heaven; and God
forbid that now any creature, should continue, to crucify her, in her honor,
and in the fame of her sanctity, or in the effects of her mercy. The Jews
crucified the Son, but let no man be so wicked, as to crucify the mother. Let
no man now be like those Heretics of ancient time who thinking (belike) that
the sword of sorrow, Antidico. marianitae apud Ephiphan. haer. 78. Luc. 2.
which was foreseen, and foretold, by holy S. Simeon, and of which it was said,
that it should pierce her heart from side, to side, at the crucifying of our
Lord, did not make the wound wide enough; and therefore they would needs procure
to keep it open, with their venomous teeth, and tongues. Let men, I say, be
like them so much the less, as the Turks themselves in their Alcora^, have bin
co^uinced so far, by the certain and clear truth of the purity and perfection
of our blessed Lady, as in several places, by way of exclamation and
admiration, to say thus of her, Alcor. Mahom. Azoar. 5. and 75.
O Maria etc. O Mary thou art more pure, and right, and clear then all other
men or women, who does perpetually attend to please God alone! There is none
borne of the children of Adam, free from sin, but Mary and her Son. There
is none amongst the children of Adam, whom Satan has not defiled, excepting
Mary and her Son.

If any wicked man, would needs have a spite to any other, even of them who
are recorded in holy writ, they might have more color, for there are few who
were not subject to some apparent fault. 2. Reg. 11. 3. Reg. 11.
There was a time when David committed a most inexcusable murder. Solomon fell
away to Idolatry; and the Prophets, and Apostles, had their defects. And such
as were free from fault were yet found to execute some severity, which
howsoever, Matt. 26.
in it self, it were just and good, yet such persons, use to be less
attractiue of the love of others.

If any man should be incestuous, I would marvel the less, although he
should cry out against S. Paul, because he delivered over one of that
confraternity to the devil by excommunication. 1. Cor. 5.
Or if he would break his promise made to God, though he rayled against ^.
P^eter, Act. ^.
because Ananias and Saphira were stroc^^^ dead in the Apostles presence, for
that finne. Or being wholly given over to frequent Ta^ernes and plays, and to
work his unbridled will, whatsoever it may cost, if he have no mind to S. John
Baptist, whom he counts to have been a melancholy kind of man, and that he was
no good Courtyer, Matt. 14.
in reproving Herod for his faults to his face. Or being a Prophanour of the
worship of God, I should not wonder so very much, though he maligned the very
fountain of sanctity, Christ our Lord himself, because he whipped such
offe^dours as those out of the Temple. Joan. 2.
But in this sacred Virgin, as on the one side there was never the least defect
at all, of which any creature could justly tax her; so on the other, she had
no such Office as might oblige her to the execution of any severity, upon the
pretense whereof, they could grow to be auerted from her.

Of her excellency otherwise I shall say somewhat afterward, but for her
discharge in point of Innocence, I would but ask the sowrest Critiques of the
world; What action of hers they did ever note, what word they did ever read or
here; or what The excessive suauity of our B. Lady.
copy of her countenance, they did ever take, in a true light, which did not
eue^ smell with sweetness, and goodness? Yet peradventure this will not serve,
because themselves will not be such as they ought. They love not to see the
sensuality and pride of theirowne lives reproached, by the example of her high
purity, and most holy humility. And they conceive her to cast more shame upon
them, then even the example of Christ our Lord himself would do. From the
imitation of whom, they would excuse themselves because he was God as well as
man; whereas she was no more then a mere creature, though most eminently
inspired by the grace of God, which yet they also in their proportions may be.
But if they would once procure to imitate this Queen of heaven in her virtues,
Note.
there is no soul capable of reason, which could ever detain it self, from
becoming the trumper of her praises.

If any narrow-harted man be inclined out of ambition to envy such as aspire to
temporal Greatenes, his Envy must look after another object, since she was
poor and private, and loved to be so. If he hate all cruelty of condition, he
may better employ that hate, upon what other creature he will; for in this
sacred Virgin, he could never see any thing, which might offend him; unless
he will be angry with her, for having never resented any indignity, that could
be done her in this life. If he love to be revenged of such as do him any
wrong, that passion can have noe place upon this Queen of Heaven, who never
did him or any, any other wrong, then to give her flesh and blood to God, that
he might spend and shed it for the redemption of man. But How we are obliged to
pity, to admire and love this Queen of heaven.
if, on the other side, there be any thing which he can resolve to pity, in
her he may see a world of pain, for the Crosses of her son, supported by
him, for the finnes of us his wicked servants. If there be any thing which he
can be content to admire; in her he sees nobility of blood, dignity of calling,
and sanctity of life, all met in one. If he be not so fierce, but that there is
some thing which he may be induced to love; in her he may behold most
incomparable beauty of body, with an unspeakable suauity of mind; who never,
in all her life, gave any one crosse-answere, nor showed so much as a strange
eye to any creature, nor complained of any incommodity, nor refused to be
subject to any impertinency; nor failed to succor any misery. But if we will
look upon her story with untroubled eyes, we shall find all the traces of her
pure feet, to have been full of a kind of divine, profound, perpetual,
humble, suffering sweetness, which at last will oblige men to be her slaves.

Of the incomparable sanctity which is employed to have been in our Blessed
Lady, by the consideration of the high dignity of her calling; and how that
manner of speech is to be understood, in holy Scripture, whereby our Blessed
Lady does seem, in the eye of some, to be disaduantaged.

CHAP. 82.
AND how indeed could it be chosen, but that her external actions, should
leave behind them an admirable odor, whose soul did so regorge with the most
sublime perfection of sanctity which might be agreeable to the dignity of the
mother of God. The B. A just consideration of the excellency of our B. Lady
drawn from he^ her high Office. Hebr. 1.
Apostle inferred the supreme excellency of Christ our Lord, from the name of
Son which God had given him, and that therefore, he did infinitely excel the
Angels. For to which of them (says the Apostle) was it said at any time, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Now the same kind of discourse,
has also place, in honor of our B. Lady. For since, together with the name,
and Office, the God of power and wisdom is wont to give all the abilities,
and ornaments, which may concern the same; what thought can there be, that
there should be any thing in any mere creature, yea or in all of them put
together, which might presume to compare, with the superexcellent mother, of
the immortal God? And therefore it is no speculation, or streined conceit, but
a consequence which flows apace, or rather flies, as a man may say down the
hill; That as the dignity of Gods mother, is incomparably beyond the dignity of
Patriarks, Prophets, Precursours, Apostles, and whatsoever is high, or holy in
the kingdom of God; so also does her sanctity exceed theirs, as far as a
mountain exceeds a moate, or as the sea, exceeds any shallow brook. And the
meanest act of virtue, which ever was practiced by this B. Lady, did in the
intensenes of it, far, and far excel the greatest of that kind, which ever
was exercised, by any other, except her Son our only Lord and Savior.

Far be it from any Christian to conceive, by the reserved manner and speech,
which sometimes is held by Christ our Lord to our B. Lady, in holy Scripture
(whereby he did but mean to teach the world certain lesso^s, or else to deliver
some hidden mysteries) that he could have any intention to rebuke her, as
faulty, in the least degree; yea or even to reprehend her, as not being worthy
of all honor. But it is to be considered, that our Lord JESUS was a Priest
after the order of Melchisedeth, Hebr. 5. and 7.
of whom it is recorded that he was without Father, and mother. As man, our
Lord was without a Father, and though he had such an excellent mother as we
know, yet, in the eye of the world, he would give little notice thereof, at some
particular times; any more then to that eye, he would give any knowledge of the
dignity of his own divine person. Luc. 1.


When our Of the great honor, which is done to our B. Lady, by Saints, by
Angels, and by our Lord God himself. Luc. ibid.
B. Lady, and the Angel, were in conference together, we have partly seen
the honor, and homage, which was performed to her, by that celestial Spirit, a
high Prince of Gods heavenly Court. When our B. Lady was single, with S.
Elizabeth, in the performance of her Office of humble charity; we know how that
Saint, that Prophetess, that mother of the great Precursour of Christ, that
Kinswoman of our B. Lord, was in confusion to receive the honor of a visit,
from her. And she was drawn to forget (as a man may say) even the very rules
of modesty, by crying out with a loud voice in admiration of the blessed
Virgins excellency, and felicity.

When Christ our Lord was private, and not in the exercise of his public
Office of Doctor of the world (in which priuacy he continued for thirty, of
the three and thirty years of his whole life) who can doubt with how perfect,
and profound reverence, that Son of God, and very God, would be sure to carry
himself, to his sacred mother. The holy Scripture expressly says, that when he
returned, from being found in the Temple, he continued subject, Luc. ^,
not only to our B. Lady, who was his natural and most worthy mother, but to S.
Joseph also who was but his putatiue Father. It would Note the force of his
reason.
therefore be strange, if when we are taught by so express evidence, what
honor was done to this sacred Virgin, by Angels, and Saints, and even by God
himself, in this mortal life, during those thirty years of his subjection to
his parents (excepting that only instant time of his teaching in the Temple, at
twelve years of age) we should argue any vnderualew to have bin, in the mind
of such a Son, toward such a mother; or of any irreuerence, or want of care
and due respect, in the mind of such a mother toward such a Son. And all
this, but only under the color of some words, which our Lord might say to her
in the hearing of others, at such times as when he considered her, not so much
as he knew her to be the mother of himself, when was God; but as she seemed in
all appeara^ce to be, which was a carpenters wife.(...) Angels in heaven; but
because, as it was incomparably Superior to it in proportion, so yet it
carried a kind of resemblance in the condition thereof. So that if any man
should ask me what was the true name, and, as it were, the very nature of
Christ our Lord? I would say, God Incarnate; and so also, if he should ask me,
the same question concerning the Mother of God; I would not doubt but to say,
that she were Virtue, or Sa^ctity, or the Angelical nature incarnate, and that
the perfection of all created sanctity, under that alone of Christ our Lord,
had taken upon it, the habit of her holy flesh and blood, thereby to illuminate
and inflame the world. And that Our Lord Jesus, is the only mediator of
Redemption, and our B. Lady, is the most excellent mediator of Intercession,
under him, to God the father and between him self and us.
as Christ our Lord, was to be the Mediator of Redemption, between God the
Father, and man; so was she under him, to be the most excellent Mediator of
intercession, between us and him, as the holy S. Bernard does expressly affirm.

How the sanctity of our B. Lady, does much import to the honor of Christ our
Lord. How notwithstanding all her excellency, we anow her to be nothing, in
respect of Christ our Lord as God, and by innumerable degrees inferior to him
as man: and how much more honorably our Lord redeemed her, then others.

CHAP. 83.
IF a man, who were full of want, should need the help of a woman, toward the
obtaining and accomplishing of some honorable and useful design of his; and
if she should cheerfully concur therein, and so the end desired should be
obtained by him; could that man be so wicked, as not to acknowledge the merit
of that other creature, and not to enrich, and honor her, as far as her
condition would bear; especially if he were mighty, and not to be made the
poorer by it? Or at least, if the case should be so put, as that his own
future honor, were so interessed in the honor and excellency of that other,
as that they two, were Relatiues, and that, after a sort, it would redound upon
them both a like; there could be no doubt, but that howsoever he were so
unworthy, as not to be grateful to her for her sake, yet he would not fail to
be so, for his own.

What kind of How our Lord was, as it were, obliged to fill our B. Lady with
all perfection.
thing must they therefore, make Almighty God, who allow him not to have endued
our Blessed Lady, withal the privileges and prerogatives of sa^ctity, and
grace, whereof a pure creature could be capable; since he took flesh of her;
and that she was ordained from all eterniry to give a new being, and nature,
and life to himself? Whereby he was to atcheeue the most glorious enterprise
which ever he had undertaken, or ever would? And so much more wicked is it to
think any such thing of God, even because he is God, and is not a whit the
emptier for filling any other with himself. And because he is supreme goodness,
and knows not how to be overcome with curtesy. But now since he descended to
this Incarnation, in the B. Virgins womb, especially, and expressly, for the
mere communication of himself to all his reasonable creatures; what floods of
grace must he needs be believed to have rayned down upon that happy soul, by
whose only means, under himself he was afterward to derive himself to
others. Yea and finally, if this blasphemy could be a truth, that God had
sought his own, and not our end thereby; and that it were possible, to conceive
God to be wise, and not conceive him to be also good, yet even wisdom alone,
would have obliged him to do all that for her, which could possibly have bin
done to a created nature, since himself was to be so highly interessed thereby,
his very body having bin wholly hers.

The glory or shame of any mother, and her Son, are so near of kin, that
they will not part; and how much more of this Son, and mother, since this
mother gave this Son all the humane nature he had, by the operation of the
holy Ghost. And That body, which our B. Lady gave to Christ our Lord is that
very body, which is to reign eternally at the right hand of God.
that very body, so bestowed by her as to remain, and reign at the right hand
of God, for all eternity. It is therefore of much honor to Christ our Lord, the
more honorable and excellent his Blessed Mother was. And by this we way also
easily discern, the immensity of height, to which our Blessed Lady is exalted.
She being raised up, so near to the Deity of Christ our Lord it self; and
beholding that omnipotent God, both personally, and eternally, to subsist, and
live in her nature. And by the infinite merit of that person of his to be
working such store of spiritual miracles in the world, adorning men here with
gifts of grace, and crowning them afterward with glory.

So great is our Blessed Lady, and so much more, as shall be showed afterward:
and her adnersaries and ours, have no cause to scandalize themselves with us,
for saying so. For to that which they are wont to say, that we equal her to
Christ our Lord, I will desire them to receive this short true answer, that
afterward I may proceed in her praises, without any further fear of offending
them: By so good a work we all acknowledge and believe, our Lord JESUS to be
true and perfect God; and that our Blessed Lady, (though the most excellent
mere creature that ever was) to have bin no more then a mere creature. Now
There lies no comparisort at all, between our B. Lady, and Christ our Lord as
God.
it follows heervpon that there was, and is, more excellency in him, as God,
then her, by more millions of degrees, then there is greater quantity in the
bulk of the whole world, then in the least little moate, which wanders up and
down in the air. For, in a word, he is infinite, and she but finite; and
therefore there lies no kind of comparison between them two.

Let it be also considered, that even what she had of dignity and greatues, did
all originally (as will further be showed afterward) depend upon that first
Grace, whereby she was elected, without any merit at all of hers, through the
only goodness of God, who drew her (by his divine understanding, before all
eternities, and did execute it afterward, upon her, when the fulness of time
was come) out of the whole race of mankind, with intention to make her that
happy creature, which should give flesh, and blood, and life to the increated
Word and Wisdom of God, the second person of the most holy Trinity. Which
divine life of his he would afterward lay down upon the Cross for the
redemption of the world, and the total destruction of our death. That The
ground, and Original cause of all our B. Ladies sanctity.
out of the same free goodness, she was made a most pure vessel of the holy
Ghost, at the very first instant of her sacred, and immaculate Conception; that
so as she was to be the mother of God, she might also be made most worthy of so
incomparable a dignity. And that, to this end, she was most beloved, adorned
and enriched, withal that plenitude of divine graces, and virtues, and
prerogatives, which might any way be convenient for the incomprehensible high
office, to which she was assumed.

That not only she was infinitely inferior, and indeed, of her self, a mere
Nothing, in respect of God; but that she was also inco^comparably of less
excellency, and dignity, then Christ our Lord, as he was man. And that, since
even the soul of Christ our Lord himself, did not deserve that first Grace
whereby it pleased God, to assume and unite it hypostatically, to the second
person of the most blessed Trinity (in virtue of which union, the Grace and
merit of that soul, after a sort, was infinite) so much less could the soul
of the B. Virgin deserve the first Grace which was imparted to it; whereupon all
her other greatness did originally depend.

That The great prehemine^ce of Christ our Lord even as he is man, beyond our
B. Lady.
Christ our Lord, did merit, as it were infinitely, of himself, and for
himself; but that, the Blessed Virgin, could never have merited any thing,
but in virtue of the merits of Christ our Lord. That Christ our Lord, was
absolutely, and of himself, and by nature, holy; and endued at the first
instant wherein his soul was united to the Word, with such an immensity of all
divine graces, as was wholly incapable of any increase. That he was our sole
Redeemer, and Savior, and for himself, did need no Savior nor Redeemer. That
he was not conceived, in the way of ordinary generation, but by way of
Obumbration of the holy Ghost, in the most precious and pure womb of the
all-immaculate, Luc. 1.
and B. Virgin.

But that she, came into the world, by way of generation from her most holy
parents. That her soul was so enriched, in contemplation of the merits of her
only Son JESUS Christ our Lord; and that by him, and him alone, she was
redeemed; but How much more excellently our B. Lady was redeemed by Christ our
Lord then any other.
but yet after a more excellent manner, then other creatures, as became the
dignity, and love of such a Son, to such a mother. For whereas he redeemed
all others, by applying his merit to their souls, in the way of redress and
remedy of the sins, either original or actual, into which they had fallen,
he had applied it to hers, by way of preservative, and for the keeping it ever
in perfect innocence. And this kind of more noble Redemption, is so far from
having diminished, the glory of Christ our Lord as he is God; as that it makes
a clear demonstration, not only of his infinite goodness and power, in regard
of her, but of his infinite wisdom, in respect of himself. Since both at all
other times, and especially in the Conception of this Queen of heaven, he had
a sovereign care of her sanctity, and did so studiously prepare and preserve
that holy tree untouched by the dew, or mist, or even breath of any imperfection
or sin, whereof himself meant to be the fruit.

Of the great eminency of our Blessed Lady beyond all others; with an authority
cited out of S. Augustine: and that the way, for us, to judge rightly of her,
is to purisy our souls.

CHAP. 84.
THIS is therefore that, which Catholics teach, concerning the excellency of
the mother of God; who are far from fancying, that she is any more then a
mere creature; and who believe that she originally owes all her greatness, to
the Grace, and goodness of our Lord God. But so also do they believe and teach,
that amongst all the most excellent creatures of God, this one does
incomparably excel, Sicut lilium inter spinas; Cant. 2.
as a beautiful and odoriferous Lilly would do, amongst a company of
unpleasant, and ill favored thorns. A beautiful Lilly she was, both planted
in the Garden of God, and wherein God planted himself, as in a Garden: Candens
folijs, and virgultas aureas in caelum versas emittens; The pure leaves of her
excellent conversation, shining brightly in the eyes of all, and the
cogitations and affections of her soul, being highly raised toward heaven by
fyery, but most sweet contemplation.

And albeit this princely mother of God and us, were not free in nature, and of
her self, from the shame or spot of sin, as her Divine Son was; yet had
she the high privileges of pure and perfect Sanctity granted to her, with
another manner of care and love, then favors use to be imparted by earthly
Princes. Who yet, are wont to be so good to their Queens-mothers, as gave
occasion to old Vlpian to record this custom: L. Princeps. ff. de legibus.
Augusta licet legibus soluta non sit, Princeps iamen eadem illi priuilegia
concedit quae ipse habet: Though the Queen, says he, be not free in rigor,
from the law, yet does the King impart those privileges to her, which himself
inioyes. In so much as that the incomparable Doctor S. Augustine (that bright
and burning lamp of the Church of God) being in argument with the Heretic
Pelagians, who extolled the dignity of man's nature, beyond the lymits of true
faith, and whom therefore the Saint was to repress as much as might be, by
declaring the great, and general deformity of mankind; and he does therefore
conclude, all the world to lie under sin, he yet does wholly except this
blessed mother of God. lib. 1. de not. and gra. c. 36.
And he says, that even for the honor of her Son our Lord, he will not
enter into so much as any question of her, whenever there is speech of sin.
For we know, says he, that since she deserved to bear him, who had no sin,
she was supplied with such store of grace, as served for the total conquest of
all sin.

That Eagle S. Augustine.
saw that truth, with clear eyes; and if the brightness of our B. Ladies
beauty, and glory, do strike the weak sight of owls, into a dazeling: Let
them, in Gods name, and by the help of his gracious hand procure to purify,
and fortify that sight of theirs; and cease The way to conceive rightly of our
B. Lady is to purify our own souls.
to quarrel with the sun for being so clear. For so will they quickly find,
(and far more to the comfort of their hearts, the^ I can make the^ know) that
our high veneration to the sacred Virgin, is so far from derogating from God,
as that it adds unspeakably, to the notion which we have of him; and to the
supreme adoration which we carry to him. For since, notwithstanding that our B.
Lady is proclaimed by us, to be such a world of purity, and perfection, as we
believe her to be (which yet both came from the liberal gift of God, and in
comparison of him, it is not only not much, but even very nothing at all) how
easily, and yet how highly do we grow to magnify, and dignify God himself, by
the consideration, and confession of her greatness. And therefore having cleared
this doubt, and discharged this scruple, which in many is made, but by
hypocrisy, and envy, though it go maskt under the pretense of piety and zeal,
which forbids them (as they say) to believe so honorably of our Blessed Lady;
I proceed for their instruction and our consolation, to show how the spirit of
God has declared it self by holy Scriptures, and holy Fathers, in her honor
and favor.

Of the great Excellency of our Blessed Lady, set out by the Figures,
Appellations, and Allusions of the old Testament.

CHAP. 85.
WE are now to look back upon what was said, and showed before; how Adam was
a figure of Christ our Lord, and Eve of our B. Lady; and we are also to
consider, that as there are many other figures, of him; so are there also of
her, throughout the whole curre^t of the old Testament, according to that which
was cited before, out of holy S. Bernard, Ser. super Signum magnum.
That this Queen of heaven was both clearly foreseen, and particularly and
misteriously foretold, by the holy writers who lived under the old law. The
principal figures of Christ our Lord, after Adam, were Abel, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Genesis 2.4.22.29.37. Exodus 2. Ios. 1. Iud. 13.1. Reg. 17.3. Reg. 2. Ion.
2.
Moses, Iosue, Samson, David, Solomon, and the Prophet Jonas. And in the self
same manner, God was pleased, that as there was an admirable simpathy, and
conueniency, between this divine Son, and his Blessed Mother, in other
things, so also there should be in this; That her excellency, in like manner,
should be prefigured both by Persons and Things, throughout the course of holy
Scripture.

Our Blessed Lady, was figured, in the old Testament (after Eve) under The
principal figures of our B. Lady. Genesis 24. Indith 13.
the person of Rebecca; as a fit and choice spouse for the true Isaac, which
was found out, and adorned by God himself; he being the Father. She was
figured by Judith, who by cutting of the head of Holofernes, (that type of the
Devil) gave victory to her people, as (according to Gods first prediction) our
Blessed Lady was to do it in a higher, and nobler manner, by bruizing the head
of the Serpent. And the honor, which once the people did to Judith, by that
Elogium of theirs, was incomparably better, and more authorizedly fulfilled, by
the Angel Gabriel himself, and by the holy Prophetess S. Elizabeth, and now
daily, by the whole Church of God, and upon the person of our B. Lady.

She was also figured by Hester; for she found so much favor, with the great
Assuerus, according to the Angels asseueration, of Inuenisti gratiam apud
Deum; as to discharge the decree of death, which had bin published against the
world, by her conceauing, and bringing him forth, Ester. 8.
who tore the handwriting which was so full of prejudice to us. She was that
excellent creature whom Moses saw figured in the Bush, Exodus 3.
which was not blasted by the fire; Which Aron saw, Number. 17. Exodus 37.
in the rodd and flower; which the Israelites saw in the Arc of the Testament,
which was made of incorruptible wood. She was foreseen by the Prophet Isay, in
the root of Iesse, Isa. 11. Ezech. 44.
which was never bent; By Ezechiel in the Oriental gate, which was ever
brightly shining, and ever shut; By Gedeon, in that Fleece of Wool which was
moystned with dew from heaven, Iud. 6.
she being fulfilled by the desce^t of the holy Ghost, and the obumbration of
the virtue, of the most high. Number. 24.
She was that Star, which sprunge from Jacob; and from whence that beam did
flow, which served to illustrate the whole world. She was the mystical Arc of
the Testament co^teyning the celestial Manna, Ad Hebr: 9. Exodus 37.3. Reg. 7.
which is the bread, both of men and Angels. She was the Propitiatory of gold;
who, by bringing us a Savior of the world, did appeal the divine lustice,
which was so incensed against it. She was the Temple, and the Sanctuary of God,
and the very Way of Saints, because by her, as through a Triumphall Arch, the
Saint of Saints, made his entry into the world, in flesh and blood; and
appeared under the eyes of mortal men. She, in Certain Allusions, and
Appellations of honor, which set, forth the excellency of our B. Lady.
fine was that precious and choice Spouse and friend of God, whom Solomon,
being then full of the holy Ghost, did foresee, and celebrate after a most
eminent manner, in that mystical espousall of all holy souls, to the King of
heaven; but particularly, and especially of hers; which was so much more holy,
then they all. Nor could that Prophetical divine Poet, content himself with
any one single allusion. But he calls her what he can; Cant, 2.6.
Immaculate, most fair, worthy to be crowned, perfect dove; A woman who for
her excessive beauty, did resemble Jerusalem; that most beautiful, and most
goodly city; A woman, whom the daughters of Sion, did see, and praise, and
Queens themselves did proclayme her to be more happy, Cant. 4.
then they. And not content with this, he compares her, to a most pure
fountain, to a most clear well, and to a most delicious garden, but most
carefully shut. He falls then, into exclamations (as not being able to express
himself home, after a positive manner) and he asks, Cant. 3.8.
Who that is, which rises up, as a perfume could do, out of most precious,
and odoriferous gumms? Who that is, which ascends out of the desert, even
drowned, as it were, in most pure delights, and leaning so upon her beloved?

These I say, are Salomons descriptions, of this Queen of heaven, although he
call her not, in those places, by her proper name. And The same passage of holy
Scripture, has many true sense^.
although those passages of holy Scripture, are capable of many several
se^ses, which are all true (as S. Augustine proves at large that all the holy
Scripture is) yea they contain a litterall and an historical, and an
Allegorical, and an Analogicall sense; yea and there are eue^ of the very self
same places of holy Scripture diverse senses, which are litterall, and all which
are true, and intended to be understood by the holy Ghost, as appears by what
was said, in that discourse of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord. And The
several senses of the Canticles, do all, most particularly set forth the
sanctity of our B. Lady.
although some do, in some sense, take these places of the Canticles to be
spoken of the Church of God; and others, of any soul in state of grace; yet if
it should be but so, what Christian would doubt, but that even out of these
very Tytles, they most properly must belong, to the All-immaculate Virgin
Mother of God; whose soul, being so dear beyond all others, in his sight,
must needs have bin espoused to him, in a manner so sublime, as no Angel is
able to conceive. For who is so eminent a part of the Church, as she? De symb.
ad Catech. l. 4. c. 1.
S. Augustine says of her; Mulierem illam, Virginem Mariam, significasse, quae
caput nostrum, integra, integrum peperit; quae etiam ipsa, siguram in se
sanctae Ecclesiae demonstrauit. The woman mentioned in the Apocalips (at whose
childbirth the dragon (that is the devil) watched to devour the Infant) did
signify the Virgin Mary; who being entyere, brought forth our head (namely
Christ our Lord) intyere; and who also, in her self, did declare, and bear,
the figure of the holy Church.

But besides the weight of this consequence (which yet is full enough of force)
we see that numbers of most learned writers, Vide Canis. l. 1. c. ^.
do apply many passages, not only of these Canticles, the Proverbs, and
Apocalips, to this blessed Virgin; but even the Rabbis of the Jews
themselves, have affirmed that they were to be understood of the Mother of the
Messiah. And the Catholic Church of JESUS Christ our Lord (which is taught by
the voice of the holy Ghost) does in the Lessons and Responsories, and
Antiphonies which are used in the festiuities of our B. Lady, resort for her
honor, to those books, and texts.

We may therefore here in some part, discern, by the figures, which did
foreshew our B. Lady; and by the allusions which set her forth, to be admired;
(by resembling the most precious and delicious things to her) that she was, and
is the most excellent pure creature, which can be thought of. But yet figures,
and shadows, do not fall so far short, of bodies, and substance, as the
prerogatives, and praises, of this most gracious, and most glorious Queen of
heaven, the ornament both of this, and the other world, whereby she is
delineated in the old Testament may be well content, to vanish in the sight of
those others, which are most perfectly declared, in the new.

The wonderful excellencies of our B. Lady, which are declared in the new
Testament, be here set forth.

CHAP. 86.
LET therefore that be first remembered, which was touched before upon other
occasions, that the holy Scripture is wont to express it self in few words;
and, that they use to be delivered in a very positive manner, least otherwise,
the earnestnes of asseueration, might derogate from the authority of that
infallible spirit of truth, whereby they are written. Let it be also considered,
that little is said in the whole Evangelical history, of Christ our Lord
himself, in the way, and under the Title of express praise. For he was to
give himself for a perfect pattern of profo^d humnility, which permits not a
man either to praise himself, or to like, that it be done by his next
fellows. His resolution was, that his works should speak of him, and so they
did; and this was also the case of our Blessed Lady, who as she was next him in
grace, so was she also next him in humility.

But yet nevertheless, as it was necessary, that Christ our Lord should be
declared to the world for the Savior of it, and for the Son of God, and of
the Blessed Virgin; whereby the incomparable excellency of his person was to be
discerned, and the admirable perfection of his actions discovered; so by a
necessary consequence of that relation, which runs between a Son and his
mother, the dignity of her person who was the mother of God, must also needs be
incide^tly, and not only incidently but expressly also showed; and the
matchless sanctity of all her actions and operations thereby inferred. For,
notwitstanding all the reservation which I have said to be used in holy
Scripture, let us see, if it have bin able to contain it self, from
magnifying our Blessed Lady, even in other terms, then by only saying, that
she was the Mother of God. Which word alone, had yet been sufficient to advance
her as far above all the world of creatures, both in heaven and earth, as a
single figure, being placed before a whole million of Ciphers, would express a
number, which would scarce be told.

I will first, in a word, point out the privileges and praises of this
perpetual Virgin which are mentioned in holy Scripture, in effect, as they ere
raunged together by Canisius, lib. 1. c. 2.
that devout and learned servant of hers. And from thence I will proceed, to a
short consideration of those divine virtues which were imparted to her,
together with those prerogatives which were necessarily to be supposed to be
in her, by those praises. For of her and to her, it was said, by the Archangell
Gabriel (and note that he said it not, as in his own person, but as in the
person of God himself whose Ambassador he was) All hail, O thou full of
Grace. Luc. 2.
Our Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou amongst women. Thou have found grace
with God. Thou shall bear a Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. That
Son of thine, shall be great, and he shall be called the Son of the most
High. Our Lord God will give him the seat of his Father David. He shall reign
in the house of Jacob for ever; and that kingdom shall have no end. Upon thee
shall the holy Ghost descend, and the virtue of the most high, shall ouershadow
thee. And so therefore that, which of thee shall be borne holy, shall be called
by the Son of God.

Upon her presence also it was, and upon the first sound of her sacred voice,
that S. Elizabeth was endued with the spirit of Prophesy; and ful-filled with
the holy Ghost; Luc. 1.
that her Son did spring in her womb, with joy as has bin said; which
supposes the use of reason then imparted to him. Upon her Visitation it was
that S. Elizabeth was not able to contain her self, but cried out to this
effect, with an extaticall kind of loud voice. Is it possible that this poor
creature should receive such a favor, as not only to be saluted, by the mother
of my Lord, but that she should prevent me, with such a painful visit? How
come I to be capable of such high honor? Blessed art thou amongst women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Happy, I say, art thou, who have believed;
for whatsoever our Lord has said to thee, shall be performed.

And heerupon, the humble and loyal soul of the sacred Virgin, when she found
that her Cousin had received a revelation of the divine mystery which had bin
wrought in her^ lent her tongue to the holy Ghost, Luc. 1.
who thereby pronounced that holy Canticle, of the Magnificat. And so far was
she The holy Ghost did force the sacred tongue of our B. Lady, to give her
self due praise.
ouerruled thereby, as prophetically to foretell her own excellency; and not
only to say; That our Lord had done great things to her; but that all
generations of men should call her blessed.

It is but reason, O Queen of heaven, that those Generations should call thee
blessed, by whose only means under God, his curse is to be removed from them.
And if the good A consequence which cannot be denied. Luc. 11.
woman in the Gospel (upon the seeing and hearing of Christ our Lord, when he
was teaching) did proclaim the blessedness of that womb which had borne such a
Son, and of the breasts which had given him suck; and if according to the
judgment of antiquity, she was inspired therein by the holy Ghost; Beda l. 4. c.
4^. in Luc 11.
she of whom our Venerable Country man S. Bid affirms, that by the example
of her faith, and devotion, (whilst the Pharisees were tempting and blaspheming
Christ our Lord) she did both confound the slanders of those principal Jews
who then were present, and the persidiousnes of those Heretics, who would
spring up in time which was then to come; how much more, are we to bless her,
who have so much more knowledge of her excellencies then the other had. For she
did but conceive her, at that time, to be mother of some great Prophet, or man
of God; whereas we are taught by the light of faith, that she was no less then
the mother of God himself. How miserable therefore are they, who do their best
to give both the holy Ghost, and her the lie, whilst they acknowledge her not
to be truly blessed; for as much as they make her subject both to original and
to actual sins.

An incomparable dignity it was, for thee, O sacred Virgin, to be made the
mother of the everliving God. And if we with our misty sight, discern that
dignity to have been so great, what did those pure sweet eyes of thine? But The
B. Virgin did more esteem perfect innocence and Sanctity, then even to be the
mother of of God.
yet so highly did thou esteem the least degree of Grace, and so profoundly
did thy holy soul abhor the least deflexion from the divine Will, by any
little error, as that rather then to have committed any one venial sin, or
voluntary imperfection, with being the very Mother of God, infallibly thou
would have chosen, to relinquish that high Maternity, rather then to have
lost the least degree of perfect innocence, and sanctity.

We therefore thy children of the holy Catholic Church (that Church, whereof thy
Son our Lord is the mystical head, and we the inferior members, thy self
being the beautiful neck thereof, by which that head sends down the
influence of grace into the body, and by which, that body sends up the odor,
and incense of prayers to the head;) We, I say, We Catholics subscribe to the
prophesy of the greatness of our B. Lady. Psalm. 44.
subscribe to thy prophesy of thy self; we admire thy excellency, the belief
whereof, is planted in the roots of our heart, and from thence it shall grow up,
upon all occasions into our tongues, which shall be as so many penns of ready
writers, to ingraue the memorial of thy greatness, in all the minds of mortal
men. And let woe be to the world, if since (by these high prerogatives, which
we find to be given thee, by the spirit of God himself) so much service and
praise is due to thee, as will never be fully paid (though the creatures of God
both in heaven and earth were all distilled into one) we who are but worms of
the earth, and who are daily sinning against thy Son; and who by hours, and
minutes, are both needing, and finding the effects of that incarnate Mercy,
which, by thy faithful, and free consent, did become flesh and blood (in thy
sacred womb) should not be doing thee all that homage, which the most
excellent pure creature can receive; the same, being under God, the
maister-conduit of all Grace to us.

That our Blessed Lady, was saluted full of Grace; and of sever all kinds of
Fullnes of Grace.

CHAP. 87.
SHE might well impart some to us, who was so full of it in her self. For as
soon as the Angel had saluted her, with that profound admiring reverence,
which he knew was due, from a household servant to the Mother of his Lord; he
bids her as has been said; Hail full of grace. And as in the Passion of our
most B. Lord, when the Priests and Elders made their charge against him, Luc.
23.
before Pilate, they said Inhenimus hunc etc. We have found this fellow etc:
without vou^^a^ing, so much, as to give him a name, (because when there is a
meaning, by way of exaggeration, to contemn a person, the forbearing of the
name does show a bitter and profound contempt; as if no name could be found,
which were base enough for such a person) so in this first part of the
salutation of our B. Lady by the Angel Gabriel, The incomparable reverence of
the Angel in satuing the B. Virgin.
the admiration which he had of her, was such, as that, to show the great
height thereof, and his not being able to express the reverence, he bare to
her, by any name, he spoke to her at that first time, without a name, and said,
Luc. 1.
Hail full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst women. As
if he had delivered himself in this manner. O sovereign Virgin, I am sent to
thee, on the part of God; I am to bring thee a news, which if it prove, is to
sill heaven and earth, with joy. On the part of God, it is already resolved
upon; but the consistory of the B. Trinity, is at a pause, till it obtain thy
free consent. I know not by what name to call thee, which may express thy
Dignity, and my admiration; but this I know, that thou art a vessel full of
Grace; a spouse to whom God himself is making-Court; and a creature which is
blessed beyond all the children of flesh and blood; and as such, I salute thee,
with all reverence.

The men who are so miserable, as to love to lessen the opinion of excellency
in our B. Lady, are desirous (according to what I touched before) to follow the
Grammatical sense of the Greek word, whereby they would bar her, from being
saluted by the Angel for fulof Grace; and they will but admit her to be highly
sauoured, and accepted, or graciously beloved by our Lord God. But Even that
which we affirm of our B. Ladies being full of Grace, is most justly inferred,
by what our aduer saries confess
first though it should be as they say; yet that which we assirme would follow
upon it, by a necessary kind of consequence. For if God had accepted and
favored, and graciously beloved her in so high a manner, as for shame they
will not choose but grant; what doubt can be made, either of the power, or
goodness of that divine Majesty, but that he would perfect his own work, by
filling her withal inherent Grace, whom he had vouchsafed to assume, into so
high favor, as to make her his Palace of pleasure; and to vouchsafe, of her
purest flesh and blood, to build an eternal house of humanity, which his own
increated wisdom, was so to inhabit.

But besides, that this truth does grow even from the inference of common
sense, let us cast an eye toward the chief Fathers and pillars of the Church
of God, to see if they do not read gratia plena with us, and not gratiosa with
our adversaries; and (to leave the question de nomine) if every where they do
not, with devout joy of heart, acknowledge, that the Virgin was saluted, and was
indeed full of Grace. Resort therefore for this purpose to the margin which
will guide you to the way, Canisius lib. 3. c. 6. and 7. upon his confideration
of the salutation of our B. Lady, by the Angel.
where you shall see this clearly auowed, both by the Latin Church, and by the
Greek; S. Hierome, Sophronius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Eusebius Emissenus,
Petrus Damianus, Venerable Bede, Rupertus, S. Bernard, S. Thomas, and many
others. And so also is this done, by S. Athanasius, S. Ephiphanius, S. Ephrem
the Deacon, S. John Damascen, S. Gregory of Neocaesaraea, with many more, whom
I spare to name. By them you shall find this sacred Virgin, to be admired, as a
vessel full of Grace, and resembled to a River, which runs with a full current
of the holy Ghost, to a field which is all laden with fruit; That her soul
was shot through, and through, with that choice arrow of the love of God, which
left no thought thereof vnfilled with Grace. In c. 1. Lucae.
And S. Ambrose has these excellent words: Been itaque etc. (which couple the
gratia, and gratiosa, both in one) She was justly therefore said to be full of
grace, who alone obtained the grace, which never was merited by any other, of
being filled by the author himself of grace.

But that which Of the value of the vulgar translation of the By. ble by S.
Hierome.
ought to serve our turn, is the vulgar edition, which was made by the most
learned S. Hierome; and is authorized by the decrees of the Catholic Church.
Besides that diverse Counsels, have also acknowledged her, to have been full of
grace, in co^formity of this salutation of the Angel. And Our B. Lady was
saluted by the Angel in the Syriake tongue.
moreover the Syriacke, reads thus, Peace be to thee, O thou full of grace.
And it is most probable, and as good as certain, that the Angel did speak to
our B. Lady, in Syriacke, which was the language of that time, and place, and
not originally in Greek, which for ought we know, our B. Lady did not (...) at
that time. So that, for our parts, we will co^template her with holy S.
Bernard, Ser. de Natiuit. Virginis.
as a slower which the air of the holy Ghost did not only blou upon, but
breath through, that so her delicious odours, might abundantly bestow
themselves upon the world.

This salutation of the Angel, with full of grace, in his mouth, was such a
one, and delivered in such a sense, as by the Testimony of S. Ambrose, had
never been heard, In 1. Lucae.
or found before according to the understanding wherein it was allowed to her;
but was only reserved for her, who was to be made the most worthy Mother of our
Lord God. Now what can be imparted more precious in this life, then the
Treasure of The incompable excellency, of the Grace of God.
Grace? or what proportion can exceed the fulness thereof? The true value of this
jewel, is only to be exactly understood by our Lord God himself; because he
only understands the infinitnes of his glory, which is that fruit, whereof
Grace is the seed. He only is able, outright, to penetrate the true deformity
of sin, which is so inco^patible with Grace, as that although a soul were
defiled withal the sins of the whole world, one degree of Grace, would
expel, and kill them all, at the very instant, that it should enter into that
soul. And so if any one soul had all that Grace which is in all created
souls, any one mortal sin would instantly expel it all.

Not only does it remove deformity, but it indues the soul with such excessive
beauty, as makes it, of odious to God, and obnoxious to the eternal fires of
hell, most dearly amiable in the sight, of that divine Majesty; and it gives it
title, and right to the kingdom of heaven. Not only does it beautify, but it
does dignify the soul; subliming it, as S. Peter says, to consort with God
himself, and that not after any ordinary manner, but even to partake of his
divine nature; and such a soul is treated to all purposes, as a daughter of
the eternal Father; a sister to Christ our Lord; a most beloved spouse of the
holy Ghost, and a fellowcittizen, and sweet companion to all the Angels, and
Saints, in the kingdom of God. This Grace, is no load, but it lightneth, it is
no dead thing, but perpetually it is living and working wonders, if it meet
with no impediment in the soul; as in our B. Ladies it never did. As she was
full of Grace, so was that Grace full of fruit. For Grace in a soul, is the
mother of all virtue; nay if it be not fruitful, it is not Grace. In that
soul of the Blessed Virgin, it did fructify in such strange proportion, as no
created thought can comprehend; though shortly I will procure, with reverence,
to point thereat.

But in The misery of such, as forfait the Grace of God, for the committing of
a vile sin.
the mean time, if the dignity, and excellency of Grace be such, how miserable
is that man, who for his inordinate desire of a temporal delight, which
(besides that it draws him down to hell) is past as soon as the name is
uttered; or for a sum of honor, which, at the most, can make him happy, but
by hearsay; or for the rickes of this world, which is but dirt, one degree
removed; and which may be stolen, and must be left; (and whilst it is inioyed,
cannot make a man either healthful, or strong, and much less learned, holy,
or wise) will be so deadly foolish, as to deprive himself of this celestial
patrimony of Grace, which was bought for him, at the high rate of the passion,
and death of Christ our Lord; and was imparted to him, with so much love, to
the end that by him, and with him, and in him he might eternally be happy.

The The unjust Cavil of some men against our B. La. dies honor in being full
of Grace. Act. 2. Act. 6.
adversaries of our Blessed Ladies exellency, whilst they deny her to be full
of Grace, deny that, to Gods Mother, which yet they must grant to many
servants of his; of whom the holy Scripture says, that they, after their
manner, were also full of Grace. Namely the Apostles, and they who were present
with them, when the holy Ghost came down. And particularly, it is said of
Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, That he was full of Grace. And yet again, on
the other side, they do unjustly accuse us, as though, when we say that she
was full of Grace, we sought to equal her, with her Son our Lord; of whom
it is also said, by the beloved Disciple, that he was full of Grace. But Of
several plepitudes of Grace. Joan. 1.
even that disciple, both in the same very place makes us know, that there are
several kinds of plenitude of Grace. And that the plenitude of Christ our
Lord, was of the only begotten Son of God, which was infinitely, after a
fort, beyond the plenitude of our B. Lady; as he^s, being as of Mother, was
also incomparably beyond that of the Apostles, and S. Stephen, and all the
Saints and Angels put together, who are but wayters, in the Court of heaven.

Not, that there is any difference, in the very being full amongst them who all
are full; but the difference is in the capacity of the vessel, into which that
treasure is infused; whereof some are more extended, and more capable; and
others less. And it does also consist, in the various kinds of graces, whereof
some are more intense, as also more precious, and sublime the^ others. The
plenitude therefore of the B. Virgin, presumes not to make the least comparison,
with that of Christ our Lord; but so also must not the plenitude of other
servants and Saints, once enter into competition with the plenitude of the most
worthy mother, of the ever living God. The plenitude of Christ our Lord, was of
the original fountain of all Grace; that of our Blessed Lady, as of a sweet,
and fructifying River; and that of the other Saints, as of inferior streams.
So as all of the^ derive whatsoever good they have from Christ our Lord. But as
for others, multae filiae congregauer^t diuitias, tu vero supergressa es
vniuersas. The Angels and Saints are all of them full of merits and celestial
graces, but the Mother of our Lord God, outstrips them all.

The praises of the Blessed Virgin, prosecuted by a testimony of S. Gregory;
and an entrance is made, into the consideration of her divine Vertu^s, and
first of her admirable Faith, and Hope.

CHAP. 88.
LET us consider, Our B. Lady is far superior to al Saints in Sanctity. Greg.
in 1. Reg. 1.
what the holy S. Gregory says, to this purpose: Potest Montis nomine,
Beatissima semper Virgo Maria Dei genitrix, designari etc. The ever most B.
Virgin Mary, the mother of God, may be designed, by the name of a Mountain.
For a Mountain she was, by the dignity of her election, which exceeded all the
altitude of any elected creature. Was not Mary (says he) a sublime Mountain;
who, to the end that she might arrive to conceive the eternal Word, did erect,
or raise the high top of her merits, even unto the Throne of the Deity, above
all the Quires of Angels? For of the most superexcellent Dignity of this
Mountain, Esaias (by way of Prophesy) does say: In the latter days there shall
be prepared, in the top of the Mountains, the Mountain of the house of our
Lord. For this was a Mountain, in the top of the Mountains; because the
altitude of Mary did shine above all Saints. This, I say, Beda l. 2. Histor c.
2.
is alleged by the holy S. Gregory the great; who, by S. Bid, is most
worthily called the Apostle A due praise of S. Gregory
of our Country; and whose high estimation and devotion to the sacred Virgin,
it is all reason that we should embrace, and imitate. Since he was the man,
under God, who with most tender care, and love of him, and us, converted us, in
the person of our Progenitors, from Paganism, to the faith of the Son of
this Virgin. And we may well rejoice, in having such a Father, and guide to
follow, whom we may justly esteem to have been one of the greatest Saints, in
the whole Church of God, since the Apostles. And perhaps it would trouble a
man, to set such another by him, in all respects; both for the great nobility
of his birth; the highest dignity of his calling; the clarity of his wit; the
eminency of his learning; his high contemplation in prayer; his admirable
humility; his ardent charity, embracing, with his love, such barbarous Nations
so far of, and cherishing, near at hand, all kind of Pilgrims, and poor
people. And lastly, his most sweet invincible patience, and joy, in the midst
of so many great calamities, and Crosses, as were imposed upon him, by wicked
Princes, by plagues, by famine, and by war; and lastly, by a body al loade^
with diseases, and pains, throughout all the course of his life; together
with a soul, which was deeply wounded, for all the sins of the world. In so
much, as the holy Church has all reason to say, as she does, thus Romans Bren.
infesto S. Greg.
of him: Admirabilia sunt, quae dixit, fecit, scripsit, decreuit; praesertim
infirma semper, and aegra valetudine. It is an admirable thing, to consider the
things which he said, which he did, which he wrote, and which he decreed,
especially being ever subject to a body, which was so weak and sickly.

But to return, and thereby to clyme toward this Mountain of ours, whereby
this Saint understands our B. Lady; it must first be granted, that the virtues
are so near of Kin, to one another, as that it must breed, no wonder, if
somewhat which I shall range under some one, might be also reduced to some
other head. But this perpetual Virgin, was a very Mappa mundi The B. Virgin is
the very Map of virtues of the world.
of them all. And as in a Map of the world, the several kingdoms thereof,
are set out in several colors, that they may be discerned with greater ease;
so is it, in the case of her divine virtues, as will be seen in our
ponderation thereof. I will only, with reverence, and admiration, point out the
chief, that so by them we may contemplate the rest; and these shall be her
Faith, Hope, and Charity, her Humility, Purity, and (which includes both
Obedience and Patience) her most intiere Conformity to the will of God. In all
which virtues, and in all the rest, we believe her to have been as perfect, as
S. Ambrose does insinuate, when he says thus of her: Lib. 2. de Virginitate
Non tam vestigia pedis etc. She seemed to grow in the degrees of virtue, more
swiftly, then even she could move her feet.

For as much as Her inexplicable Faith.
concerned her Faith, she believed that supreme mystery of the B. Trinity,
which lay so hidden in the law of nature; and was so little known even in the
time of the written law. She had formerly understood thereof, in the holy
Scriptures; but now upon the words of the Angel, she clearly embraced, with
her belefe, the person of the Father, from whom the Son was to be sent; the
person of the Son whom she was to conceive; and the person of the holy
Ghost, who was to work that high mystery in her. Not only did she expressly
believe the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, which till that
time, had been but shadowed, under types and figures; but she believed, that in
co^teauing him, herself should both continue a Virgin, and yet be a mother.

All this, and more the^ this she believed; and that before the Ghospel was
received, and before her Son was borne into the world? and much more, before
he had wrought any miracles; and without dema^ding any sign, or proof thereof,
Iud. 6. Luc. 8.
as Gedeon, and Zacharias had done. And she believed the^, with a far-far
greater certainty, and clarity of Faith, then any thing had ever been believed
before. Her Faith, in fine, was so great, as that she was canonized for it, by
the holy Ghost, in the mouth of S. Elizabeth. And S. Augustine was not afraid
to say, Aug. de S. Virg. principio.
that although to be chosen for the mother of God, was a kind of infinite
felicity and favor, yet it Our B. Lady was more happy in her great Faith the^
in being the mother of God. S. Tho. 3. p. q. 27. art. 4. ad 2.
was a greater, to have bin enriched, by the hand of God, with such a clear,
and lively Faith. For by virtue of this Faith, she also, continued to believe,
and to assist at the Passion of her Son our Lord, when his own people
crucified him; and when his Apostles were fled away, as has been seen. And
she expected the Resurrection, with an vndoubt, and most constant Faith,
without fluttering at the sepulcher, between hope and fear, as others did.

How solid was her Our B. Ladies invincible Hope.
Hope in God, when, notwithstanding that S. Joseph saw that she was great with
child; and knew not at that time, of the Incarnation of the Son of God, in
her sacred womb. And although she might both with great ease, and honor, have
vnbeguiled him, by declaring the mystery; yet she rather chose, with strange
contempt of herself, to confide in God, that without any help of her, he would
both preserve the espousalls from being dissolved, and the fame of her
virginity, from being touched. How nobly did she conside in God, Matt. 2.
who having been enriched by the three Kings (when they adored her Son in
that stable) made such have as doubtless she did, to give all away to the
poor; in imitation, and admiration of how God had emptied himself, as it
were, of his Divinity, that he might fill her womb, with his holy Humanity. In
so much as that when, within a few days after, she went to Present our Lord
JESUS in the Temple, Luc. 2.
she was Return to the Chapter of the Presentation of our Lord Jesus in the
^e^ple Luc. ^. Leuit. 12.
not (as was said before) worth the price of a Lamb, but was faigne to make an
oblation of Doves, which was appointed as proper to the poorest people. Being
at that Marriage of Cana, where there was want of wine, she was touched with
pity of their poverty. And though her Son our Lord, had wrought no miracle
till that time, yet she conceived in her heart, such a most lively Hope, that by
supernatural means he would supply all wants; as made her but propound the
suite in few plain words; de^aunding wine for them, in that very form, of
only representing the necessity, which our Blessed Savior himself, was after
pleased to use, when he cried out Sitio, upon the Cross.

Of the most ardent Charity, both to God and man, which reigned in the heart of
the Blessed Virgin.

CHAP. 89.
BUT who shall ever be able to express her excessive Charity, to God, and for
his sake, to man; since according to the measure of the Grace, which is infused
into any soul, so is Charity infused; and therefore since we have found her to
be full of Grace, we are also as sure that she was full Charity. Our Lord make
us so happy as that once we may see that soul in heaven; for till then we may
aim, but we shall never be able to hit the mark of her greatness. We have a
Proverb and it is no ill one: That Out B. Lady was both a Pilgrim, and a
Post, in her way to God.
the Pilgrim goes as far as the Post, and the reason thereof is this. Because
howsoever the Pilgrim walks but slowly on; and the Post runs, day and night;
yet, for as much as this latter through the much have he makes does use to
catch many falls; the former, who pla^ts his feet at ease, is perhaps at his
journeys end, before him. But now, if the speed of the one, and the certainty of
the other, might be so happy, as to meet in any person; what a deal of way,
would that creature ridd, especially if the time should be long, which were
deputed to that trauaylo.

It is thou, O Queen of heaven, who were that very creature, running on, in the
way of Sanctity, with those most steady, and yet most swift affections of thy
soul; as being both the mother, and the daughter of that God, and man, thy
Son our Lord; of whom the Royal Prophet did foresee, Psalm. 18.
and say, That he exulted like a Giant who was preparing himself for his
course. Which was to be, of less way, then from that high hill of heaven, to
this low vale of earth. But yet it was with this difference; that as he made
such have from thence hither, by his Incarnation; so the have thou made, was
from hence thither by spiritualizatio^, (as I may say) of thy self, through
thy growing by instants, in all virtue. For, as in the first moment of her most
sacred and Immaculate Conception, her soul was endued, with such a large
portion of divine Grace, as might become the Dignity of Gods Mother; to which
from all eternity she was designed; so did she instantly cooperate therewith,
in all perfection. And that cooperation, did, as it were, oblige Almighty God,
to enrich her, with new degrees of Sanctification; and that again, produced
new acts of most humble, and most faithful love, in her, by way of
Retribution. And, in this manner, did that happy The continual most happy
strife, between the Grace of God and the soul of the sacred Virgin.
strife continue, between the omnipotent and most communicatiue hand of God,
and that most capable, pure, holy heart of the Blessed Virgin, during so many
millions, of millions of moment, as might run out, in seauenty two years of
time, which according to a very probable opinion, was the last period of her
mortal life. So as this posting Pilgrim, did set out, in the way of Grace,
and of the love of God, as early, as the first instant of her Immaculate
Conception, and she continued therein, till the last of her life, which was very
long. And in all that time, she lost no one minute; and every one of her acts,
was performed with incomparable, and complete perfection.

And although in all that journey, they wind was ever on her side, since the
Fomes peccati, or Concupiscence, was never permitted once to breath against
her; nor any inclination of sense, to oppose the impulse of reason, which drove
her on; yet in the running through that happy race of hers, she was visited
(besides all the rest) at Of two admirable increases of Grace in the soul of
the sacred Virgin.
two several times, by such a vehement power of Gods spirit (namely at the
instant of the Incarnation of the Son of God in her sacred womb, and again
afterward, upon the descent of the holy Ghost, which he sent from heaven into
her heart) that she had such wings added to her soul, as made her no longer
go, but fly; and she sent all her thoughts into God, inco^parably with more
force of love, the^ any arrow is shot out of a bow, by the strongest hand that
lives.

And who shall then be able, to measure that The bottomless se^ of the love of
God wherein the B-Virgin, did for ever sa^^.
bottomless sea of her love of God? Who shall be able, to soar into the
height of those divine contemplations, whereby that soul was transformed in
him; far and far beyond the understanding of all the spirits in heaven;
whilst yet she walked up and down, the world, in a garment of flesh and blood,
amongst the children of men? What sighs and tears of admiration, and most
humble joy, would she be dispatching up to that throne of Majesty, in whose
light so inaccessible, to other folks, she did so clearly see, the bottomless
pit of nothing, from whence, the sweet strong hand of God had brought her, and
the worse then nothing of sin, from which he had preserved her, by his first
abundant Grace; and that afterward he had enriched, and sublimed her so far,
as both in dignity, and sanctity, to make her the very top, and Crown of all
mere creatures.

If A most excellent affect of S. Augustine. Confess. l. 11. cap 2.
S. Augustine could say to God, with incredible internal joy of heart, Et
intrem in cubile meum etc. Let me enter into my most retired chamber, and let
me singe Loue-songes to thee; sighing out certain unspeakable groans, in
this pilgrimage of mine. And calling the heavenly Jerusalem to remembrance;
with my heart enlarged and turned up toward it. Jerusalem which is my Country,
Jerusalem which is my mother. And I will remember thee, who art the ruler of
it, and the illuminatour, the tutour, the Father, the spouse, the chaste and
strong delight, the solid and sincere joy, and all unspeakable good things
put together, because thou art the only true and supreme good. What kind of
notes, and songs, of Angelical, and Seraphicall love, do we think, that this
spiritual Nightingall, this Turtle, this both everliving, and dying Swanne,
would still be singing, and sweetly mourning out to God? In respect of whom,
although S. Augustine, being set, not only by other men, but eue^ by many other
Saints, were as a furnace of fire, being compared with some single coal; yet
the same S. Augustine in respect of her, was no more then a single spark, in
respect of a whole sphere of fire.

An inexplicable thing it is, to consider the Profound rest and perpetual
motion, were coupled in the soul of the sacred Virgin.
profound rest, together with the perpetual strife, and motion of her soul
of love which was both continually inioying God, and yet continually earning
toward him. Continually laboring to do him most faithful service, and yet
continually feeding upon the precious fruits of those very labors. But because
she fo^d, that Man, was the thing which he most loved, next to God, as being
his Image by Creation, and his own purchase, by Redemption, and that she most
actually and most purely, clearly saw the Son of God, and her at that time,
in such labor, and pursuit of man's good; with so much forgetfullnes (as it
were) of his own Majesty and glory; and that afterward he left his life, upon
a Cross for our Salvation; it The incomparable and most ardent love which our
B. Lady bears to ^ all mankind.
is not to be declared, nor yet conceived by us, what an unquenchable love, she
also had to the good of men. Imploring God, for all that mercy which their
misery did need; and by her own excellent example, giving them patterns which
they were to follow; and procuring both increase of comfort, to them who had
store; and the access thereof, to such as she found to be in want thereof.

This may evidently appear, by those two excellent patterns, of that whole
piece of her love, which have so often been produced, and which she delivered
at S. Elizabeth's house, and the marriage of Cana. Especially if the
circumstances be pondered well both of the difference in Dignity between her
person and theirs, and the have that she made to be communicating her favors
to Gods creatures. Toward whom the ardour of her affection was so great, that
it seemed by the much have she made in those two mysteries, as if she had not
been able to contain it.

The impenetrable profound Humility, and the perfect, and supercelestiall
Purity, of our B. Ladies both body and soul; and wherein the height thereof
consists.

CHAP. 90.
I Come from the Theological, to some chief Moral virtues; and behold how
deep she said the foundation of Humility, that her building might reach up as
high, as heaven. She considered with perfect clarity of understanding, that
from all eternity, she had been nothing, as was touched before, till the
omnipotent mercy of God did prevent her, with those first unspeakable, and
vnconceaueable graces, without any merit on her part. She knew well, as has
been said, that The ground of our B. Ladies most profound Humility.
she was no more, then a mere creature, of the race of the sinful Adam; and
that she might have fallen into as many, and as grievous sins, as the rest of
mankind, was subject to, if the sweet goodness of God had not prevented, and
presered her still, with most particular favors. By the light of this
knowledge, the most sacred Virgin did esteem her self, as the meanest
creature of the world; and she cordially despised herself, as a thing, in
herself, who deserved to be, of no account at all.

Not, but that she well knew, what guiftes she had received of our Lord God; or
that she took herself into contempt, as thinking meanly of them (for them
she esteemed, and she reueared God for them, as she had cause;) but she
esteemed herself, in herself, no more for them, then if she had not had them
at all. She was yet further from conceauing, that she was to contemn herself
as if she had committed any sin (for true True Humility is ever grounded upon
Truth.
Humility is grounded ever upon certain truth,) and therefore as indeed she did
never sin, so neither could she think, that she had sinned) but she despised
herself, because she clearly saw that, of herself alone, she had nothing
which was good; but that all was of God, and that to him, all thanks were due;
as they also were for his preserving her, from all those sins, into which she
might have fallen, if our Lord had not prevented her, by his grace.

This mean conceit of her self, the most sacred Virgin, made appear, when
she was told by the Angel in the name of God, that she was elected, to that
highest Dignity, of being the Mother of the Son of the most high; which was
the greatest Dignity, whereof any mere creature could be capable. But yet she
was so far, from taking complacence in her self, upon that reason, that the
text affirms her to have bin troubled at them. So that the Angel thought it
his part, to give her comfort afterward, by letting her know that it was not
he, but God himself, who did her that honor. But How our B. Lady was
troubled, and in what sense she was not so.
the while, we must not think, that this trouble of hers, was any such thing,
as could deprive her of the clear discourse of reason; or of the peace, of
that immovable soul; though, for as much as it was a motion of holy fear,
and modest shame, to find herself so much esteemed; it shows what an
impenetrable sort of humility, she had in that deep sweet heart of hers, and
how profoundly she thought herself unworthy of honor. So that finding her
self, at the very instant, to be sublimed to such a height as that, she did
not yet esteem her self, one grain more worthy, in her self, then she did
before. Whereupon she took no titles which might then belong so her present
state, as of Queen of Angels, Lady and Mistress of the world, or elected
Spouse of the holy Ghost. Nor did she prefer herself, before the^ meanest
creature of the earth; but settling her soul, in the lowest, and meanest place
of the^ all, she gave her self the style of a hand-mayd or slave. In c. 1.
Lucae.
S. Ambrose wonders at this Humility, and I wonder not at him for so wo^dring;
for the Angels themselves are not able to do it, as it deserves. This virtue
she also discovered, in strange manner; when, upon those great praises, which
S. Elizabeth proclaimed to be her due (both for the prerogatives which she had,
in her self, and for the wonders which had bin wrought, in S. John, upon the
only hearing of her voice) this sacred Virgin, refused outright, to accept
thereof; and instantly running into her most humble heart, she fell into that
divine Canticle, Luc. 2.
wherein she ascribes all the glory of her greatness, and of that felicity of
hers, which was to be celebrated for ever, by all the Generations of the
faithful, to the only omnipotent mercy, of our Lord God.

Of the sovereign Purity, Greg. Ni^^. in Orat. de humana Christi Generat. Aug.
de S. virginitate c. 4. Beda hom. de Eest. Annunt. Anselm. hom. Intrauit Jesus.
Bern sermon de Natiuitat. Mariae apud Canisium l. 2. c. 14.
of this sacred Virgin, as it were a most blasphemous sin to doubt, so were
it simplicity to dilate the consideration, of a thing so clear, into any great
length. She embraced Chastity, and she vowed it; though formerly both in the
law of nature, and even in the written law there was little notice of it, and
less practice. And as fecundity was much esteemed, by the Jews, so was the
want thereof, a note rather of reproach, and infamy, then otherwise. The people
of flesh and blood, do often choose rather to be infamous, with the loss of
virginity, the^ glorious by the preservation thereof. But this Queen of
Virgins, did love, not only to be contemptible in the eye of the world, but
even to excuse her self from accepting to be the very mother of God; rather
the^ she would endure to think, that the flower of her virginity should once
be touched. Yet touched it was; but first that was, by the holy Ghost himself;
and then instantly afterward, by the increated Son of God, who reposed so
many months, in that Angelical Cradle, of her sacred womb. But that touch,
was so far from blasting it, as that it endued it, with most precious odours,
which have perfumed the world. And if before that time, her Virginity were but
in flower it was now grown to be, both in flower, and fiuite; being highly
sanctified and sublimed, by that Elixir The sacred humanity of Christ our Lord.
of heaven, which turns whatsoever it touches into gold.

The integrity of her sacred body, was the least part of her divine Purity, for
her soul was that which did excel. That extended, not only to the absence of
any thing, which was contrary to Chastity; but This indeed is true and perfect
Purity.
to a forbearance of taking the least contentment, or delight in any thing
created, but only in God, and for God. No thought, no care, no desire, or joy,
did ever presume so much as to solicit that superexcelle^t soul, but only how
to co^ply with her unspeakable obligation to Almighty God, by perpetual
working, and yet profoundly contemplating those divine attributes of his, upon
which from the first instant of her Immaculate Conception till that other of
her most glorious Assumption, her mind (as has been said) did beat and boil
in continual acts of most ardent love. This indeed was to be Chaste, in the
most eminent degree; To be doing that on earth, which the Angels are doing in
heaven. Whose incessant actual love, S. Augustine does thus express: Confess.
lib. 12. c. 11.
Quod perseuerantissima castitate De^ hauriant; that they are sucking up God
himself, with a most perseruing Chastity and purity of mind.

When the Son of God, and her, was sucking at the sacred fountain of her
breast, for the relief and maintenance of his precious life; how would that
divine Virgin A happy excha^ge.
Mother, be sucking the while, at the fountain of his Divinity, for the
delighting, and inebriating of her soul? How instantly did she, upon all
occasions, give back all praises, and attributes of estimation, and honor to
God, though they had been sent down to her, by the Tr^pets of heaven, and by
tongues of truth it self, as has been said.

When other creatures are praised they seldom send the praises back as clean
as they come, but their minds being moystned by self-love, are still
retayning some impression thereof more or less: Lumen siccum optimae anima. It
is an excellent choice soul which so flameth up toward God as not to be
softened or steeped in human affections. It was, with our B. Lady, in the case
of the praise or honor, which was done her, as it would be with a wall of
Diamond; toward which some ball were sent; and the harder it should be driven,
the more forcibly and quickly it would return again. What ball could be
stronger driven, then that she should be proclaimed, the Mother of God, by an
Archangell? and what more stiff repulse could be made to the praise which did
result thereby, then that instantly, she should prostrate, and protest her self
to be no better then his slave.

If such were the perfection of her Purity of heart, at that time, (which I
would to Christ, we did not want words so much as to name) what would it grow
to be, after so long cohabitation with that God, her son, for the space of
tree, and thirty years? He The power of the presence of Christ our Lord.
whose presence, even for one minute, in such sort as he was pleased to affaord
it to her, were able to make any dissolute, and disordered heart, become Saintly
and pure; and indeed to make a kind of heaven of hell it self.

I adore God, in his B. Mother; and I admire the perfection of her happy soul;
and in the least of her actions, and words, I see another manner of Abyss,
without a bottom, then in all the Saints and Angels, put together; but that
which most amazeth me, is the plentiful Regio^ of her purity, and the
incorruptible fidelity, of her soul toward God. Which was so perfectly dead
to it self, and so full of springing life, and motion to him, as The Nonplus
vltra of the Purity of the B. Virgin.
that instantly, she did ever, return his graces back again, (wrapped up, as
in so many Loue-letters, of adoring thanks, and ardent sighs) as clear, and
pure, as God himself had sent them down, without the sticking of one grain,
or crumme of dust to her.

And therefore now, if she were so absolute in that inward, and profound
contempt of herself, we shall cease to find it strange, that so entirely she
conte^ned exterior things. And yet, of it self, what a wonder was it, for the
Queen of heaven and earth, to be so joyfully delivered, of the ever living
God, in his misterious Nativity, as we have seen before, with all the
circumstances of disadvantage, and dishonor, that could be thought. But the
want of all worldly things, was that sumptuous banquet, upon which the soul
and body of the B. Virgin loved to feed; for love of him, who had emptied
himself into that Humanity, for love of us; and which obliged us thereby, to
discharge even the lawful love of all other things, wherein the height of
purity does consist.

Of the inexplicable Conformity of the will of the B. Virgin, to the holy will
of God in all things, how dear soever, it might cost her.

CHAP. 91.
FROM hence did also grow, that entyere Conformity of her will, with the holy
and wise will of God; which as she had never ouershot in the prosperous part of
her life (as at the salutation of the Angel and S. Elizabeth, and when her
Son was adored, by the three kings, in his royal throne, of her lap;) so did
she never fall short of it to the breadth of a hair, in any affliction or
tribulation. We saw before, in part, what her Humility was; and how profoundly
low it laid her own account; and how pure she kept her heart, from any
co^placence in her self, upon those highest praises, wherewith the Angel and S.
Elizabeth did adorn, and celebrate her grace and greatness.

We How deeply true humility abhors praise.
know withal, both by the clear light of truth, and by the faithful records
of Saints lives, that an ambitious person cannot more greedily hunt after
praise, then a soul truly humble, will shrink in, and avoid, and abhor the
same. And if, even a man, who is but moderatly vain, will not easily be
induced, even for very shame, to praise himself very much, and with
deliberation; what an unspeakable auersion, must needs that most humble, of
all humble souls, have had, from all extolling of herself. But yet, since the
will of God was such, Luc. 1.
and that the holy Ghost, was pleased to use the instrument of her tongue,
which, of it self, was so truly a lover of holy humble silence, toward the
proclayming of her own prerogatives, and greatness, she did most joyfully
concur to praise herself, and to avow, that God has done great things to
her, and that for them, all Generations should call her blessed.

It was the will of God, that her Son should fly, as by the wings of her
arms, into Egypt, for fear of that Kite King Herod; and she went, upon a
minutes warning, with a Conformity, How a will, which is in a conformity to the
will of God, must be both supple, and stifie.
as stiff as any rock; and withal, as supple, and gentle, as any wax; and
with a resiguation so profound, as not so much as to ask, when she should be
freed, from that Cross. It was Gods will that S. Joseph should have the honor
of the Angels visit, Matt. 2^
and that she should obey a man, whose incomparable Dignity did much consist in
this, that he was admitted to take the care of her, and to do her service: yet
behold, she did punctually obey all his orders, in her delight to be
complying, with the commandment of our Lord God, as if she had been the
beggar, and he the King. And that we may see, how many businesses the holy
Ghost is able to do at once; and how by comma^ding some one thing, he gives
matter for many souls to persorme, the acts of most heroical virtue at the
same time, Vt reuelentur ex multis cordibus cogitationes; it will not be a
miss to consider (as infallibly the thing is true in it self) that as it was
a point of most humble, and pure Conformity for the B. Virgin to take law, from
How holy S. Joseph was mortified in being obliged to give orders to our B. Lady.
S. Joseph; so was it matter of excessive mortification, to his most holy, most
wise, and most faithful soul, to give directions, as by means of revelation,
to that superexcellent mother of God, whom so profoundly he did reueare, and
admire, saving only that he also, would obey the divine will therein.

But to return to the Conformity of the B. Virgin; and to make short in this
particular, and to say the chief of that which can be said in a word: It was
the will of our Lord God, that his Son and hers, being both God, and man,
and, even as man, being the most innocent, and most excellent, holy person,
that ever was, should be put to the grievous, and most ignominious death of the
Cross. And she saw, that he had been buffeted and dragged, and hoodwincked,
and scourged, and Crowned with thorns, and pierced with nails; and defiled
with spittle; and defamed with slanders, and profaned with blasphemies; and
exposed, stark naked to the view of the world upon that top of a hill; and
placed between a coople of murdring thieves; and so he continued, till at last
he parted with his precious life, being all dissolved into a very fountain of
blood.

This I say, she saw; and because his death was agreeable to the will, and the
manner of it, to the permission of our Lord God; she resolved with ineffable
strength of mind, to will all that part of his death which God would; and to
permit all that, which he The unspeakable co^formity of our B. Ladies will to
the will of God.
permitted. And she laid her self so wholly aside, as not only not to give it
the least impediment, but not so much, as once to harbor the least thought,
that way. And notwithstanding that she grieved at it, more then all the
creatures of God together, could have grieved (though all their grief had
been summed up into one drop of grief) since she loved him more then they all
could do, and the grief took measure by the love) she yet looked on, whilst
this was done; and she stood upon her feet, which is the posture of strength;
and she turned her heart up to God, by way of offering up even that Son, in
union of his own divine oblation; and she endured all that torment with
invincible patience. And whilst What a miracle of grace was this. Luc. 1.
the sword of sorrow, which S. Simeon had foretold, and which for the space of
so many years, she had, with a most steady eye, foreseen, with the point
still turned toward her, and with a most careful heart considered; and which
she was then, in the very act of Feeling, to pass, and transpierce her very
soul; yet neither in so many years, was that Mare pacificum, that profound
Sea, of her sweet soul, once troubled at it; nor, at the foot of the cross,
did she utter any one word of less Co^formity; nor express otherwise, any
little show of womanish, and weak complaint.

Nay S. Ambrose who considers her, in this most dolorous, but yet most glorious
state, dares not affirm, the she did so much as weep: Stantem lego, flentem
non lego; Ambr. de obitu Valent. prope sinem.
I read (says he) that she was standing at the foot of the Cross, but I do
not read, that she was weeping for the Crucifix. And to increase the wonder,
let it be further considered, as it is most true, though she had such grief,
as has been said, for the torment, and death of Christ our Lord, which was the
effect; yet incomparably she had more grief for the dishonor of God, and the
sin of man, which was the cause thereof. But still howsoever, she was all
resigned: and so, in conformity, of the most excellent will of God, as still to
stand, like an immovable marble tower, in the midst of such a world of waves.

To conclude therefore, concerning her virtues; she had not, in her whole life,
one thought, whereby she did not exercise some virtue, or other, in all
perfection. Nay if we be so miserable, as by one, and the same act of ours, to
offend sometimes against many virtues at once; Our B. Lady did exercise, at
once, many virtues, in the top of perfection.
how much more sure was her divine soul to be, like a huge rich Carbuncle cut
full of faces or squares, and to co^ply by every act of hers, with the
obligation, and perfection of many virtues at once. And those virtues had the
very properties, which her own excellent person had; for they were not only
most purely fair, for as much as co^cerned themselves; but most chastely
attractiue, and actually fruitful, in the mind of others. And God alone is
able to n^ber up, those innumerable millions of virtuous acts, of all kinds,
which have been wrought by Christians in imitation, and contemplation of her
virtues. And not only have men produced them, by her example, but when that was
done, they have refined, and perfected them, in a high degree. And yet still
withal, they conceive, and consider, and feel themselves, in their very
hearts, to be, but as unprofitable servants, as Christ our Lord commands all
the world to think they are, when they should have done all they could. Wherein
no soul has reason to find difficulty, when it remembers this holy mother of
God, who would know her self, by no better name then of his slave.

The entiere Conformity of the B. Virgins will, to the will of God, is
prosecuted; And it is showed, how a world of privileges, and perfections,
which seem incompatible, were assembled in her.

CHAP. 92.
VERILY we Christian Catholics, are much bound to God, for infinite Out Lord
does seek to draw us to him by objects of incomparable strength and sweetness.
favors; and it deserves to go amongst the greatest of them, that he sets
before us, such puissant and yet delightful objects as these. A God incarnate,
dying upon a Cross, and an Angel incarnate, and more then a whole Quire of
Angels, in the person of his B. Virgin Mother, at the foot thereof. They draw
us up toward them, by depressing us down, below our selves. For even what
Saint, will not run out of co^ntenance as far as the feet of shame can carry
him, and shrink into a feeling knowledge that he is indeed a kind of nothing,
if he be compared, I say not only to Christ our Lord, but to our B. Lady?

When the body is tormented, the mind will help to hold it up, but when the
Martyrdom is endured, by a sword of such sorrow in the soul, what is able to
stay it, but such a perfect obedience, and patience,, and love, as hers; which
tied it, after an immovable manner, to the pillar of Gods will; and which The
house of our B Ladies heart was immovable
planted that house of her heart, upon a rock so firm, as could not once be
shaken, by all the waves of earth, and hell. The visible Sun did hide it
self at that time, as in the discourse of the Passion was declared; and so
also did the invisible Son which was the the Son of this sacred Virgin,
hide himself in her. For where did he shine, and burn, but there? Cant. 2.
Dilectus meus mihi, and ego illi, was then the word of them both, hand to
hand; and she might well affirm in a much more eminent manner, Coloss. 3.
then S. Paul, that her life was hidden up with Christ in God.

What Our B. Lady did abound with things which seem incompatible with one
another.
a world of things, which seem incompatible with one another, do we see
encounter, and embrace themselves, in this sacred Virgin? In her, we see
affliction and joy; Nobility and poverty. A clear knowledge that she was the
Cedar of Excellency, with a perfect contempt, and making herself the shrubb of
hysop by humility. The fire of Charity, and the snow of Purity. Her person upon
earth; her conversation in heaven. A child of Adam in nature, and his mother in
Grace; and a child of Christ our Lord in grace, and his mother in nature. So
that she is both mother and daughter; nay she is both Virgin, and Mother. In
her sacred womb, she coupled God and man; Eecl. 42.
Et qui creauit me, requieuit in tabernaculo meo: and he (says she) who
created me, has reposed in this Her sacred womb.
Tabernacle of mine. She gave a new, and that an Eternal being, to him, who
gave the total being which is inioyed, both by her and all other creatures.
She was Grauida, as S. Bernard says, but not Grauata, great with child, but it
was a burden without any weight. For she carried him in her womb, who
carried, and conducted both him, and the world, in his three fingars. S. Bern.
hom. 3. super Missus est, post med.
She was turbata, non perturbata; troubled at the salutation of the Angel, but
not disturbed by it, as is also affirmed by the same S. Bernard. She is a fair
full river, which could never fall; but did over flow so far as to be a Sea,
but subject to no tempest; and always, if we will, we may glass our selves in
her smooth and shining waters. A Sea she is, to sail in; and a port to rest
in. She is also a well sealed up, Fons signatus. Cant. 4.
but yet we may all draw that from thence, which will quench our thirst; for
she is not only well, but water. She is also a garden shut up; but yet we all
may gather of those excellent, Hortus co^clusus. Cant. 4.
and odoriferous flowers. Nay though she be a garden, herself is also a
flower; and the best but one, in all that heavenly Paradise of God. She is the
true mother of Pearl; but yet withal she is a Pearl; and the richest after
that other, which does adorn the Throne of the Divinity. She is the woman,
whom, in the Apocalips, Apoc. 1^^
S. John saw clothed with the sun; and he also saw, in his Gospel, of
Verbum caro factum est, Joan. 11
that the Son was clothed and kept warm by her. She is also said to be like
the sun in brightness, yet not glareing, or dazeling; but together with the
brightness of a sun, she has the sweetness, of a neuer-wayning or changing
Moon.

She is sweet, but strange after the example of Christ our Lord, Sap. 8.
Qui disponit omnid suauiter, and pertingit, a fine vsque ad finem fortiter.
And for this, she is also said to be Terribilis, vt castrorum acies ordinata;
as terrible as a battle placed in good array. The terror, which a complete
Army gives, is great; but that is only to the enemies; for, to friends, it is a
spectacle, both of security, and glory. She The most sweet condition of our B.
Lady Cant. 4.
conquers with curtesy, and mercy; or if she do it, by force, yet is it not to
kill, but to take prisoners; and to enchaine them, in the arms of her
protection. She is that strong Tower of David; but yet withal, she will needs
be so weak, as to yield herself, upon the call of any afflicted creature.

In How our B. Lady was allied and lincked with all the three Persons of the B.
Trinity.
fine she had God the Father, for her Father; and God the Son for her Son;
and God the holy Ghost, for her Spouse. Her Son was wholly his Son, in one
of his natures; and his Son was wholly hers, in the other; and yet it was but
one, and the self same Son of the^ both. Who as he did infinitely (after a
sort) enrich that Humanity which he received from her; so it became his Majesty
and greatness, and wisdom, and goodness (besides his filial reverence, and
love) to impart himself to her as has been said, in the most abundant manner,
and withal those privileges, and graces which any mere creature could
receive.

Of the several devotions that we are to carry to our B. Lady.

CHAP. 93.
NOW therefore this glorious Virgin, being given us, by the gracious hand of our
Lord God, to be our mother; and she, withal, being a mother of such Sovereign
excellency, as we have seen; it will remain, for us to acknowledge, the
infinite obligation which we have to our B. Lord, for such a How enriere
devotion we are to carry to our B. Lady.
benefit; and to consider how great devotion, and humble affection, we ought to
carry toward her; that so we may obtain the more abundant blessing at her
hands. This Where in that deuotion^ does consist.
devotion and humble affection will consist, and ought to be expressed, by our
procuring to have her much, and with a mighty estimation in our memory; To
congratulate and rejoice, withal the powers of our soul, for her glory; To
dilate, and spread the fame of her excellency; To implore her aid of our
misery; And lastly, and chiefly, to imitate her Humility, her Purity, and her
Charity, with all the rest of those divine virtues, which triumphed and reigned
in her holy soul.

We Catholics, do all esteem her as we ought; and I will persuade my self
that such as are not so, (if yet withal they will pretend to believe in Christ
our Lord) will begin to do it. If any of us had interest but a little-little
piece, of one of the corruptible garments of Christ our Lord, how happy, and
how rich would he esteem himself, in the part which he might have, in such a
jewel? And if that piece, were of that garment in particular, which he had
worn next his own sacred flesh, how much more would he glory in such a
treasure? Now although we have no such Relic of our own, as this; yet by the
providence of God, his seamelesse coat, is extant in the hands of the Church.
And because it had the honor, to touch his sacred body, there is no Monarch in
the world, who ought not to adore God for that favor; and who may not lick
the dust of that ground, upon which so precious a jewel were conserved.

What are we then to think, and what to do, In Hypopante Domini, apud Canisium.
toward this Relic of God, the B. Virgin, of whom it is said by Methodius
(that excellent learned holy Saint, and Martyr, who was celebrated so greatly
by Saint Hierome;) That she was the garment, and cloak of Christ our Lord,
which he, being the true Elias, did leave to us, when he ascended up to heaven,
that so his spirit and grace, might doubly come down upon us. For not only had
he touched her and been clothed by her, but he lodged also in her precious
womb, many months; and alone it was, that himself had taken a body, which
might be touched. He was then in effect, but one, and the self same thing with
her; and so truly are The straight union between the mother and the Son.
the mother, and the child reputed both to be, then but one, that they have
both, but the good Angel of the mother; and the child has none of his own,
till he be severed from her, by his birth. And yet even afterward, it is rather
a separation, in respect of place, then a division in respect of nature; for in
that consideration, they are, in effect, still the same. With what an
admirable, tender, and most reverent love, must we therefore resort to this
mother of God, who was once one thing, with the Humanity of the same God; and
who never after, grew so much less one, in the way of corporal union, as she
did, by moments, go increasing in the union of her spirit with his.

We see what respects, are carried even to Reliquaries made of metal, if the
Relics which they keep, be well authorized, and of some Glorious Saint. And
much more we know, that the sacred Chalice is not so much as to be touched, but
by Ecclesiastical persons, for reverence of the B. Sacrament, which it
contained therein. Dear Our B. Lady is the Reliquary of God himself.
Lord and how highly reverently, are we then to touch this Reliquary, of the
divinity of God; since the matter whereof it was made gave matter, out of it
self, for the making of his humanity, which was the very Relic it self! How
Religiously are we to approach to this Custodia, which did minister the Corn,
whereof that bread of heaven was baked, by the fire of the holy Ghost, wherewith
the whole world is to be fed for ever! For then do we approach to this
Custodia, and then we touch it, when we aspire toward her, with our pious
affections, and devout prayers, which are the hands of our heart.

Most happy are those souls, to whom our Lord imparts a cordial, and filial
devotion to this Queene-mother of heaven; for they read that truth written in
their own hearts, which others do but read in books: Namely that it is a great
sign of Predestination, to be particularly devoted to her. And if I were
disposed to prove, that an auersion of the heart, from doing her honor, and
service, were an evident sign of Reprobation, in punishment of that, and other
sins; I The filthy life and fearful end of such as have opposed to the honor
of B. Lady. Vide Canis. l. 5. c. 20.
should need but to make a Catalogue of such as have maligned her. For the
proof of this latter truth, let Nestorius, Iouinianus, Heluidius, with the
impure Apostata's of this last age, be looked upon, and let their wicked life
otherwise, be considered, together with the fearful end, to which many of
them did arrive. And so also let them look back with their memory, upon
Copronymus, that most flagitious Emperor, that bloody, laciuious Sorcerer; who
by laws solemnly made, did deprive our B. Lady, both of her due estimation,
and invocation: Apoc. 13.
Et aperuit os suum in blasphemias ad Deum, blasphemare nomen eius and
Tabernaculum eius; and he opened his mouth in the way of blasphemy against God,
and his holy Tabernacle. And afterward, he dyed blaspheming God himself,
through the torments of most loathsome diseases, which carried him, from hence
to hell.

On the Compare the persons who have been devoted much to our B. Lady with
those others.
other side, let it be weighed, what excellent Princes they were, who, from
time to time, have done right to this Queen of heaven, by erecting Temples in
her honor. As Constantine the great, S. Helene, S. Pulcheria and Charlemaine,
to omit innumerable others. And what worthy holy persons, they also were, who
have written in her praises, and commended themselves with humble devotion to
their intercession; and who withal, have filled the world, with the odor of
their exemplar and holy lives; as namely S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nazienzen, Petrus Chrisologus, S. John Damascene, with
troops of other Fathers of the Greek Church; and of the Latin, S. Ambrose,
S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, Venerable Bede, S. Anselme, S. Bernard,
and worlds of others, whose books are full, besides the testimonies of prayers
to Saints, and sometimes to such as had then lately lived with themselves; (and
how much more to this Blessed mother of God, this Saint, Superior to all
Saints, under Christ our Lord) whose honor they have defended from all
Heretics. Some of whom, had taken pleasure, and pride, either to degrade her
body from integrity, or her soul from Sa^ctity; and who have, withal,
discouraged, and dissuaded the world, from procuring by their prayers, to her,
to obtain the effects of Gods mercy, toward her children. And when it shall
be found, what a difference there is, between these two troops of men; both
her adversaries, I hope, by so lively examples will be reduced, and her humble
sernants, and obedient Sons will be animated to the increase, and doubling of
their devotion toward her. Which the Saints of all ages, have delighted in;
and which (supposing that she is the mother of God) the very light of reason,
does enforce; and which God himself has approved by innumerable most
undoubted, both corporal, and spiritual miracles, in all the corners of the
Christian world.

The pity of our B. Lady toward us now that she is in heaven, is set out,
and showed to be far beyond what it was, when she lived on earth. And this
discourse is concluded, with a Prayer to her.

CHAP. 94.
IF whilst A particular po^deration of our B. Ladies vnque^chable charity
whilst she lived on ^^^th. (...) 1.
she was here, in this mortal life, she would vouchsafe, being the mother of
God, to express such an act of Humility, and Charity, as cost her pure feet
so many painful steps, over that hilly Country to S. Elizabeth. If she put
herself upon that labor, immediately after she was announced the mother of
God. If, it was not any visit, of complement, but that by her presence, she was
the means of enriching the body, and soul, and Son, of that Saint, with
celestial graces; And that she went not, to come quickly away again; but
staid assisting, and serving her, for the space of three months; in all which
time, S. Ambrose excellently po^ders, Luc. 2. l. 1. Co^. S. Luc. c. ^.
how much S. Elizabeth must needs be sanctified, by the divine conversation of
the sacred Virgin; since the first show of her presence, wrought such wonders
in her. If the sanctification of S. John, were the first spiritual increase,
which our Lord incarnate wrought in hearts; and it was done by means of this B.
Virgin; and the first corporal miracle was also wrought by her means, at the
Marriage of Cana, when she would descend so low, as to assist at the dynner of
people, who were so very poor as that they were not able to have wine enough
for their most solemn Feast? If of herself without being desired, she had an
eye, upon their wants, and a heart which wrought toward the relief thereof? If
she had compassion of them, not only concerning some such thing, as bread;
which had been of mere necessity; but for the obtaining of wine, which is a
creature, chiefly ordained for our delight, and comfort? If to procure it, she
solicited her Son our Lord, to work a miracle, in their favor, which, till
that time, he had never done; and yet he would not fail to grant her suite?
If, as soon as by her prayers for them, she had induced Christ our Lord, to
give them wine; she did instantly turn her praying to him, into a kind of
preaching to them; aduising them, to do whatsoever he should require at their
hands, through the dear solicitude and fear she had, least otherwise they
might have failed of due obedience (especially when she knew, in what manner,
he went to work the miracle) which was first to have the vessels filled with
water, which might have seemed to be a very contrary means to the desired end,
which was to help the^ to a supply of wine? If these things, I say, were done
by her, when her Charity was far less, A comparison of what our B. Lady, was
on earth to what she is now in heanen
and her state incomparably inferior to that, which now it is: what person is
that so unworthy, whom this Queen of heaven will not auow, and own from
heaven? What wound of any soul, is that so grievous, which she will disdain
to dress? and what want of comfort can that be so extreme, which she will not
employ herself to remove, by interceding to her Son our Lord? Now that those
Lillyes of Purity, and those Violets of her Humility, and those red Roses of
her burning Charity, and Patience at the Cross, are tra^splanted out of the
desert of this world into that garden of God, in heaven. For thither is she
assumed, both in soul, and body, to the fruition of more glory, then is
possessed by all the Angels, and Saints. There, is she ingulfed, in the bright
vision of God, where she sees, and in whom she loves, all the souls which
have recourse to her, with incomparable Charity, and care. And if S. Augustine,
could truly say of his deceased friend Nebridius, who was gone to God: Confess.
l. ^. c. ^.
I am non ponit aurem ad os me^ etc. He does not now lay his ear to my mouth,
but he applies that spiritual mouth, to that spring of thine; and he drinks
wisdom, after the uttermost rate of his own greedy thirst, being happy for
all eternity. Neither yet, do I think, that he is so inebriated with thee, as
that he can forget me; since thou, O Lord, whom he is drinking, art mindful
of us. If S. Augustine, I say, could thus reflect upon Nebribius, who shall be
ever able, to express the perpetual memory, or rather the ever present sight,
and care of us, which the mother of our Lord God, now reigning in such glory as
becomes such greatness, has ince^ parably, more te^derly, and more lively of
us, then S. Augustines Nebridius, could have of him. So much more, as she was
made our mother here; and so much more, as (now that she is there) she drinks
whole seas of God, for any one drop which Nebridius could drink, and
consequently, as she is more perfectly happy, and tra^sformed into that Abisse
of charity, God himself; whose love, and desire, and care of our eternal good,
is infinite.

Proceed, therefore O thou glorious Queen, in being glorious; and reign thou
for ever, under God alone, over all his creatures. Proceed, in being gracious
to us, thou who were so full of Grace, even before thou were made the mother of
God. Thy soul did magnify our Lord, at the visit which thou gave to S.
Elizabeth, with The princely gratitude of our B. Lady, expressed in the
Magnificat, to our Lord God.
more delight and joy, the^ ever had been conceived, by any creature. And thou
did the^, most divinely express his goodness, to thee, in a manner of Court,
so choice, and noble, as might well declare, that thou were born a Queen; thou
did singe Magnificat to our Lord, for having respected, and, as it were, cast
an eye of favor, toward thee. And how truly indeed were thou as good as thy
word therein, when thou said that thou did Magnify, or make great our Lord.
For whilst he was bestowing those great favors upon thee, according to those
other words of thine, Fecit mihi magna qui pote^s est, and sanctu^ nome^ eius:
Our Lord has done great things to me, and his name is holy, thou were, even
very then, returning those great things again to him; with the addition of
thine own most humble thanks. So that the greater he made thee, the more great
and glorious he was also made by thee. And besides, how could thou make him
show more glorious; and more great, then in saying, that, with the cast, as it
were, but of an eye, he had made such a mother for himself as thou. This
Magnificat of thine, is celebrated with diligent, and daily devotion, by the
holy Catholic Church, in memory of that high joy, which thou had in thy
Angelical heart; when the holy Ghost, expressed it self, by that well tuned
Organ, of thy tongue. But now, O sovereign Lady, that thou art all transformed
in God, thou art singing it out, in a far higher strain. Thou can not say
any more, that he but casts an eye of favor toward thee; for now he looks
upon thee, with a full face; and thou art able to see him, as thou art scene.
1. Cor. 13.
And since the more thou see of him, the more do thou also, see of us.
Vouchsafe to implore his mercy toward the relief of our misery, which thou
can not but find to be extreme. Behold us who are children of thy soul,
since by Faith, thou becamst the mother of all such as were to live by Grace.
And intercede thou for us, with that Son of thy sacred womb; whose laws
though we have transgressed; and whose Passion, though we have renewed, and
whose grace though we have quenched, by our innumerable sins; yet for as
much, as from our souls, we are sorry for the^; and that there was mercy in
store, for his very Crucifiers, let it not be wanting to us, who are procuring,
as thou know, to be his servants. Since we fly to the sanctuary of thy feet
for succor; since, with the most reverend of our thoughts, we take hold of
that Altar, of thy purest womb; wherein the Judge of the quick and dead, did
make the first Sacrifice of himself, to his eternal Father, for the
redemption of the world; defend us, by thy prayers, O Queen of pity, from
that sword of Justice, which is ready to fall upon our heads.

Thou said, that all Generations should call thee Blessed; and we are a part
of them; and withal the powers of our souls, we bless both thee, and God for
thee; and we vow our selves to believe, whatsoever excellency may be ascribed
to a mere creature. And we make this protestation withal; that so far we
are from derogating thereby from the worship of Latria, which is only due to
God, as that we know not, in this world, how to do him more high honor, and
service, then by offering him first to himself; and next, by honoring and
praising thee. For the greater thou art, the greater do we acknowledge him to
be, who made thee what thou art, or nothing. Obtain of that holy Spirit, who
ouer-shadowed thee, here, and which does, as it were, ouerwhelme thee there,
in that region of eternal bliss; that we also, may be quickened, and inspired
by it: and so may be walking on toward heaven, by those paces, which thy pure
feet, have traced out.

I cannot beseech thee, to obtain wine for us, as thou did for them, of
Cana, for we want no wine, since we are nourished by the milk of thy maternall
love, which is better the^ the best and most precious wine. And we may also be
inebriated, as often as we shall well dispose our selves, by that Vinum
germinaus virgins; Lach. 9.
that precious blood in the body of thy Son our Lord, in the venerable
Sacrament of the Altar. But the misery is, that our souls want mouths,
wherewith to taste it; or rather they are all crammed, with the corrupted food of
delight in creatures; and our blindness is such through the mist of passion
which ouergrowes us, that we see not what we eat, and much less can we
discern, the sad effects, which it works within; and amongst them, this one,
that it depriues us of gust, in heavenly things. It is therefore, O Queen of
heaven, that we cast our selves humbly at thy feet; that by the force of thy
prayers, the merits of thy Son our Lord, may be applied to us. And that so
our souls may be discharged, of all inferior kinds of love, which press us
down, as with grievous weightes; and then drag us after the^, in the chains
of bitter servitude. And procure thou, at length, that they may fly up to God
as to their true, and only place of rest, adoring him for ever, and admiring
thee.

A Recapitulation of diverse Motives, which ought to draw us close to the love
of our Lord.

CHAP. 95.
BY the mercy of our Lord; we have partly seen the supereminency of his Love
to man, in the whole course of his sacred life and death; and withal we have
beheld the unspeakable Dignity of his person, which is the thing that stamps
the mark of true value upon all that, which he was pleased both to do, and
suffer for his creatures. His heart may be accounted as the root; his actions
and benedictions as the branches; and he desires, that the love, which, by way
of retribution, we must bear to him, may be a good part of the fruit. For
although in holy Scripture, he was pleased to call himself the Vine, Joan. 15.
and us the branches; yet his meaning clearly was that those branches should
not be as of the barren fig tree, which he cursed; Marc. 13.
or as of that unnatural Vine, with gave him veriuyce instead of wine; Isa. 5.
but that they should be such, as might deserve to be of his planting; since
for the fertility and abundant increase thereof, he came into the world, and
wrought himself for that end, into the most bitter, and ignominious death of
the Cross. Now heerby as man, he made himself able to pay, unto himself, as
God, that debt which otherwise, would not have failed to drag mankind into the
bottomless pit of hell, and to enchaine it, for all eternity, to an
unquenchable fire.

Many principal obligations, which we have to love, withal our soul, this
Lord of ours, for such a love, may be derived, and drawn, out of these
particulars. Every mortal sin, is an offense, not only against the law, and
will of God, but even against the nature and excellency, of that infinite
Majesty. So that the committing of any one The grieuousnesse of any one single
mortal sin.
mortal sin, needs an infinite reparation; and cannot possibly be
expiated, by the penance of any one, or all mere creatures, though it should
last, as long, as God, is to be God. Let us therefore consider, what a deal of
love there went toward the making of such an infinite satisfaction to God; as
in virtue whereof, not only some one single sin, but millions of millions, are
discharged, before the tribunal seat of God; and that, at the so little cost
of man, as I shall instantly declare. They are innumerable sins, which are
committed by some one man, in some one day; and then to what may they arrive in
his whole life, by a miserable multiplication of his wicked acts, who drinks
iniquity up like water, and imagines mischief on his bed; whereby the holy
Ghost, has declared to our knowledge, how delightfuly and restlesly the wicked
man is wo^t to sin. But yet, if any one such creature should have committed
as many sins, as were, and will be committed by all mankind, between the
creation, and co^sumatio^ of the world, when afterward he grows to be
sincerely and truly sorry for it, and does intyrely coniesse it, and do penance
for it, according to the ordinace of God and his holy Church, with constant
purpose to abstain from future time; at the instant, I say, that he conceaues
this true sorrow at his heart, he is forgiven all the guilt of all his sins.
And as for the punishment, it may also be all forgiven, if the sorrow have bin
very intense and pure. And in case it were not so very perfect, it is supplied
so far by the Sacrament of Confession, as to make the punishment instead of
eternal, become temporal. But always such a person of a rebel and traitor,
and child of wrath, is made by one act of true Contrition, if it be true
indeed, the servant, the Friend, the Son, and even the very spouse of God.
Nay he is not made so for only once, but toties quoties; as often as he
returns cordially from sin to God.

Besides, our It is nothing but infinite love which obliges our Lord to
forgive sins.
Lord forgiueth not sinners, as not having power wherewith to punish them, as
men do sometimes; for he is omnipotent. He does not forgive them, as not
considering, or not remembering, or not weighing, the deformity of sin, which
many times is the case of men, when they find themselves to be offended. But
God is of infinite wisdom and knowledge: He numbers the hairs of the head;
Luc 11. Psalm. 7. H^ebr. 4.
He weighes out the thoughts of the heart, and he deuides between the marrow and
the bones. He differreth not his pardon one minute; but the very instant of our
true sorrow is the same, with that, of his forgiveness. He does not reproach his
penitents for their sins; nor does he upbraid his friends, with the
allegations of his former benefits, as the custom of the world does bear. It
is he, who inuites, and calls us, and even wooes us to his friendship, and not
we our selves; and this he does not, for any benefit of his own, but only ours.

There The incessant liberal goodness of our Lord.
is no minute of our life wherein he is not actually imparting worlds of
blessings to us, many whereof we know, who yet may be said to know nothing; and
incomparably the greater number whereof, we never know till the next life. Nay
and even upon them, who are actually at that very time offending, and
affronting, and blaspheming him, he is bestowing benefits, which are both
without measure, and number. And then does he preserve them, both in life and
health, and he gives them his beasts, and birds, and fish, whereon to feed, and
he carries the torch before them both of Son and Moon and fixed Stars. He
does them both exceeding honor, and favor; he howseth them under the vault of
heaven, and he gives them the earth for a foot stool, and he loades the^,
even in that time of their treason, with the offer, of many superexcellent and
supernatural gifts, expecting them every minute to penance; though whilst he
begets and breeds good thoughts in their hearts, they do nothing but brain
them by their sins. And that which may confound us, with the admiration of
love, is to observe, how, many times, when men are in the very top of their
greatest crimes, eue^ then, and very then, he is executing his eternal decree,
of taking occasion, even by those sins, to give them such a degree of grace,
in such circumstances, of time and place, and disposition, as may make them his
own in most particular manner for ever after. Confess. l. 3. cap. 6.
Vae, vae, quibus gradibus descendi in infernu^, says the incomparable S.
Augustine: woe is me, woe is me by what steps was I dropping down to hell! and
the Saint showed, shortly after, that even then, our B. Lord was taking him,
with the hand of mercy, of out that Abyss of danger and destruction.

We may see, in some durty Note this comparison.
poole of mire, some little ugly stick, which is rotting it self away, into
worse then nothing; and we would wonder at the great goodness of some Sovereign
Monarch, if he should vouchsafe to stoop, and to foul his fingars, for the
taking it up; and much more, if he would make a bath of his own blood Royal,
wherein it might steep, if thereby he could make it fit again to be a plant, and
to bring forth fruit in his Princely garden, to the pleasure of himself, and
all his Court. No rotten stick, in any durty stinking poole, does come home to
the expression of that filth, and ruin, which tryumpheth in every soul, which
is liable to the guilt of mortal sin. And yet this King of heaven and earth,
did abase himself from his throne of Majesty, to this Center of misery; and,
by the hand of his grace, takes up innumerable souls, which are rotting in
sin; and he bathes them in his own precious blood, at the instant that they
are sorry for their offenses, and he plants them first into his militant
Church; and then he transplants them, into the tryumphant, and they grow to
flourish, like so many beautiful trees, in that Paradise of God, for all
eternity.

But first, in this life, when once men accept of his inspirations; he How
infinitely our Lord inricheth his friends, and servants.
gives the^ new graces, and means to acquire inestimable eternal treasures in
every moment of their lives; since in every moment thereof they may do, or say,
or think of somewhat, to his greatest glory. Every one of which acts, being
rooted in his grace, which was purchased by his merits, and being accompanied
by his promise, which flowed only from the fountain of his love, has a
district degree of glory; belonging to it, in the next life. Every one of which
degrees of glory, through the inestimable and incomprehensible excellency
thereof, although it should last but one only minute, were millions of times to
be preferred, (as was touched once already) before all the Honors, Treasures,
and Pleasures, which were, and are to be possessed and inioyed, by all
creatures from the creation of Adam, to the second coming of Christ our Lord.
And what then shall we say, of such a degree of glory, as is to be eternal?
And what then, of such innumerable degrees of the same eternal glory, as do
answer to all the moments of our life.

Not only does our Lord give us means to serve, and please his superexcellent
Majesty; in all the moments of our mortal life, by our continual turning up
the white (as I may say) of our souls eye, to him; but he is ever ministering
to us, An incomparable mercy if it be well considered.
particular means, and occasions, whereby, and wherein we may exercise most
heroycall virtues, of Humility, Patience, and Mercy; of Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience; Faith, Hope and Charity, and all the rest.

Besides, it has pleased our Lord to plant a perfection in every occasion, and
actio^ of his life. Now, by means heerof, how miserable soever we have bin in
former times, we may, at that instant (supposing that our state be chosen well)
do that very thing, in the most excellent manner, which of all others, in the
whole world, is most acceptable and pleasing to our Lord God.

Again, for See how sollicitous our Lord is of our good.
those souls, which are in state of grace, our Lord does keep, as it were, two
several books of account. The one is of time, which has an end; the other is
of Eternity which has none. Now whatsoever defects, or Venial sins, be
committed (which being Venial, are compatible with the state of Grace) how
wilful, and unworthy soever they be, our Lord, who is so rich in goodness, and
so liberal of grace, does cast them into the account of time, that so there
may once be an end of the punishment thereof. Which is at last discharged,
either by the penance of a penitential life, or else afterward, by the pains
of Purgatory; both which kinds of satisfaction, are rooted in the precious
merits of Christ our Lord. But as for the good deeds, and words, and thoughts,
which have proceeded from such a man, (though accompanied with imperfections,
and frailtyes) our Lord does lodge the^ all, in the book of Eternity; that so
there may be no end of their reward. Now woe, and woe again, be to that
wretched soul, which upon this occasion and motive shall presume to serve our
Lord with less fidelity, and love, and not rather, incomparably with more.

Of the several kinds of Love, which our souls may exercise to our Lord
Jesus. And the whole Treatise is concluded, with showing how much we love our
Lord, by loving our neighbors for his sake.

CHAP. 96.
WE must therefore serve, and love this blessed Lord of ours, with all the love
of all our souls; not depriving him of his due, by distracting it toward any
of his creatures, Confess. l. 4. cap. 12.
but only for him, and in him. For most unjustly, as the incomparable S.
Augustine says, do we love those things to his dishonor, from whom those
things do all proceed, and by whom, if they were not preserved, in every
moment of time, they would instantly perish.

I say we must love our Lord, with a kind of delight, or complacence, rejoicing
in the Consideration of his divine excelle^cies, and attributes; and taking
gust in the conte^plation of his beauty; and in the strength, and wisdom of
his holy will; which, in despite of devils and wicked men, shall be
accomplished, and fulfilled from the greatest of his works to the falling of
any lease toward the ground, and the moving of any moate in the air. Et quid
necuerunt tibi (says S. Augustine, Confess. l. ^. cap. 2.
of wicked men) aut in quo imperium tuum dehonestauerunt, a caelis vsque in
nouissima, iustum and integrum? For how could they ever hurt thee, or wherein
have they bin able to dishonor, or disparage thy dominion, or government,
which is so entyere and just, from the very highest to the very lowest of thy
creatures?

We must The love of benevolence, and frie^dship toward. God.
love him, with a love which may be called of Friendship, or Benevolence, most
cordially desiring, and incessantly procuring the exaltation of his holy name,
and the exaltation of his eternal glory, in all hearts and souls.

We must love him, with a love of exquisite, and entiere Obedience, both in
perfectly doing all that which he is pleased to inioyn, and cheerfully
suffering, all that which he is pleased to impose. For the truth of love, does
not consist in only thinking, or talking, or weeping, or any such expression of
the mind, but in a faithful pursite of his will, who is beloved, and in a
sincere complying with his good pleasures.

We must love The love of correspo^dence.
him with a love of Correspondence; observing his inspirations with great
attention, and answearing them with great affection; and being far from
greeuing his holy spirit, which by moments, is soliciting us to perfection,
Confess. l. 11. cap. 9.
Audiat te intus sermocinantem qui potest, says the divine S. Augustine; let
him that can (and who is he, that cannot, if he will) give ear to those holy
motions, and give way to those pious affections, which our Lord is making, and
moving, in the souls, of such, as desire to serve him, in particular manner.

We must love him with a love The love of commerce.
of Co^merce, not only answering with a great facility of inclination, to his
express, and known inspirations, but, at all times, and upon all occasions,
as far as our frailty will permit, we must be procuring to dispatch our
thoughts toward him; and be sweetly careful to maintain a perpetual
intercourse, or traffic with him, deploring our miseries, and imploring his
mercies, and venting the breathing, and longing of our hearts, to be once well
united, and for ever to be ingulfed in him. Manual. cap. 19.
For why, as S. Austen says, should there be a minute, wherein we may not think
of him, since there is no minute, wherein we are not favored and regaled by
him. And our Lord does know, that it is misery enough, for the soul which
loves him, to be absent from him, but even for a minute, and this alone ought
to make, and keep us humble, without putting him upon a kind of necessity of
permitting us to fall into other grosser sins, for the punishing, and abating
of our secret pride.

We must love The love of entiere excha^ge.
him lastly, with a love of total and entiere Exchange; contracting our selves
to him, in all the courses of our life, with an indissoluble knot of love.
Loving all that which he loves, and prising all that which he esteems, and
despising all that, which he contemnes, and abhorring all that which he
mislikes. In effect, we must leave to be our selves, and we must strive, and
grow, to be as so many little Christ's; according to that divine saying of the
blessed Apostle, Viuo ego, iam non ego, viuit vero in me Christus. Galat. ^.
I live, yet now it is not I, but Christ our Lord, lives in me. For this is
the felicity of a Christian, to be like, and to live in Christ our Lord, and he
in us, by exchange, or rather union of the will. And without this resemblance,
more or less, there is no thought to be had, Romans 8.
of clyming so high as heaven. For they who are predestined to the felicity
of raygning there, are called in this life (as the B. Apostle shows) to a
great resemblance, and conformity with the Son of God.

But we are not The unspeakable honor and happiness that it is to be like our
Lord Jesus.
worthy to live, if we need to be either persuaded, by the obtaying of
promises, or by the declining of punishments, to become like this Lord of ours;
since the very thing it self, even abstracting from what it may import us,
either toward Hell or Heaven, is of the most excellent, the most sublime, and
sweet condition, that can be conceived. Our Lord give us grace to penetrate,
the much honor he has done us, if ^^ were but in giving us leave, to be like
himself; and much more, to ponder his immense Love, in commanding us, that by
loving him, we will grow like him, and in that, Confess. l. 1. cap. 5.
(as Saint Austen divinely contemplateth, after this manner) he will be
greiuously offended with us, and does theaten to load us with huge miseries, in
case we will not resolve to love him; whilst yet that very not loving him, is
the hugest misery which can be felt.

A strange Our Lord does place his nor our in our good. John 15.
thing it is, to see how that excellent Majesty, has not disdayned to place
the point of his great glory, in our greatest good, and not only in our being
good, but in that we should be growing, better daily. For In hoc clarificatus
est pater meus, vt sructum plurimum asseratis, says our blessed Lord, with his
own sacred mouth: By this is my Father glorified, if you bring forth great
store of fruit. And he was not content that we should only live by him, and
with him, and in him, by a life of grace, and glory, John 10.
but he would have that life to be abundant, Vt vi^a^ habeant, and abundantius
habent.

To conclude therefore once for all, our Lord might well say to mankind, under
the figure of that Vine of the old Testament, in the way of expostulation and
admiration: Quid potui facere vineae meae, and non seci? What thing is that
which I have bin, even able to do, and which I have not done to this vine of
mine? Look back An advise to the Reader.
Christian Reader, upon that, which has bin delivered in this Discourse. Look
up, to that incessant goodness, and invincible patience of our Lord God. Look
down, upon thine own miseries, and sins, and consider that yet, thou may
be truly happy, if thou will. Let us procure to be sorry, and ashamed when we
consider what a deal we loose for lack of wit, by the loss of time: In every
moment whereof, we might do great exployts, even within the Closets of our own
heart; and the little that we get in the long lives, which we lead in this
world, for want of love, notwithstanding that God is infinitely communicable,
and that, after a sort, our souls are also infinitely capable.

Away therefore with sin, away with loss of time. And as for those happy
souls, whom already our Lord has ^ounded with his love, let the^ improve the
rich Tale^t, Matt. 13.
which they have received; that the more they abou^d, the more may still be
given them, that so they may still abound the more. And We cannot better show
our love to God then by loving our neighbors.
for as much as we cannot revenge our selves (if I may so say) upon our Lord
himself, by doing him any real good, for all his goodness toward us, because
he is completly happy in himself; let us procure to send forth the beams of
our pity, from the bowels of cliarity toward our neighbors, since they are
the creatures whom our Lord has loved so much, as to dye as well for the^
upon a Cross, as he has done for us. A body The wonderful value and reward
even of corporal works of mercy.
would think, that we should need no exhortation to frequent the corporal
works of Mercy, as feeding the hungry and thirsty; clothing the naked;
visiting and comforting sick persons, and prisoners, and the like; since by
his own sacred mouth, he has told us, in his holy Gospel, that he will
assume men to heaven, if they shall have done these works, and adiudge men to
hell it they do them not. But this blessed Lord of ours, does yet assign such
another reason in that very place; as, to a soul which has tasted of his
divine love, is incomparably of more force then the former. And it is, that he
has vouchsafed to put his very self into the person of that beggar, or
distressed person: Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis mihi secistis; Matt. 25.
That so he might make us happy, by his receiving, from our miserable unworthy
hands a piece of courtesy and service, Which he is pleased to apply to his own
most excellent divine person.

And now, since our Spiritual works of mercy are inco^parably of more account
with God then corporal.
Corpoall works of mercy to our neighbors, are taken by himself, as such
lively tokens of our love to him; who shall be able to declare, how much more
gratefully he will take it, that we be careful, and liberal in the works of
mercy which are spiritual. So much more grateful to him are these latter,
then those former works, as the spiritual, and immortal substance of the
soul, is more valuable, then the base and dying substance of the body: Nay one
soul, according to S. Chrysostom, Orat. 3. contra Iudaeos.
is more worth then the whole material world put together. Now the spiritual
work of mercy, which is exercised by one man toward another, in reducing such
as err, in teaching such as are ignorant, and in fine, in drawing a soul from
wickedness of life, to Gods service, does produce, as the instrument of God, and
by the help, and strength of his holy hand, (l) Miraculous things are wrought
in the soul who^ it returns to God. 2. Pet. 1.
strange things in the soul. For it destroys the kingdom of Sin; it
infuseth grace; it makes that man, of an enemy and traitor, which he was to
God, to become both his Son, and Heir; it enricheth him with the merits of
Christ our Lord; and it makes him partake of a divine nature. Nay it is most
certainly and clearly true, that the man who co^uerts a soul, does, by the
goodness of our Lord, acheiue a more great, and glorious enterprise, the^ Christ
our Lord himself, was pleased to do by his illuminating of the blind, or
raising of the dead, or, in fine, by working any other miracle, which was
merely corporal. Since therefore this work of helping souls is so very great,
how immense must that love, and mercy of our B. Lord have bin, who was pleased
to How easily great things are done in Gods service.
enable men thereunto; and that at so easy a rate, as that, by the goodness of
God, it is performed many times, by the only exchange of a few words, either of
counsel to them, or instruction of them, or by prayer for them. And by these
happy men, that is partly and daily fulfilled, which was done in great measure,
Colos. 2.
by the blessed Apostle, when he said: Adimpleo ea quae desunt passionum
Christi, pro corpore eius, quae est Ecclesia: I fulfill those things which are
wanting to the passion of Christ our Lord, for that body of his, which is the
Church. Not, but that the passion of Christ our Lord, is all-sufficient in it
self, for the redeeming, and saving of a thousand worlds; but that which the
blessed Apostle does insinuate, as wanting to the passion of Christ our Lord,
was the application thereof, by Faith and Penance (which last, supposes also
Hope and Love) to the souls of Christians. This I say, is that wherein the B.
Apostle employed himself; and this is that very thing, to which the men of God
do now attend; and this, in fine, is that, whereby we way testify our Love to
our Lord Jesus, in a most excellent manner. And I beg of the same Lord, that
he will give us store of grace, whereby we may love him as we ought; and serve
him in such sort to all purpose (...) he desires, and deserves at our hands.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. OF the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, declared by showing his
Greatness, as he is God. page 1
Chap. 2. The Love of our Lord Jesus, as he is Man, is much commended to us, by
the consideration of the Excellency of his Soul. page 10
Chap. 3. The power and Sanctity of the Soul of Christ our Lord, is considerd;
whereby we may also the better see his excessive Love. page 15
Chap. 4. The dignity of the precious body of Christ our Lord, is declared,
whereby the excellency of his love is magnified. page 21
Chap. 5. How the Beauty of our Lord Jesus Christ, did convince and co^quer all
lookers on, saving only where excess of sin had put out the eyes of the
soul. page 25
Chap. 6. The admirable visible grace and disposition of the person of Christ
our Lord, is further declared. page 29
Chap. 7. The same discourse is prosecuted and concluded, concerning the
excellent Beauty of our Lord; especially of the attractiuenesse of his sight.
page 35
Chap. 8. How this infinite God, and superexcellent Man, our Lord Jesus Christ,
did, with incomparable love, cast his eye of mercy upon mankind. page 43
Chap. 9. The Original Root and Moti^e of the infinite Love of Christ our
Lord, to the Salvation of man, is discovered. page 48
Chap. 10. The mystery of the Incarnation is more particularly looked into; and
the love of our Lord Jesus is wonderfully expressed thereby. page 52
Chap. 11. Of the immense Love of Christ our Lord, expressed to Man in his holy
Nativity. page 57
Chap. 12. How by the Poverty of our Lord Jesus in his Nativity, poor men are
comforted, and the rich are kept from being proud. page 61
Chap. 13. Of the unspeakable love, which our Lord Jesus expressed to us in
his Circumcision. page 66
Chap. 14. Of the name of Jesus, and the incomparable love which our Lord does
show to us by that name. page 75
Chap. 15. The same discourse concerning the holy Name of Jesus is further
prosecuted. page 78
Chap. 16. Of the great love which our Lord showed to us in his Epiphany, or
Manifestation to the Gentiles, in the person of the three Kings. page 82
Chap. 17. It is showed by the Presentatio^ of our Lord Jesus in the Temple,
how infinite love he bare to us. page 90
Chap. 18. How in the flight which our Lord Jesus made to Egypt, he discovered
his unspeakable Love to man. page 96
Chap. 19. The great Love of our Lord Jesus, is further showed in his flight to
Egypt. page 101
Chap. 20. Of the great Love which our Lord Jesus showed by his disputing and
teaching in the Temple. page 107
Chap. 21. Of the excessive love which our Lord Jesus showed to us, in that he
would vouchsafe to be Baptized. page 114
Chap. 22. The discourse concerning Baptism is continued; and the great Love
of our Lord in the institution of that Sacrament, is more declared. page 120
Chap. 23. Of the unspeakable Love to us which our Lord Jesus showed, in his
being tempted in the wilderness, by the Devil. page 126
Chap. 24. The excellent examples and instructions which our Lord Jesus gave
us, with great Love, in this mystery of his Temptation. page 13^
Chap. 25. The Temptations which the Devil did seek to put upon our Lord
Jesus, are declared and opened. page 135
Chap. 26. It is showed how we are to carry our selves in the use of holy
Scripture; and we are instructed concerning Lent; and we are encouraged
toward the use of Penance; and so this mystery of the Temptation is
concluded. page 140
Chap. 27. Of the great Love which our Lord Jesus showed to mankind in the
Vocation of his Apostles. page 145
Chap. 28. The incomparable Love wherewith our Lord insta^tly rewarded the
speedy obedience of the Apostles. page 151
Chap. 29. Of the excessive Love which our Lord Jesus showed to man in the
mystery of the Transfiguratio^. page 157
Chap. 30. The incomparable joy which the Apostles took through the love which
our Lord Jesus showed the^ in his Tra^sfiguration: and how himself was content
to want the glory of it, both before and after, for the love of them. page 152
Chap. 31. The most excellent instructions which our Lord, through his love did
give to man, in this mystery of the Transfiguration. page 166
Chap. 32. Of the unspeakable love which our Lord Jesus showed, by delivering
to us his admirable Doctrine, and of the manner which he held in teaching us.
page 171
Chap. 33. Of the tender love which (...) Lord Jesus showed by the incommodity
which he was subject to, whilst he delivered his Doctrine to us; and of the
surfeit which some are subject to, if we take not heed, by the abundance of his
blessings. page 176
Chap. 34. The same discourse is continued, concerning the great love, which
our Lord Jesus expressed in his Doctrine. page 181
Chap. 35. The incomparable purity of the Doctrine of Christ our Lord: and with
how great love he helps us toward the practice thereof. page 186
Chap. 36. Of the unspeakable Love of our Lord Jesus, in ordeyning, that the
greatest part of his divine Doctrine should remain in writing: and of the
great benefit which grows to us by the holy Scripture. page 195
Chap. 37. How careful we must be, not to be rash in the use of holy
Scripture: and of the great obscurity thereof. page 201
Chap. 38. How the holy Scripture grows to be so very obscure: and of the
infinite wise love which our Lord has showed to us, even therein. page 209
Chap. 39. Of the great te^dernes of the Love of our Lord which is showed to
man, by the express words of holy Scripture: and first of the old Testament.
page 216
Chap. 40. The infinite tender Love of our Lord, which is expressed in the
Scriptures of the new Testament. page 226
Chap. 41. Of the excessive love which our Lord Jesus showed to man, by the
Miracles which he wrought on earth. page 233
Chap. 42. How all the miracles of the new Testament do tend to mercy; and how
our Lord did never deny the suite of any one; and of the tender manner which he
held in granting them. page 239
Chap. 43. The great (...) of Love which our Lord Jesus expressed in the
working of his Miracles, is more declared. page 247
Chap. 44. How the corporal Miracles of our Lord Jesus had an aim at the
reformation of souls, and did tend to the discovering, and facilitating the
belief of great mysteries. page 252
Chap. 45. Of the infinite Love which our Lord Jesus, showed to us, in the
institution of the blessed Sacrament, and the holy Sacrifice of the Mass. page
257
Chap. 46. How our Lord would not harken to those reasons which might have
dissuaded him from showing this great mercy to man. Of the necessity of a
visible Sacrifice: and how our Lord himself, does still offer it. page 264
Chap. 47. Of the judgment which the holy Fathers of the Church have always
made of this holy Sacrifice, and B. Sacrament; and the great veneration, which
they had them in; and the ^^^iues whereby we may be induced to do the like.
page 270
Chap. 48. How we do both feed, and are fedd upon, in the B. Sacrament; and of
the admirable effects which it must necessarily cause, in such as do worthily
receive it; and of the reason why it must be so; and of the Figures which
forshewed the same. page 277
Chap. 49. Of the great Love of our Lord, in conueying the B. Sacrament to us,
under the species of bread and wine. Why it is neither necessary, nor
convenient, nor scarce possible for all Christians to communicate of the
Chalice. Of diverse kinds of Union: And how liberal our Lord is to us, in
letting us all frequent these divine Mysteries so often. page 284
Chap. 50. The misery is showed, and the error is partly co^uinced, of such as
do not (...) the belief of those divine mysteries. page 292
Chap. 51. Of the Obligation which we have to God, for so great a benefit; and
who are most bound to be denoted to it, and why; and how happy they must needs
be, who frequent it with devotion. page 298
Chap. 52. Of the infinite Love which our Lord Jesus discovers to mankind in
his sacred Passion; with a reflection upon the dignity of his divine person;
and the use which here we are to make thereof. page 304
Chap. 53. Of the most tender and divine Love and care which our Lord Jesus
showed, at his entrance into the Passion, in his last sermon, and long prayer,
to his eternal Father. page 308
Chap. 54. The horror, and terror, and sorrow of Christ our Lord, together
with his Prayer in the Garden. page 313
Chap. 55. What grief it must needs cause to our B. Lord to be estranged from
feeling comfort in God. page 319
Chap. 56. The incomparable sorrow of Christ our Lord, through his
consideration of the dishonor of God, and the sin and misery of man:
together with the sight, of what himself was to suffer. page 324
Chap. 57. Of the excellency of Prayer, declared by occasion of that Prayer of
our B. Lord in the Garden. page 331
Chap. 58. The apprehensio^ of Christ our Lord, and a just expostulatio^ with
the traitor Judas, for that hideous treason of his: together with a
description of mortal sin, and the danger which we are put into by all
voluntary venial sins. page 335
Chap. 59. Of our Lords great love to us, in permitting that fall of Judas: and
of that unspeakable mercy which he showed otherwise, in the mystery of his
apprehe^sion. page 344
Chap. 60. Of the blow which was given upon the face of our B. Lord in the high
^^iests house; of the fall of S. Peter. How our Lord was taxed first of
Blasphemy; and of the excessive Love of our Lord, in all these particulars.
page 350
Chap. 61. The abundant, and must bitter scorns, which our B. Lord endured
with excessive love, in that night precedent to his death. page 358
Chap. 62. How our Lord was solemnly adiuged worthy of death for Blasphemy; and
of the death of Judas; and how they send our Lord to Pilate. page 366
Chap. 63. How Pilate examined our B. Lord, and sent him to Herod. How Herod
scorned him and sent him back to Pilate, who resolved to scourge him. page 372
Chap. 64. Of the cruel Scourging of Christ our Lord, and how with
incomparable patience and charity, he endured the same. page 377
Chap. 65. How our B. Lord was crowned with thorns, blasphemed, and tormented
with strange invention of malice. And how he endured all with incomparable love.
page 382
Chap. 66. How we ought to carry our selves in consideration of the Ecce Homo.
And how our B. Savior did carry himself at that time, with contempt of all
humane comfort for love of us. page 388
Chap. 67. How the Jews prefer Barabbas before Christ our Lord: And how Pilate
gave sentence of death against him. And with what incessant love he endured
all. page 394
Chap. 68. How our Lord did carry his Cross; and of the excessive love he
showed in bearing the great affronts which were done to him, in his journey to
Mount Caluary. page 399
Chap. 69. The Crucifixion of our B. Lord; his quick sense, and several
pains distinctly felt: and of his unspeakable patience, and love to us
therein. page 404
Chap. 70. Of the excessive torments of our Lord, and how he was blasphemed by
all sorts of persons, and of the divine patience and love, wherewith he bare it
all. page 411
Chap. 71. How our Lord did exercise the Offices of Redeemer and Instructor
upon the Cross: and of the three first words he uttered from thence. page 419
Chap. 72. Of the darkness over the world, and the desolation which our Lord
endured with incomparable love, whilst he said to his eternal Father, Deus,
Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me? page 425
Chap. 73. Of the excessive love which our Lord expressed by his silence in the
torments of the Cross: And how the while he was negotiating our cause with
God. page 432
Chap. 74. Of the unspeakable thirst of our Lord which he did endure, and
declare with incomparable love to man. page 437
Chap. 75. Of the entyere consummation of our Redemption, wrought by Christ our
Lord upon the Cross. page 442
Chap. 76. Of our Lords last prayer; and of the separation of his soul from
his body, and of the grace and beauty of the Crucifixe. page 447
Chap. 77. Of the great love of God expressed in those prodigious things which
appeared upon the death of our B. Lord. And of the blood and water which slowed
out of his side etc. page 453
Chap. 78. The Conclusson of this discourse of the Passion of our B. Lord; and
the use which we are bound to make thereof. page 460
Chap. 79. Of the unspeakable love of our Lord Jesus in bequeathing to us upon
the Cross, his All-immaculate Virgin Mother, to be the Mother of us all. page
472
Chap. 80. How our B. Lady and Eve do resemble one another, and how they
^iffer: And our B. Lady is proved to be the spiritual mother of all mankind.
page 478
Chap. 81. The external Excellencies, and attractiuenesse of our B. Lady. The
reasons of congruity which prove her innocence, and purity, and the innumerable
motives, which oblige the world to admire and love her. page 485
Chap. 82. Of the incomparable sanctity which is employed to have been in our
B. Lady, by the consideration of the high dignity of her calling; and how that
manner of speech is to be understood in holy Scripture, whereby our B. Lady does
seem, in the eye of some, to be disaduantaged. page 424
Chap. 83. How the sanctity of our B. Lady, does much import to the honor of
Christ our Lord. How notwithstanding all her excellency, we auow her to be
nothing, in respect of Christ our Lord as God, and by innumerable degrees
inferior to him as man: and how much more honorably our Lord redeemed her the^
others. page 500
Chap. 84. Of the great eminency of our B. Lady beyond all others; with an
authority cited out of S. Augustine: and that the way, for us, to judge rightly
of her, is to purify our souls, page 506
Chap. 85. Of great Excellency of our B. Lady, set out by the Figures,
Appellations, and Allusions of the old Testament. page 509
Chap. 86. The wonderful excelle^cies of our B. Lady, which are declared in
the new Testament, be here set forth. page 514
Chap. 87. That our B. Lady, was saluted full of Grace, and of several kinds
of Fulness of Grace. page 520
Chap. 88. The praises of the B. Virgin, are prosecuted by a testimony of S.
Gregory: And consideration is made of her divine Virtues: and first of her
admirable Faith and Hope. page 527
Chap. 89. Of the most ardent Charity, both to God and man, which reigned in
the heart of the B. Virgin. page 533
Chap. 90. The profound Humility and perfect Purity of our B. Ladies both body
and soul: And wherein the height thereof consists. page 545
Chap. 91. Of the inexplicable Conformity of the will of the B. Virgin, to the
holy will of God in all things, how dear soever, it might cost her. page 545
Chap. 92. Of the entyere Conformity of the B. Virgins will to the will of God
and how many privileges and perfections were assembled in her. page 551
Chap. 93. Of the several devotions that we are to carry to our Blessed Lady.
page 555
Chap. 94. Of the piety of our B. Lady toward us now in heaven, far more then
when she lived on earth; with a prayer to her. page 580
Chap. 95. A Recapitulatio^ of diverse Motives, which ought to draw us close to
the love of our Lord. page 567
Chap. 96. Of the several kinds of love which our souls may exercise to our
Lord Jesus: with the Conclusion of the whole Treatise. page 574.

FINIS.

