MARGARITON. A RICH TREASVRE DIScovered of Problemes and their Resolves* in 3
Parts
Amorovs. Natvrall Moral and Politiqve


Faithfvlly translated ovt of French.

LONDON Printed for D: Friar. 1640



NATVRE

MARGARITON. A RICH TREASVRE DISCOvered of Problemes and their Resolves.

In three Parts.
Amorous. Natural Moral and politic.
Faithfully translated out of French, for the profit and delight of the
Ingenious English of both Sexes; to serve as a useful help in their Discourse.

LONDON. Printed by B. Alsop. and T. F. for DANIEL FRIAR, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the Red Bull in little Britain. 1640.

TO THE INGENIOVS AND Courteous Readers of both Sexes, in great Britain Health
and Happiness.
THe Learnd Poet Horace intending to bestow the true praise of Wisdom upon
them which are most worthy, says that they most of all diserve it, which
knows best to join Profit and Pleasure together, for those two thins to the
Jngenious are excellent and admirable: For as much as Hesiode reports, that
the Heathen Gods desire that profit might daily be accompanied with travel
and labor, and that usually the end of pleasure is bitter and unpleasant,
therefore ought he to be mended for a good Artist, which can with facility and
dexterity incorporate and unite them, as the one may still interchangeably
ensue and rise of the other, to which intent ( notwithstanding their diversity
of opinions the ancient Philosophers endeavored to the uttermost, seeking every
one according to their ingenuity to polish and beautify that most excellent
portion of us, the Mind as prepaired the beetter to receive the Print of
virtues seal, we might in this race of Frailty clime to some degree ( at least
of true happiness and sound felicity) but because the name of virtue is of
such Majesty, as at first view it would dismay the countenance of her timorous
beholders, certain Philosophers casting aside their frosty beardes, and other
such ceremonies of Philosophical show: with loving care to maintain and
cherish those soft and sweet gentle minds, and tender natures that cannot
presently combat with the tediousness of scholastique exercises have studied
and presented certain pleasant confections (wherewith to excite and sweeten
the study of Philosophy handling each part thereof so familiarly and facilly,
that the most wild and stupid heads were oftentimes incited to hearken and
follow their wholesome documents. Like the Phrygian Fabler Aesope, giving
fained speech to Creatures unreasonable, under pretense thereof has left to
future posterity, most necessary Precepts of all Humanity and Moral duty the
like has been done in all ages by many Noble Poets, who in their fabled
Forgery ( if rightly marked) have uttered all manuer of most deep and profound
Learning. I speak not of Comicke writers, who pretending but sport, by pretty
contriving of Parts and Persons, teach how to behave our selves toward all
sort of Persons, and specially to shun the cousening Ginnes of those which are
registered amongst the vilest kind of people; which fruit is also to be gathered
of our common plays and interludes; which grounded (ordinarily) upon the rule
of Philosophy, do whet and sharpen the wits of the beholders; as those
exercises of Tilting, Torney, Wrestling, leaping, or running, do by use
strengthen the limbs, and frame the body better and more ablie to discharge,
when need shall require their office of arms. But lest I should wade too far
in the praise of Philosophy, which may be termed as a labyrinth: Give me leave,
Courteous Reader, to let you understand that this little book in French,
happening to my hands of late, perusing of it, found it like a bed of various
pearl, or a rich ship fraught with precious wares and Aromatique Drugges the
Work sure of some learned and skillful wri^ter, although he co^ceale^^ his
name, aiming principally to the like good purpose, though it could not be
labor in vain to spend some Recreative hours in teaching it to speak our
mother English tongue.

Especially, for that having thoroughly perused the same, and found the Author
had so excellently by ^ay of question couched to^ether the most necessary
^oints of all Philosophy as to the ingenious Reader. Who thoroughly and
diligently observes, it will bring with it exceeding rich increase, both of
profit and pleasure; more particularly; because in order of his treatise, not
intermedling with the particular duty ^f any calling or estate, he generally
concludes of matter not impertinent to all degrees, so that leaving the
rawnesse of the Jnfant, and childish years to the care and correction of their
Nurses and Schoolemasters, begins to shape his first Precepts to the best
advantage of that age which (as it is most disposed to the vanity of Love, so
most likely be abused and miscarried by the same) may here in some part learn
to know and eschew the tempting deceits, and subtle devises of that boyish God
and his blind Disciples; From thence our Author leads us into the dark
storehouse of Natures secrets, where with open Eye, perusing the weak
condition of the World and Worldly things, and things, and of us our selves for
whose sake they were principally ordained, may remain thereof, more mindful
and thankful to our Creator. Lastly our Author brings us to the Fountain
of good nurture, teaching not only in private cases of our own lives and
houses; but in Commonwealths matters also, to give such verdict of things
incident, as amongst the wise and sagest Governors, shall make us esteem not
soly ignorant or empty of understanding: but like the Be that sucks and tastes
of every flower, gathers somewhat to lade her self with to her hive: so there
is not a question or demand in this Book, but you may reap some benefit by it.

All which things, although they be not unknown, may by the learned be
collected out of the Works of sundry authentic Authors, yet al^ men having not
such opportunity, whereby to searc^ and run over their numerous volumes, it
may be expected, the most part of both sexes, especially those who have not
such Libraries, but their ingenious disposition moves them to spend their
vacant hours in some virtuous exercises sometimes may employ themselves in the
perusing of this book which may add some curious structure to natures Artist
( Discourse) which is an excellent Ornament to that person who is completely
furnished and endowed with variety of it, wherefore my courteous Readers and
buyers of this book, I hope you which reap and enjoy some benefit by it, will
with equity judge and censure this my translation these brief Collection as of
a labor willingl^^ undertaken, and especi^ally those that cannon understand it
in the O^riginall. For the delect^able Recreation of you^ mind, and profitable
help unto Discourse whereunto be wishe^^ Universally most happy success.

Farewell Yours, T. S.

QVESTIONS of LOVE, and the Answers,
Question.
WHereof does it come, that Ruffians, Iesters, and common Dancers, be less
subject to Love then others?

Answer. That may come by the continual familiari^^ that such men have with
women: in whom they have no pleasure for respect of Love, or whose familiarity
does make love ^^oathsome, or out of taste.

Q. What is the cause, that he that loves fervently is soon angry?

A. Because the spirits, and humors of Lovers be very hot, and boil
continually.

Q. How comes it to pass, that an (...) morous woman is so curious to be
finely ap^parelled and decked?

A. She does it to increase and set forth her beauty, thereby to subdue and
draw^^ those unto her, that be most beautiful an^^ desirous to Love.

Q. But why be rough and hairy (...) more prone and disposed to the amorou^^
battle of Love, then others?

A. Because they abound and be mo^^ full of humors then others.

Q. What has moved certain Greek Poets, to say: that Love is the most
exce^^lent amongst all the heavenly Gods?

A. It is perchance because there is (...) Philosopher that does teach the
manners man's life so well as he, or makes man mo^^ practice of quick spirited.

Q. But why has Love been esteemed God?

A. Because he makes an^ Idiote to speak well, a coward to be bold and hardy,
a m^^ lancholike man joyful, a heavy and sloth^^full man prompt and ready to
all enterpri^ses, be they never so great. Or else he (...) made a God, for man
to excuse himself and to cast upon Love all that, which by the same he has
done and sustained.

Q. Why be Lovers so desirous of corporal and bodily beauty?

A. Because beauty (as ancient Poets do affirm) does please the Gods, is
agreeable to men, is not loathsome nor hea^^y to him that is endued therewith,
but desired above all things that may be wished.

Q. What is the reason and cause of Nosegayes, Garlands of flowers, and green
Boughs, wherewith Lovers be went to ^^dorn the fronts of their Ladies
Lodgings?

A. It is to honor them as their Gods ^n earth, and to show that such
Nosegaies, Garlands, and May-boughes, do serve for ^he spoils and triumphs
of their Ladies, and for true signs of the service and devo^ion of their
loving Servants.

Q. But whereof comes it that we ^^eame sildome of the thing that we love?

A. All Lovers being tossed and vexed with ^^vers thoughts, cannot steadfastly
grave and settle any one thing in their fantasy: ^r their thoughts be like the
circles and ^^ubblings of the water, which are dissipated, ^e one by the other.

Q. From whence comes it, that certain Lovers upon the view, and sight of
their Ladies do blush?

A. It rises of the blood and spirits which ascend upwards, whereof the face,
fulles^ of pores of any part of the body, does charge it self with color. It
may be also that it proceeds of a singular reverence that they bear to their
Paramours.

Q. But why do they afterward wax pale?

A. There is no true Lover but is troubled with some disquiet, or contrariety.
I^ the cause then of his pain do present it self before his eyes, the same
does easily grow and increase. And so Nature retirin^ unto the inward parts, as
into her hold o^ sort, carries with her both the blood and spirits, leaving
the superior parts without any color.

Q. How chances it, that barreine and unfruitful women be more hot and
promp^ to love, then they which are fruitful and bear^ Children?

A. Because that such do more aboun^ with-seed, and do purge themselves of
their natural disease less then other do.

Q. Why do Lovers delight to bear in their hands Nosegaies and Apples?

A. All Love^s have a desire to enjoy and possess the flower and the fruit of
others age and beauty, wherein they rejoice, whenever they see the same. And
so be amorous both of flowrs and fruit, and of all such beautiful things that
they see.

Q. But why be Lovers for the most part ready to weep?

A. Poor Lovers continually be pricked with some Nail, and feel cause
whereof to complain, being of Nature, fearful, suspicious, jealous, and
troubled, so that it is no marvel, if such and the like passions do provoake
them to tears.

Q. What means it that Lovers be continually as it were in a fire?

A. The affection of Love does move and trouble their spirits, which does raise
in them this heat.

Q. Why be women more prove to Love, then any other creatures at all times and
seasons?

A. Nature has endued them with more delicate touchings, and with more
moderate complexion then other. Besides this, they be of complexion hot and
moist: a thin^ very proper and requisite to Lov^.

Q. How comes it, that men take (...) pleasure in the play and Game of Love
when they have lust to make water?

A. Because even then the Conduites a^ full: and that which is full of
moystnes^ cannot receive other humor. It may b^ also, that the heaviness and
weight of th^n Urine does restrain and stop the Condu^^ from whence the Seed
does issue an come.

Q. Wherefore is the pleasure of Lov^ greater then all other pleasures that man
be imagined?

A. That comes of the Sperme which passes through all the parts of the body
yielding unspeakeable pleasures to the (...) there members.

Q. How chances it, that men of M^^lancholicke complexion be more lively, the
other in combat of Love?

A. The windy passions, whereof th^^ be full, be causes of the same: which ma^^
them more wakefull and disposed thereunt^

Q. Why do Physicians praise mediocr^^ty or sildome use of Loves desire.

A. Because the same does lighten the body, rejoice, the spirits, comfort the
brain, recreate the senses, and expels from them all accidents proceeding of
melancholic numours. Excess also is to be blamed, because it does weaken the
body, and is hurtful to the sight.

Q. Why does Nature give to Love so great pleasure?

A. For preservation of mankind, which through the same is continued.

Q. Why do they soon grow to gray hairs, which be much given to Love?

A. Because they expel from them their natural heat, whereby life is
conserved and maintained.

Q. Why does the hair of the head and eyebrowes of those that be fornicators
and lech^rous soonest fall?

A. The Game of Love does marvellously cool the superior parts, which being
made bare and void of blood, and spirit, cannot digest that which does nou^ish
the same. And so the vapors proceeding of digestion, be not sufficient and
able to engender hair of the head and eyebrowes.

Q. Whereof comes it tbat Lover care not to spend the whole Night i^ Love?

A. Every vehement passion does wholl^ draw a man thereunto, and suffers hi^
not to give himself to any thing else, bu^ to that whereof he thinks, and
whereup^on he bends his fantasy.

Q. Why be Lovers so careful of the sight and amorous looks of their Ladies?

A. All Lovers are wont to suffer them^selves to be fed with such allurements,
and there is no part of the body that does s^ well manifest and declare the
interior passsions of the mind, as the eyes. Also we say that the eyes are the
true harboroughes o^ the heart. And thereof it comes, that when one kisseth
the eyes affect^ously, as (...) thing desired: It seems that he kisseth the
thought, and the soul it self. Whereof certain Poets, with good reason have
written that Love borrows his arrows from the eyes of Lovers, to serve
himself against themselves.

Q. What does move the Poets to fain^ VENUS to be of Massive Gold?

A* That may be by reason of her ra^^ and excellent beauty, or else because
she is so much desired as Gold, some assign the cause upon the great sums
of Gold that Lovers do consume and spend upon Love.

Q. What is the cause that Lovers do use to forswear themselves?

A. Love does laugh at such perjuries; Lovers therefore desirous to serve their
God, do swear continually. Or else it preceedeth of a certain lightness
caused of diverse thoughts which do rise in their minds.

Q. How chances it, that men leave not to love a woman, although through age
or some other accident or chance, she waxes ill favored and foul?

A. That comes of love, which is blind, and being blind, cannot know or judge
the imperfections of other. But how should he take knowledge of that which he
cannot blame. And how can he blame that which he is constrained to embrace and
wholly to pursue.

Q. From whence comes it, that most commonly we be given fervently to love
not those only of whom we never received pleasure, but those also whom we
never saw?

A. Every one bears the Image of hi^ mind in his face, and thereof may be
gathered some sign or token of the wit and nature of the person, by means
whereo^ we may conjecture whereunto she is mo^^ inclined, which is the very
spring and beginning of Natural amity or hatred.

Q. How chances it, that diverse me^ cannot obtain the grace and favor o^
their Ladies, although they do serve them honor them, and adore them?

A. Because (as Aristotle says) there i^ nothing in them worthy to be beloved.
Bu^ what man is so void of Natures grace but has somewhat in him worthy (...)
Love.

Q. But what is the cause that some s^^ters be better beloved of their Lndies
th^^ other some?

A. The Lady enriched with beauty an^ good manners, is like unto the Sun the
does every where equally extend hi^ beams, which notwithstanding are rece^^ved
unequally, of some more, of some less^ after their capacity. The stars also
there in do bear some rule, so that after the saying of Diogenes the Stoique,
the signs common to two persons, that is to say, under which the one and the
other shall be borne, and those signs agreeing, do cause the wills of the
same two persons to be joined and united.

Q. Why be these little and pretty angers and fallings out which chance amongst
Lovers, the refreshing and renewing of Love?

A. That shall ever be, because Love is the flame that will go out and dry, if
it be not blown and oftentimes moved: Or else we may well say, that the more
the thing which we desire is denied, the more we desire it.

Q. Whereof comes it, that we be ashamed to communicate to others our desire
and lust to the combat of Love, and of other appetites and desires, as to
drink, eat, sleep, and such like, we be not ashamed?

A. Because that the same carnal affection is not so necessary nor profitable
for this life as the other appetites be.

Q. Whereof comes the diversity of weapons wherewith Love is wont to wound
men and women, fishes, birds, and other four ^ooted beasts?

A. Of the diverse nature of things that he assaileth.

Q. You will say, that beauty failing, love decreaseth?

A. J would say, yea, because Love is no other thing but a desire of beauty.

Q. Whereof comes it, that a man heing touched with Love, cannot rid
himself of that passion by any dexterity, policy or wit?

A. Love is a certain estate and pligh^ that does wrap and fold the mind of
man^ and with a certain sweet motion dot^ transport him into the thing by him
desired. This affection rises by the contemplation and judgment that he has
o^ beauty, which causes him to conceive in his Spirit an^ Mind such admiration
and desire, that whether he will, or no, he i^ caught in the Ginnes and Nets
of Love.

Q. What reason have certain people o^ the North parts, to sees with water
(...) certain stone called Gagates, causing their spouses before they lie with
them, to drink thereof?

A. That is to know whether they have made any fault or not before. For the
pro^perty of that stone is suddenly to force them to make water that have
endured, and suffered the act of man.

Q. What is the cause that women which be of very bote nature cannot conceive?

A. Great and vehement heat does destroy and corrupt the seed; and therefore
they which be very hot, are commonly fruitless and barren.

Q. Why do some women love men that be black, and other, those that be fair
and well colored?

A. Women of feeble sight love them that be black, because blackness does
join and unite the sight too much disparkled, and by this means does comfort
the same: Or else we may well say, that every thing does love and desire his
like. They therefore which be hot of nature love them that be black; because
they be more prone to hea^e. Other which be of colder Nature do love them that
be white; because they be of cold Complexion, the Mother of whiteness.

Q. Wherefore have the ancients compared love to drunkenness?

A. For nothing else, but because it makes men (which before were cold, heavy,
and covetous) lusty and liberal.

Q. Wherefore do not common harlots conceive: or if they do, it is very
sildome?

A. The diversity of the seeds does le^ conception, and causes that the same
cannot be retained.

Q. What means it, that the purse of Cupido is tied with a Leeke?

A. This proverb does declare that Love is liberal, and finds no let to put
his hand in his purse.

Q. Which is greatest, the hurt or profit that comes of Love?

A. He that does not love of himself, esteems the loss to be greater then
the profit.

Q. Think ye that Love has judgment or no?

A. How can he with judgment cause Lovers daily (as every man may see) to fall
into such enormities.

Q. Whereof comes it, that for the most part, the Children which married
women do borrow, or which be not lawfully be gotten, commonly called Bastards,
do resemble more their husbands, then those that be legitimate or lawfully by
them begotten?

A. The reason comes of an imagination that they have to be suddenly taken
or espied of their husbands: And so their husbands be always in their
fantasy, for it seems to them that they be continually before their eyes,
and that they say to them: what do thou, thou shameless whore? Is this thy
assured promise made unto me at the marriage day.

Q. Wherefore be young women more prompt to laugh then others?

A. Young women are under the safeguard and tuition of Venus, the Goddess of
laughter, and so they do easily laugh. It may also be said, that they have
tender and delicate bodies, and laughter is no other thing then a spice of Joy,
wantonness or tickling.

Q. Do you think that Love is so blind as he is painted, or that his sight
be good?

A. Wherefore should not I think him blind: since amongst my neighbors I see
the most ill favored to be best beloved of the fairest.

Q. What people (after your mind and judgment) be most worthy to be beloved?

A. J think those that be learned: be^cause they may give pleasure to the body
profit to the Spirit, and make their fa^^ immortal.

Q. Wherein is the subtilty of women mos^ discovered?

A. In that they seem to love one alone and nevertheless do give themselves
(...) many.

Q. What woman thinks her self mos^ worthy to be beloved, the fair or the
foul?

A. Before J shall answer you, show (...) a woman, that thinks her self to
be foul.

Q. What means it, that the looks o^ Ladies do wholly turn us from all
other objects, and do draw us unto them?

A. The looks of Ladies be near neighbor to the Image and imagination of
beauty then any other thing, which above all things does ravish our senses, an^
they do pleasantly bind and captivate the same of purpose, in the end to bring
the^ to subjection.

Q. What be the conditions that an amorous Lady ought to have?

A. That she be not covetous, that she be courteous and easy to be spoken
unto, neat and secret in her doings.

Q. What properties be requisite in a Lady that right well may be called fair?

A. That she have a fair and a comely personage, a fair neck, a small body, a
little mouth, and white teeth and clean.

Q. Is this a proverb good? Love him that will love thee?

A. Yea very good: for he is a beast that will not love, being beloved.

Q. Whether is the man or the woman more subject to love.

A. That question is very evident, a man is sooner taken and wrapped in love then
a woman. For we see that the man, which is borne to a thousand good and great
enterprises, does for loves sake abandon all glory and honor that he may
receive.

Q. Why have the ancient and they of these days, painted love with wings?

A. To declare that the desires of Lovers be high, and labor to attain high
and great enterprises.

Q. Who deserves more to be favored of love: the fair of simple and honest
meaning, or the foul that is sage, crafty, and well advised?

A. Prudence is the beauty of the mind^ which continues longer then the beauty
of the body.

Q. Can love be without Jealousy?

A. I think not. For testimony whereof^be Ovid, Virgill, Plutarch, and
Boccace^ who writes in a Sonnet: If Love lived without Jealousy, etc.

Q. Why he Ladies sooner amorous of (...) Soldier, then of a learned man?

A. Soldiers be more liberal, and not so subtle as Scholars be, more easy
to be allured with enticements of women. There is no Soldier so brave, if a
woman say unto him: that he has a fair beard, that his legs be well
proportioned, that he is comely on horseback, strong to encounter and
overthrow his enemy, but incontinently does give over and submit himself unto
her will and pleasure.

Q. What is the cause, that many despising their wives, be so fond upon
curtezan^ and Harlots?

A. The Curtezans suffer not themselves to be seen, except they be first
painted, but wives must often be seen of their Husbands, which causes them to
seem not to be so fair. Or we may say that wives continually be at their
husbands backs, misusing them with vile and unseemely words, which makes them
to taste of other meats, and causes them to imagine a thousand other appetites
and lusts.

Q. Wherefore have Lovers so feeble voices?

A. Of the fear that they have to displease their Ladies. And therewithal the
unequal motions wherewith their Spirits are moved, which forces this
feebleness of voice.

Q. Whether does Love show her greatest force, either in making the fool to
become wise, or the most wise, or advised man, to become a beast?

A. If there be more pain to break down, then to build: I believe there shall
be more adoe' to restore wisdom to him that has lost it, then newly to make
him wise. For love and folly, be nothing else, but analienation o^ the good
sense and wit.

Q. May a man dye, through veheme^ Love?

A. Of this the History of Seleucus a^^ Antiochus, may testify and bear
witness^ which may be read in the first Tome (...) the Palace of pleasure,
lately published.

Q. Which should be the greatest heart breaking, the Lady dying in our sight
an^ presence, or in our absence?

A. J would think by her presence, for the eyes do give greater feeling of
dolo^ and grief then the ears.

Q. Whereof comes it, that men have diverse judgments of the beauty of w^^men?

A. It is a proverb derived from the an^cient Greeks, that all fair and
beautiful things, be hard to be judged: even so of thi^ difficulty comes this
diversity of judge^ments.

Q. How chances it, that many which be esteemed men of very good judgment, ar^
surprised with the love of foul, and ill fa^voured women?

A. It may be that they have marked (...) certain beauty in them, which does
appear^ outwardly. In like manner, Painters and Musicians have judgments of
draughts and ^^cords, whereof none do take heed, but ^^ch as have skill in the
same.

Q. Do you think the discovering of Love, to be the cause sometime that a man
^btaineth not his desire?

A. That chances many times by reason that such women do love their honesty
^ery much.

Q. Is the travel greater in secret and ^oncealed love; then in that which is
discovered and open?

A. Without doubt there is greater pain in concealed love: because a man
cannot vent the heat of love concealed, which by communicating and counselling
with some other, may be made more comfortable and easy.

Q. Whether is more constant in love, the man or the woman?

A. The man, being both of body and spirit more firm in all affairs. And
naturally he is more constant and of better per^wasion in love.

Q. Whereof comes it, that he which loves is most commonly beloved?

A. That peradventure may come, because our Spirits cannot resist the amor^^
shots which do proceed of the sweet loo^ that Lovers do continually cast one
upon another. Or else we will say: that it is the property of nature to couple
and join lik^ to like, and to scatter and divide the things which have no
proportion together.

Q. Wherefore do men say, that to snee^^ is a good sign in the deed of love?

A. Because it comes of the brain which is as it were the little Canon, and
withdrawing place of all the Senses. And it seems that all the Senses do
agree and give their assent to the sentence and conclusion of Lovers.

Q. Whereof comes it, that secret love is more burning and fervent, then
tha^ which is discovered and open?

A. That chances because the secret Lover has no mean of ease and rest to
le^ out the fire that does consume him, the virtue of love being of marvailous
force and strength, and so not able to attain the thing which he loves best,
is unto him greater travel and pain, then if he enjoyed it, or might discover
it to his friend for his comfort.

Q. Whether were it better that there ^ere love or no love?

A. I believe it to be better that there ^ere love, for so much as it brings
unto ^s more good effects then evil, and to my mind and opinion Plato agrees,
who ma^ing a definition of Love, does say, that it is nothing else but a desire
to get and obtain (...) fair and beautiful thing.

Q. Think you that one may be in love with another, only upon fame and report?

A. If Love be wont to place himself in ^he chamber of our minds, by entry
through ^he gates of our eyes, who doubts but likewise he may enter by the
doors of our ears, to harbor himself in our understanding. Boccacio in his
Decameron, and Plutarch, be of the same opinion. Example hereof may be seen,
by the History of the Duchess of Savoy, and the Lord John of Mendozza: which
may be read in the Palace of Pleasure aforesaid.

Q. What does incite a man more to virtue: either honor: or the desire that he
has to please the thing he loves?

A. I do not judge or think, that Love does serve for a spur to prick men to
virtue: supposing that a man desires it for no^^ other purpose, but to enjoy
it.

Q. Whereof comes it that diverse (...) men have remained long time without
^^ving any person, and afterward have ^^ned with love?

A. J say that the virtue of the Plane has wrought it: for in this University
(...) things nothing does move it self, that do^^ not take it is first motion
of the Planets.

Q. Who loves most fervently, the ha^^dy or the Coward?

A. It is the bold and hardy; for t^^ Coward commonly dares not advan^^
himself forth to prove his fortune.

Q. Are ye not of this opinion, that h^^ which is more lively and of spirit
more excellent, is less content with one Lo^^ alone?

A. Yes truly, and that is accustomably seen among men and women: for why To
content himself to love in one place is an act of pusillanimity, and of small
hear^^ and courage, which is the cause that my mistress does not content her
self with (...) thousand Servants.

Q. Which is greatest pain; to get an^ ^btaine the love of one, or to
maintain ^^he same being gotten?

A. To maintain it after my judgment, because of the great inconstancy ^^f
Women which do soon fill and sa^isfie themselves, and are quickly angry and
soon weary, lightly found and ^^one forgotten, very slippery Cattle.

Q. Who is more easy to be perswa^^d that they are beloved, the Man or (...)
woman?

A. The Man, and that may be clear^^ seen; for Ladies neither by long ^^rvice,
great gifts or otherwise, can ^^erswade themselves to be beloved, but ^^vermore
they be ready to reply, that (...) man does dissemble and counterfeit (...)
truth.

Q. What does certify the woman that she is loved?

A. The perseverance in^one.

Q. Is there no other sign then per^^verance?

A. To be jealous of them, and to ^^ve liberally, if perchance they be
co^^etous, as indeed they be for the most (...).

Q. Why is Love painted by some (...) form^ of a Shepherd?

A. Because they which pursue a^^ follow love, be more liker beasts the^^ men.

Q. Which has greatest force in ma^^ ^atred or Love?

A. J would say, that the passion, (...) Love should be greatest. And why (...)
Man through ^atred never killed hi^^ self, which men do oftentimes through
extremity of Love.

Q. Is Love blind as he is painted*

A. The vulgar and common love blind, but the celestial love is not: (...)
with great dexterity it opens and d^^ covers the greatest secrets.

Q. Whereof does it come, that Lover have so little knowledge of the
imperfections of their Ladies?

A. One great motion does let another. Every Lover then being trouble in
spirit, the judgment of his sense impeached and let in such wise as (...)
remains blind in the thing which loves.

Q. Why do Lovers so often br^^ ^h^ir faith and promise one to another?

A. Youth abounds in heat, and is ^ubject to diverse and many things, and
cannot stay it self in one thought; whereby it proceeds, that the ancients
^^ve made Venus the mother of Love, whom many Lovers do follow.

Q. Do ye think that by Magic Art the heart of an obstinate woman may be
mitigated to condescend to the pleasure of a Lover?

A. All they that have written of Natural things affirm the same. The Divines
say contrary. And J in the diversity of opinions in so great men dare not
declare mine own.

Q. Is it possible that a Covetous man may become amorous?

A. The forces of Love have always been more brave and fine, then those of
Covetousnes. So J believe, that love cannot only make the Covetous libe^all,
but also prodigal; For as the covetous have had no measure to get goods, so
they may have as little to spend them, if they think that by money ^hey may
enjoy the thing that they love.

Q. Wherefore have Men more (...) herty then women, to love in more plac^^ then
one?

A. Take modesty, shamefastness^ and fear from Women, and ye take (...) way
their lives, which chances not (...) man.

Q. Wherefore be Lovers continually ready to demand the hearty goo^ will of
them that they love?

A. The Heart is the seat of des^^ and of all knowledge, all which be re^dy to
obey the thing that it loves the Image whereof representing it self pleasant
before the eyes of Lovers, do^^ ravish from them both the heart an^^ the
principal parts. And thereof (...) comes, that being as it were robbe^^ of
themselves, and oppressed with (...) tolerable bondage, they require with all
importunity to be restored and pl^^ced in their entire and former estate.

Q. Whereof comes it, that commonly we suffer our selves to be all (...) to
love things whereof there is no ho^^ to attain unto?

A. That is for lack of knowled^^ of the beginnings of Love, the which are
light and little. And although that all hope is cut off and taken from us to
enjoy the sweet imbracements which Love does promise: Nevertheless the beauty
of ^he thing beloved, does delight us, and the remembrance thereof does occupy
the Brain. Such passions have been called of our elders, Dumb desires;
because they do still and steadingly possess the heart unaware, and by little
and little take increase. And our eason should not be hindered if it (...)

Q. (...) a^l the joys of Lovers uncertain?

A. Because in Love there do daily chance diverse casualties; as Suspicion,
jealousy, anger, peace, refuse, disdain.

Q. Why is Love compared to a dark Laberinth or Maze?

A. Because the entry and coming in is easy, and the going out impossible.

Q. Wherefore do men compare Love to a Crocadile?

A. The nature of a Crocadile, after the mind of those, that have writt^^ of
Natural things, is to follow th^^ that fly from him, and to fly from them
that do follow him: and so it i^ with Love. Therefore I give counsel that
whosoever will enjoy the effect ^f his desires, that he be not too sharp^ and
eager to pursue and follow his Lady

Q. Believe ye that Love and goo^ judgment may be together?

A. I believe no; for then the foul^ and deformed should never be beloved But
we see not only the contrary to happen, but which is worst, those tha^ be the
vilest, endued with most treason* and least loyalty and faith, how foul^
soever they be, are most commonly bes^ beloved.

Q. Whereof comes it, that diver^ which loved fervently to have some comfort,
did suddenly lose that great heat of Love?

A. All vehement love does no^ long continue; for within a while the spirit
has leisure to examine it self and to return to due understanding thinking
upon all things that might violate and corrupt the same, whereby the sensual
appetites be by this means restrained.

Q. Why do men call Love both flame and fire?

A. It is not possible better to express how insupportable a thing it is,
considering the heat of the desires which it engenders in the hearts of his
fervants, and the tyranny that he uses toward those which are under his
power, whom he brings to ruin, and consumes like fire without any pity.

Q. Why are men rather amorous then women?

A. For that they are of hotter Complexion, and their spirits more quick and
prompt.

Q. Why be women more firm and steadfast in Love then men?

A. Because things which of themselves be cold, be less subject to mobility and
inconstancy, then those that be hot.

Q. Whereof comes it, that women be more easily persuaded to be loved then
men?

A. Because they esteem themselves much more then there is cause.

Q. But why be they angry, or wh^ do they frown and lowre, when men sa^ they
be foul or old?

A. Foulness most commonly com^meth of age: and age is the highway t^ death,
which naturally does annoy and displease all persons.

Q. Wherefore is it said; that the Cough and the passion of Love cannot (...)

A. They be (...) force, for the cough troubling the body can scantly be
concealed or hidden. Love is a passion proceeding of a certain fi^^ which by
the eyes is discovered (and manifests it self by the color of the face,)
and by all the acts of a Lover it may be comprehended and known; so that
without great pain and difficulty* it cannot be hidden.

Q. From whence do the amorous send forth so many sighs?

A. Their continual thoughts send all the heat to the heart, whereof it
comes, that necessarily it is convenient for them to respire and breathe, of
which respiration, sighings be forced: whereby the coldness of the air is
drawn to temper the inward heat. That may also rise of the consideration of
the time lost, of the detestation that comes of lechery, of the diminution
of honor and reputation; and finally, that the success of dishonest love, is
tragical, noisome, furious, and miserable.

Q. Wherefore have the ancient painted Love holding Flowers in one hand, and
Fish in the other?

A. To show that Love is a Lord both of sea and land.

Q. Think you that Love does yield greater force, courage and strength, to him
that does combat and fight in the presence of his Lady?

A. There is nothing more certain. And for this cause was brought in and
ordained the brave and lusty company of the errant and wandering Knights, to
give pleasure to Ladies by Justs and Tournies.

Q. Who receives most contentation, the victorious and loving Knight, or the
gentlewoman for whom he has fought?

A. The Knight as I suppose ought to be best contented, as having cause to
content himself with his own act and deed of Chiualry. For he that does best,
is worthy of greater praise: And he that runs best for his Ladies sake, is
best worthy to enjoy her.

Q. Wherefore do amorous Ladies impute that to fortune which chances contrary
to their hearts desire?

A. Because they like rash creature^ without due consideration, esteem all
things to be ruled and governed by Fortune.

Q. Is it love, to love the Image of (...) woman?

A. It is not love, but rather madness.

Q. What be they that love by a certain destiny and influence?

A. They that can give no reason o^ any cause of their love.

Q. Do ye think it to be true, that the Gods were Lovers?

A. You must know, that the old and ancient Poets were great Divines, and
speaking of one thing, they signifi^^ another. True it is, that there be diverse
well learned that cannot abide Poetical Allegories, which after my judgment
have no great reason on their side.

Q. Wherefore was Paris desirous to see the three Goddesses naked, when he was
appointed arbitrator of their Beauties?

A. To give better judgment by viewing the proportion of their bodies. O how
many fair and beautiful be there in outward appearance, which under their
sumptuous garments and crimson Robes be full foul and ill favored: that if
Peter Grubbe of Belchelianger, or Ioane Stubbes of Norton Folly, viewed them
naked as Paris did the Goddesses, they should run home for the next Gemman or
Iustitian of peace to entertain them, for they would scarce vouchsafe.

Q. Think you that the beauties of Ladies is a commendable argument to dispute
of?

A. Wherefore not? seeing that the wisest have written beauty to be a gift of
God.

Q. What moved the ancient to say; that Love is Lord over gods and men?

A. Because all that which is made either in heaven or in earth, is made for
Love. Remember what the Philosopher says: All things do move that men do
love and desire.

Q. Which is most to be feared? The bow of Love? The mace of Hercules? Or the
sword of Mars?

A. The bow of Love, and specially when he shoots his Arrows of Lead. But
not so much when he shoots his arrows of Gold and Silver.

Q. How is it possible, that Women should have faces of Angels, and heads of
Devils?

A. Be not Devils called Angels in holy writ? Read the Scriptures and ye shall
be resolved.

Q. Do you think that a Lover may be enchanted by the sight of his Lady?

A. If Sheep after the mind of Virgil, by a look may be charmed? How much
more may delicate Love be subject to enchantments.

Q. Can women by any celestial influence be made better or more rigorous
toward their loving servants?

A. The Mathematiques, Astrologians, and Magitians, by diverse and many
experiences and peremptory reasons affirm the contrary.

Q. How can the fire of Love (not participant with any other element) inflame
our hearts?

A. It is only a manner of speaking very common to Latinists, called Metaphora.

Q. Whereof comes the love of two which do equally love each other?

A. Some think that it comes o^ their conversation and mutual familiarity:
other of Angels and spirits assigned to each man. And other of the concurrants
and conformity of the Planets.

Q. Whereof proceeds the rare beauty of women?

A. Some do say that it comes of the temperature of the elements: other do
tell reasons more excellent.

Q. Why did Euripides say; that Love was like a Tragedy?

A. Because that love is evermor^ accompanied with heaviness, with complaints,
and with a hard and bitt^^ end.

Q. Is there any difference between the grace of a woman and her beauty, or
whether be they all one?

A. I believe that there is a difference; for the one has a greater force then
the other to cause a man to be content and satisfied.

Q. Whether is it a greater adventure to get the grace of a fair woman, or
else to recover it, if it were lost?

A. It is a greater act to recover it as J believe, women being of their own
nature disdainful and stout in their opinion.

Q. How may a man do to obtain and get the favor of another?

A. Some do say by merit, some other by fortune, other do impute it to the
conformity of nature, and some do attribute the same to influence or destiny.

Q. Whether of these three qualities be best to obtain the grace of women,
Beauty, Riches, or Learning?

A. They which be fair desire to have fair servants. Rich, those that have
wherewithal, and the learned love them that be learned: But most-commonly
riches is best liked of women for their maintenance, although with wise women
learning is of greatest price.

Q. Is it possible that a Lover see continually the things that he loves?

A. That chances to those specially that be not touched with Love, that is to
wit; which can represent to themselves those which be absent by cogitations.

Q. How may the heart of a Lover live that is not beloved?

A. He may live very well, considering that it is more pleasure to love (as I
have at other times affirmed) then to be beloved.

Q. May a man establish laws to Lovers?

A. I think not, but yet I will not deny that they which love by a certain
gift of nature or chance fatal, laws may be established, whereunto they may
subdue themselves.

Q. Is there any thing in the wor^^ that may retire, and draw an amoro^^ man
from the thing that he loves?

A. Only disdain may withdraw him more then any other thing.

Q. Why do the ancient paint Cu^pido, to force, himself to pluck (...)
branch of Palm out of the hand of an^ other Cupido?

A. In ancient Books there is re^membrance made of two Cupidoes, the one
chaste, the other lascivious and dishonest. The chaste is he that does strongly
bind and bring him that is lascivious and dishonest into subjection.

Q. How can a Lover dye in himself and live in another?

A. This is clear, that the heart i^ more where he loves, then where he
gives life.

Q. Wherefore be the angers of Lovers of so little continuance?

A. Because they are angry for trifles and things of nothing.

Q. How many sorts of Lovers be there?

A. Two sorts: the one after Plato celestial, and the other vulgar and
terrestiall.

Q. How comes love in us, by judgment or by destiny?

A. Most often by judgment, for diverse times men judge before they love.

Q. Is there any pleasure in the world that surpasses the contentation of
Lovers?

A. No, for why, the seed comes (...) the which causes (...) throughout all
the body.

Q. Wherefore do men esteem women to be an evil, like to the fire and to the
sea?

A. Because there is no day, but that by women's evils do come an infinite of
misfortunes.

Q. Which proceeds most from women, sweetness or bitterness?

A. For one sweetness, comes a Sea of sharp sour bitterness.

Q. Whereof comes it, that men compare the state of Lovers to a ship upon the
sea?

A. For the great dangers wherei^ they daily be.

Q. What would a true Lover do being a far off, when he sees the shi^
(wherein his Lady is) to be in dange^ of drowning?

A. He would make vows to Love and with joined hands beseech him t^ save her,
though it cost him a Tape^ so big as the mast of the Ship, to offe^ to his
Godhead.

Q. Why do we love the body so much being but earth and corruptible i^

A. We love it, because we cannon always have it.

Q. Can the love of the body and (...) the spirit agree together, or whether b^
they contrary?

A. They be contrary, and one a^gainst the other.

Q. I would know whether the body alone might content the Lover?

A. Not if he be virtuous, gentl^ and of a good nature.

Q. When a woman answers nothing to the request made unto her, is i^ a sign
that she agrees thereunto?

A. Sometimes yea, sometimes no: whereof a man can ground no certain judgment
if he pursue no further.

Q. Wherefore do young women love perfumes so much?

A. They be all Venus children. And the Greek Poets affirm, that Venus never
departed from any place without leaving an exquisite perfume behind her, for
witness of her presence. Besides this, all perfumes and good odours do either
open the appetite or else provoke Venus.

Q. Wherefore do men compare the beauty of a woman to a flower?

A. Because it is soon come and soon gone.

Q. Why do men feign that Love lives among flowers?

A. Because that flowers give continual hope of fruit: and even so does Love,
for he nourishes and entertaineth his servants continually with hope,
trusting to enjoy at the last the fruit longed for.

Q. Of two Lovers, which shall we esteem more to be favored, him from whom
his Lady shall take away a Nosegay and put it in her bosom, or him (...) whom
she shall give a nosegay that she (...) self did wear?

A. The properties of women is (...) take and not to give. J say then that
(...) shall be best beloved, to whom she sha^^ give the nosegay.

Q. Of what color should women (...) most desired?

A. I would desire them to be of th^^ color wherewith men paint vertu^^ which
i^ Red: but men do desire th^^ (...).

Q. Of whom have (...) to close their ears, against the suppli^^cations of
poor Lovers?

A. Of the Serpent Aspis which (...) deaf and venomous.

Q. Wherefore do men say, that (...) woman has the look of a Serpent, an^
the eye of a Basiliske?

A. By reason of the great subtilty and craft, wherewith they use to entra^^
and draw men to their love.

Q. Be Herbs medicinable for love?

A. Yea J have seen the experience thereof at Mantua a City in Italy, al^^eit
Ovid cries out, that love can find ^o remedy in herbs.

Q. Wherefore is the life of a lover ^ot beloved, compared to hell?

A. He that made such comparison did it by good judgment.

Q. Think ye that women be the greatest goodness that is in all the world?

A. They that judge and esteem so be blind, and have placed their senses on
earthly things, but they whose minds be directly bent on high would say the
contrary.

Q. Is there greater sweetness then bitterness in amorous death?

A. Bitterness in all things does surmount and pass all sweetness, and
specially in love.

Q. Why do women generally hate war?

A. Because it retains men, and thereby are deprived of their service and
entertainment.

Q. Do lovers live in more peace and quietness being near or far off?

A. They live better in peace a fa^^^ off, that J can speak by good
experi^ence; for it is not long ago that I b^ing servant to a Lady of
Placentia, (...) City in Italy, she assured me to ha^^ proved in herself, my
saying; and it (...) not yet three weeks, that a Lady who^^ I serve, with all
devotion said the li^^ to my great grief and sorrow.

Q. Must we be ceremonious in love^

A. All true Lovers live in love wit^ fidelity and integrity of heart, without
any ceremonies.

Q. Is it more pleasure to Love (...) to be beloved?

A. J believe to love, considering^ that it comes and proceeds of (...)
free and frank action and deed.

Q. Who is better content, the Bride^ groom or the Bride when they embra^^
each other?

A. The Bride, and that it is so, ye^^ shall see them continually rise up
merry^ and joyful in the morning.

Q. What signified the ancient Poet^^ by causing the Girdle of virginity to
(...) unknit at Marriages?

A. What else, but that the Bride just change her estate, and signifies, that
she was untied (that is to say) made ^oe, to this end; that like a good hus^ife
she should not be slothful, but ^oe about her house, and look to all ^arts
of the same.

Q. Which is best married, the Maid ^^ken perforce, or the man whom she ^oveth?

A. In the act of marriage will ru^eth, and not force.

Q. Is Love a thief? What is he ^ccustomed to steal?

A. He is a thief, and a great robber of hearts.

Q. Do you think it theft, to rob ^y mean of Beauty?

A. Is there any greater theft? Is ^ot Beauty the cruellest tyrant that is?

Q. Wherein does the Beauty of wo^en resemble the Spring-times?

A. For it does soon pass away and perish.

Q. Wherefore be all things more dis^sed to love in the Spring time, then (...)
any other season?

A. Because that then the hum^^^ do move themselves, and the bl^^^ does wax
hot.

Q. What is the greatest happin^^^ that man can have in love?

A. To possess and play with (...) Lover, without jealousy or suspition^.

Q. The eyes of the Lady have (...) such force upon the heart of the Lov^^ as
the beams of the Sun have vp^^ things on earth?

A. Yes doubtless, if the looks be^^ morous, otherwise it is clean contrar^^

Q. The time employed about love^ it well bestowed, or is it lost?

A. If a man bestow his love well (...) loses nothing, but does rather gaine^

Q. Is love subject to time, as all ^^ther creatures be?

A. Love is free* and is in prope^^ above time.

Q. What is the greatest pleasure th^^ a true Lover can feel?

A. To think that he is borne (...) serve and please his Lady.

Q. Be our hearts drawn by a^^^morous woman, as the Clouds by (...) Caecias,
Iron by the Adamant, and stra^^^y Awmbre?

A. There is far greater force in th^^ ^^rawings and inticements of women.

Q. May Love be well called and ^^earmed an Enchanter and Magi^^ian?

A. His effects be supernatural: and ^^herefore to be esteemed a Magitian, and
more then a Magitian.

Q Wherefore have certain wise ^^en painted Love with his eyes vn^^ound?

A. To show that nothing is hid from him, and there is no craft unknown unto
him, whereof he has not the ^^ounterpoiz.

Q. Do ye believe, that a true Lover ^^oth think, that he may merit the grace
^f his Lady by his service?

A. All true Lovers do judge and ^^steeme their Ladies to be of inestimable
^rice and valor, otherwise they could ^^ot be induced to love them. And if it
^e so, how can a Lover be so arrogant ^o think that for a little dured travel
^^e can get such favor.

Q. Whereof was Love made?

A. He was composed of pleasure a^^ displeasure.

Q. Wherefore be women compared (...) Proteus?

A. Because of their great inconsta^cie.

Q. Whereof proceed so m^^ Bawdes?

A. Because many desire to dep^^ of other, rather then of themselves.

Q. How is it possible for poor Love^^ to end their travels?

A. By despair, never to be fortuna^^ in Love, or never to enjoy the effe^^
thereof.

Q. Why be young Whores comm^^ old Bawdes?

A. To cause other to feel the ple^sure which they whilom did feel
themselves. Or else because they would th^^ all other were like themselves,
that th^^ might have no cause whereof to be ^shamed.

Q. Falling into the hands of a pitt^lesse woman, what were best to do? (...)
absent himself from her, and to pay over into some other Country? Or else ^o
have her daily before his eyes, and t^ ^ake occasion of travel?

A. The surest thing is to absent himself far off.

Q. I desire to know if the ordinances of Love be reasonable or not?

A. The principal ordinances of Lovers are, that they love equally: and that
between the Lover and his Lady there be nothing hidden. And thus J esteem the
ordinances of Love to be very reasonable, seeing that he uses such equa^ity
in things unequal.

Q. Does Love use his laws with ^^quity or with rigor?

A. He that understands them well, shall find that Love continually has ^sed
and does use his ordinances with great equity.

Q. Be not the laws of Love subject to other laws?

A. The laws of Love be sovereign above all other.

Q. Are they contrary to the laws of Nature?

A. No, they be rather conformable unto them, and be as it were (...) thing.

Q. May love be called an exce^ Physician?

A. Nay rather a hurter of men, (...) how can he take upon him the title (...)
Physician, that cannot heal any (...) wounds but those that he himself ^^
keth.

Q. Of what power is the Scepter (...) Love?

A. Able to make them liber^^ hardy, and patient, that will follow (...) trace.

Q. If Love proceed of Idlene^^ how can the same make men ingeni^^^ and witty?

A. Love has always done and (...) does great miracles, and therefore (...)
him to do that is no great marvel.

Q. How may Lovers be most tr^^ termed: fools or wise men?

A. J will call them wise, if they (...) well set and placed their love, and
(...) loving do not lose themselves. Foo^ I will also esteem them, if they
love^^ (...) thing without reason and measure, (...) not worthy to be beloved.

Q. Whereof rises Jealousy?

A. It comes to some of the fear ^^at they have to lose the thing that ^^ey
most love. To others, to see that ^^hich they love, to love another.

Q. Who is most jealous, the man or (...) woman, and which of them has
^^eatest occasion?

A. The woman is most jealous, but ^^e man has the greater occasion: the
^^eason thereof and the cause I will keep ^^lent for this time.

Q. Is the Jealous person blind, or ^^ath he a good judgment to force (...)

A. If Jealousy be moderate, it shar^^eneth both the judgment and sight in
^^ch wise, as it sees and knows all: ^^ut if it exceed, it is more confuse
and ^^lind then a Moule.

Q. Whom does Jealousy become: or ^^hom does it not become?

A. Jealousy is not comely in him that ^^ath experience of the faithfulness
of (...) is Lady, but Jealousy is not uncomely (...) him that is a new Lover.

Q. Think you that where love is grea^^^ there Jealousy may be great also?

A. Many do think the contrar^^ because that the vehemence of lo^^ does so
transport the person, that he^^ never separated from the thing that (...)
loves.

Q. Were it good for them that (...) Jealous to dye without cause in th^^^
rage: what should they fear more?

A. It should be well employed.

Q. Whereof comes Jealousy?

A. Of envy and love.

Q. Is the Jealous man without judg^ment?

A. Not always, considering th^^ most commonly the scapes of Ladie^ are
discovered: and he is very blin^ that cannot perceive them.

Q. What is the property of Jealousy*

A. It is to serve a thousand deaths* (...) prepare embushments for the
honour^^ Ladies, and to mingle in the midst (...) other pleasures, poisons,
mischiefs, a^^ hatreds.

Q. Do ye think that Love does one^ly entrap the light and tender hearts?

A. I do think that it intrappeth all, and there is none that is able to shut
the ^gate against him.

Q. Is it possible that a noble spirit for (...) small matter may be entrapped?

A. I believe that it may, for every gentle spirit for each little trifle is
enflamed, whose noble and gentle mind is subject to Love.

Q. Is it sufferable to falsifie^faith in love?

A. Why not: since it is nourished only with deceit, treason, and falsehood.

Q. Is the service of Love more trouble some then others?

A. In effect it is more weighty and troublesome: but in will much more easy
to be disgested.

Q. What is it that pacifieth Lovers in their greatest travel?

A. It is hope.

Q. Wherefore do they feign Love to be tied to a pillar of Iaspper, with a
chain of a Diamond and To pace, dipped in the flood Lethe?

A. To provoke women to be pudike and chaste, and to turn their eyes from the
wanton allurements which the^^ Lovers do use toward them.

Q. Should the ingrate or unkind w^^man be beloved?

A. No, because there cannot be foun^^ a worse vice then ingratitude.
Where^fore we ought to deem her wholly transformed into the nature of brut^^
Beasts.

Q. Which is the truest service i^^ Love?

A. A steadfast and a constant faith.

Q. The Lover that is loved, is he (...) Servant or a Master?

A. He is rather a Servant then a Master, for so much as he is clogged with a
double chain. To love and to be loved by two chains, although that the one be
voluntary and the other by necessity.

Q. Do you think that a woman without the prejudice and hurt of honor, may
satisfy one that has served her a long time and season?

A. J dare not say without prejudice. But yet I will affirm that she is to be
excused, if she give him some ^ase that has long and faithfully served her.

Q. Which is the greatest ingratitude that may chance in love?

A. Not to reward at all his Services.

Q. Why is the service of Love worthy of greater rewards then other?

A. Because the longer one continues therein, the greater bitterness he
endures and suffers.

Q. Think ye that Love has placed his principal treasure in women?

A. J believe so, because it has given them the Sovereignty above all men.

Q. Who is the most fortunate in love: the Attendant, or the possessor?

A. The possessor has one contentation, but the attendant has more then a
thousand.

Q. Is Love the cause of good or evil?

A. Of good, seeing he makes fools wise.

Q. Why do men say that Love is a perfect Musician?

A. Because he tuneth the spirit^^ and affections which before had no^^
agreement.

Q. Why do men say, that a fair woman is a monster in beauty?

A. Because it is as rare thing as Monsters be.

Q. Do Courtizans love, or do they feign to love?

A. There be many reasons to say that they love not, but experience teaches
the contrary, for J knew them that be mad for love, and others that dye for
the same.

Q. Wherefore do Lovers many tim^^ take upon them long Iournies to rid
themselves from love?

A. Because daily travel in Iournies do cause new and strange things to
appear, able to cause a man to forget lov^* I speak nothing of the pains
m^^^ have, nor yet of the new loves that may chance, which as one nail does
drive out another, so they make and cause them to forget their first.

Q. Whereof comes it that many Lovers, the more they be ill entreated of
their Ladies, the more they be inflamed in their Love?

A. That comes of a certain constancy of Nature. Or we may well say, that
all Lovers be not masters over themselves.

Q. Whereof does it come, that the woman is more, Jealous then the man?

A. Because she is more fearful, and suspicious: or else because she loves
with less discretion then the man.

Q. Whether is it more difficult to fly love, or to dissemble it, when one i^
entangled with the same?

A. He that loves not at all, nor is overcome with any affections, can without
great pain dissemble love: but where love rules and mastereth, it has such
force, that in despite of us he does manifest and show himself.

Q. How chances it, that diverse great amities and friendships are upon small
occasion turned into great hatred and malice?

A. That comes through the lightness and inconstancy of Lovers.

Q. How comes it, that he which (...) soon taken with Love, does soon
forg^^ it?

A. He is like to them that ride (...) great gallop, and by and by wax^^ weary.

Q. Why be some more given to their ^^kin, and of them take more pleasure,
the^^ of other?

A. For the conformity of blood.

Q. What means it, that although^ diverse women being of Nature covetous and
hold-fast, yet cannot giv^ themselves to love those that be rich?

A. They do that, to show that they will not sell their good grace, but (...)
willing to give it liberally, as being (...) a noble and gentle Spirit: but how
many shall ye find of that mind.

Q Why do they esteem it danger o^^ to love a man that is fair?

A. Because that such be most desired, or they be of nature more proud the^^
other. For Beauty is the Mother o^ pride.

Q. Whereof comes it, that women do greatly hate those that have fors^^^ken
them: and with greater malice if they carry away any thing of theirs?

A. The double loss which they receive is the cause.

Q. Why should we not ground our love upon those that be too young?

A. Because they be inconstant, very bold, and ever more curious of new
Servants and lovers.

Q. How chances it, that most commonly the beautiful desire to have servants
and Lovers that be fair? And the virtuous, those that be virtuous?

A. Similitude and likeness does engender and breed love.

Q. How is it that they which have a short or dim sight, are more given to
love then other?

A. It may be because they see not the foulness and imperfections so well as
others.

Q. Whereof comes it, that ^he Country people do love peasants better then
Citizens?

A. Because they be more affectioned to their like.

Q. Why do women appear fairer by candle light then in the clear day (...)

A. Because their painting or beauty does glister more by candle light the^
otherwise: even as our body and flesh does shine more being in the Sun, then
in the shadow.

Q. Which of these were it best to serve: a Maid: a married woman: or a widow?

A. The love of the maid is most constant, of the widow much more pleasant,
and of the wedded woman more slanderous and hurtful,

Q. Whereof comes it, that many be so amorous of Nuns?

A. Because the hidden beauty is most desired, and because they be attired and
colored with ten thousand toys: and it seems that all their words be so
sweet as Sugar and Rose Water.

Q. Whereof of comes it, that those wh^^h be young are more amorous then
other?

A. Because they trust to receive greater pleasure.

Q. Wherefore is love painted to be placed between slothfulness and hatred:
and that Idleness goes before, and hatred follows with wings?

A. Because Idleness does engender love, and of love many times rises ha^red.

Q. Whereof comes it, that women which of nature be timorous, be
nevertheless strong and hardy in amorous enterprises?

A. Because Love does darken their understanding, and in things wherein they
should be most fearful, does harden and encourage them.

Q. Whereof does it come that old women for the most part are embraced of ^oung
men, and that sometimes old men do sooner enjoy young women?

A. Old women through experience be very bold and hardy, and without any regard
employ themselves upon young men. Old men (because they be not to be feared,
and that without suspicion they may speak familiarly by good authority by
reason of their age) do come for the most part where young men for nothing that
they be able to do can come.

Q. What means it, that women given to Love, ^ee more disposed* charms and
enchantments then men*

A. Of their folly and fond belief^ which is the thing principally requir^ in
charms and Enchantments. An^ thereof it comes that the number (...) women
witches be greater then men.

Q. What is it that causes most t^^ union and conjunction of Lovers?

A. The diversity of complexion cau^seth the effects of Love to be diverse. A^^
most commonly the celestial influences be the causes of their union an^^
conjunction.

Q. What does it mean, that simp^^ shepherds have been taken with (...)
love of some great Lady and Pri^^cesse?

A. We evermore desire the thing^^ which we cannot have. But there is y^^ a
thing more strange, to see two pe^^sons of diverse fortune, the one to dy^^ for
the other. Read the History of T^^credi, in the Palace of Pleasure.

Q. Whereof comes it, that you^^ women which be in love, are never
s^^tisfied in dancing, and in all other things they be of feeble complexion?

A. Immoderate desire of Dancing is ^^veneriall, young women and Maidens be
subject to Venus. So that in such acts they never find themselves molested or
wearied.

Q. From whence comes it, that Love makes us solitary and pensive?

A. Love as Ovid does write, is full of fear and care. And it partaineth to
the fearful to be solitary and pensive.

Q. What is the cause that many do esteem themselves not to be well loved,
if Jealousy be not mixed with Love?

A. The fear which they have to lose ^he thing that they love, does cause the
Lover to be more cherished.

Q. What causes many men although they be faire^ young, rich, and fresh, (...)
be Jealous of the least wretch they ^^ee?

A. It may come of their own con^^it. Or for that they know the light^^esse of
their Mistress behavior.

Q. Wherefore do women require above all things, their Servants and ^^vers to
be secret?

A. Love being discovered, there (...) not so great pleasure: besides that,
Lo^^ disclosed can bring naught else b^^ damage and travel, and sometimes
danger of death: as may be read in the ^^cond Tome of the Palace of Pleasure
almost ready to the Print. Of a Lady (...) Burgundy.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Love^^ delight so much in Music?

A. Music is a very vain thin^^ And Lovers always follow after vanity Yet I
will not blame all sorts of Music but that only which is lascivious an^^ does
effeminate the spirits.

Q. What means it, that many d^^ love fervently, and yet cannot be bel^^ved?

A. That proceeds by reason th^^ complexions cannot agree.

Q. How chances it that love dot^ make men lea^e?

A. Lovers be in continual travel which dries up the bones, by reaso^^
whereof, they diminish and consum^^ themselves.

Q. What is the cause that the talk Love or fight of the effects thereof in
^^inted Tables, make men desirous to ^^ter into his snares?

A. The pleasures that be past are by ^^ch means brought to our memory, ^^d so
the pleasure is double.

Q. Why does Love blind us from ^^eing the imperfections of the thing ^^hich
we love?

A. Love is blind and does blind o^^ers.

Q Why is a man many times amo^^ous of a woman upon her only fame?

A. Renown does evermore make ^^ings greater then they be. And the ^^ind
esteems things more great by ^^earing then by sight.

Q. Why does the earnest view and beholding of a person make a man amorous?

A. The eyes are the messengers of love, ^^ut especially when the beams which
proceed from the heart do unite and conform themselves to the thing viewed
and looked upon.

Q. What is the occasion that Lovers do st^dy to apply themselves to the
imperfections of their Ladies?

A. It is the better to resemble them being well assured that conformity (...)
manners does engender love.

Q. How comes it, that women ca^^ better perceive and discern those that be
amorous, then men?

A. It may be that they are more expert in the practice of Love, as being more
subject unto it then men be. (...) goodly History hereof may be seen in the
second Tome of the Palace of Pleasure, of Queen Anne of Hungaria.

Q. From whence comes it, that amorous Ladies are more liberal th^^ they
which resist Love?

A. It is the property of Love to caus^^ them to be liberal and free hearted.

Q. Whereof comes it, that whi^^ Lovers do talk with their Ladies, spettle
does come and increase in their mouths?

A. The tongue oftentimes moved does heat it self, and that heat does
resolv^^ into spettle.

Q. Whereof comes it, that when amorous Dames do talk with their Lovers,
their breasts seem as though they would depart, their besome does leap and hop
with such force?

A. That proceeds of the great neighborhood that the heart has with the
^p^ppes from whom all the vital spirits (...) proceed, who retiring them to
the ^^ests, be the cause of such motions.

Q. Whereof comes it, that diverse amorous women do oftentimes speak evil
of their Servants or Lovers?

A. It is to put away the suspicion that men may engender of their love, or
else for fear that men should backe-bite them.

Q. Why do men so willingly kiss the eyes of them whom they love?

A. The eye is the dearest part of the body: and in the eye a man may see and
know what is hidden in the heart, or else they do it because the eye is the
beginning of Love.

Q. Whereo^re do Lovers hide themselves when they go about to content each
other?

A. Because of the filthiness of the act or by a natural shamefastness, for
th^^ they seem to do a thing that is (...) very honest.

Q. Wherefore be Lovers so curious (...) know the name of their Ladies?

A. Because they suppose to find^^ the names some secret thing that ma^^ yield
them hope to enjoy the thing th^^ they so greatly desire, or else we m^^ say,
that Lovers will not only posse^^ the bodies of their Ladies, but also have
all that is joined thereunto, and tha^ which does depend thereof.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Love^^^ be so importunate to demand of their
Ladies how well they love them?

A. It is to certify themselves th^^ more, of which assurance the spirit does
appease it self, and receives contentation.

Q. Wherefore do Lovers deligh^ to carry about them any thing that has been
their Ladies?

A. To be more agreeable unto them and the better to conform themselves to
their desires and wills.

Q. Wherefore do Lovers give their colors the one to the other?

A. The conformity of deeds and will, does engender and augment ami^^ Besides
this, the colors secretly do give to understand the thing that ^^n vardly we
do suffer, as by signifying of ^nconstancie, diminution of heat, mockeries,
travels, humility, highness we do show it by the colors of a yea, ^^ow,
pale, read, blew, white, gray, and ^ncarnate.

Q. What causes diverse Ladies esteemed wise and of good judgment, to give
themselves over to vile men, infamous and wicked?

A. J have told you oftentimes that Love is blind, and does captivate the
senses, abandoning judgment and foresight in women, specially in those that
(...) amorous, whose wits be very weak and unperfect.

Q. Whereof comes the custom that the Greeks do eat a confection made of
Quinces (commonly called Marmalade) the first night of their Marriage?

A. Because they fear to disease (...) weary their spouses at the first
reco^^^er and meeting.

Q. Whereof comes it that ma^^ be in Love with Gardiners?

A. Their simplicity perchance is t^^ cause: Or else because Gardens be
dedicated to Venus, and those that be continually within them do savor (...)
Rosemary, Margerome, or of some oth^^ sweet herb.

Q. How chances it, that the (...) married women the first night of th^^
marriage go so unwillingly to bed, a^^ do rise the next day so lusty and
joyful?

A. That comes of the perfectio^^ that they have received of the man, (...)
then they know that they be wom^^ indeed.

Q. Wherefore does agreement in lo^^ cause things to please us, which otherwise
should not so do?

A. Love of necessity does inflam^^ For we seeing many to pursue the thi^^ we
love, the opinion which we have (...) her beauty does increase in us.

Q. Why does a word many times more allure the heart, then long service?

A. Because service was not employed ^^o he purpose, and the word was spoken
^^o effect.

A. How comes it that women ^^ched upon the Navell, be incontinent revoked
with a desire to enter the ^^eld?

A. There be certain veins in the ^^aw, whereof the Navell is made, and he
maw is the very seat of voluptuous^esse: It is no marvel then if they be
^oved thereunto when they be touched upon the same.

Q. What is the cause that some Lovers be better pleased with the Meancholike,
then with the lively and lu^^y?

A. Lovers be easily induced to be^^eve that they be beloved, and percei^ing
their Ladies to be Melancholic ^^d heavy, they esteem that to come of (...)
care that they do take of them and (...) their affairs, but it may be that it
^^mmeth of the agreement and simili^^de of complexion.

Q. Why be rich women more gi^^ to love then the poor?

A. Idleness is the cause, who is (...) mother of all superfluity. I leave to
sp^^ of the delicate meats and the g^^ wines that the rich does use, without
^^ving any grief or vexation which (...) bleth their brain.

Q. Why is love most commo^^painted with his eyes bound up?

A. Because he blinds poor Lov^^ and makes them so like unto be^^ that they
cannot at all discern the (...) perfections of their Ladies.

Q. Why do Lovers delight to h^^ amorous Histories written by Auth^^ of our
time?

A. By the conformity of their passio^^ and likely hood of their affections.

Q. Why be women well content (...) they be told that other women be in (...)
as well as they?

A. Because their fault seems (...) less, not being alone spotted with
^^vice.

Q. Wherefore do stepmothers l^^ their Sons in law, and hate t^^ ^^ughters
in law?

A. They hate their Daughters in law, because they draw all the substance from
their Sons: and they love their Sons in law as the principal goodness and
solace of their own Daughters.

Q. Why is Love better liked in the Country then in the Town?

A. Because in villages there is not so great respect, and for that all
commodities and things are not to be found there, Lover, be constrained to
apply themselves one to another. Moreover the pleasure of Gardens, of hunting,
fishing, and other Country delights, do most commonly cause men to keep
themselves at home, and to forget the ^^oves and follies of Towns and Cities.

Q. Whereof comes it, that amo^^ous women be more ticklish then others?

A. Women prone to love, be delicate for the most part, whose skis^ be loose
and soft, more easy to be tickled.

Q. Why do women love them most earnestly that had their maydenhead, and men
clean contrary hate those women whom first of all they imbr^^ced?

A. Women by the conjunction of (...) man do gain perfection, and the (...)
thereby makes himself unperfect, (...) cause the woman is a creature
unperfect and as the Philosophers say, a creatu^^ caused and not complete.

Q. Why be some hard to be perswad^ that they be beloved?

A. Because they perceive not themselves amiable: and because they kn^^^ that
in them there is nothing that ma^^ incite others to love them.

Q. Wherefore do Lovers many ti^^ write to their Lovers, with the Ioy^^
Onions, or of Leamonds?

A. Because the thing which is writ^^ with such Juice, should not appear
^^nifest, except it be near the fire, (...) they do so to keep their love
^^cret.

Q. Why do not Lovers subscribe th^^ Letters which they write to their Lad^^
and Paramours?

A. The reason and cause is ab^^ mentioned, being assured that if th^^^ Love
were deciphred, they should have less pleasure. Besides this, a ^^ay should be
opened for false tongues, ^^o impeach and let their minds and purposes.

Q. Why do Lovers write one to ^^her amorous Sonnets in rhyme rather (...) in
prose?

A. Poetry is the friend of Love. And all the praise belonging to love was
always more sweetly sung and celebrated by Poets then by Orators.

Q. Wherefore do women so willingly ^^^old themselves in Glasses?

A. To contemplate and behold their beauty, to esteem the same as it is
worthy. Or else it proceeds of a certain ^^ghtnesse that is in them.

Q. But wherefore use they more wil^^ngly Glasses of Steel, then of Christa^^?

A. Steel is of a more sound substance comforting with his glimpse or
rever^eration the sight more then Crystal ^oth.

Q. Wherefore do we present women with Glasses, Gloves, Chains, Jewels, and
pretty Fannes to cool their Faces, or defend the same from the sire?

A. Glasses do serve them to see the^^ beauty: Fannes refresh and cool them
(...) Chains do signify that they be fools* and had need to be chained:
Gloves do let their hands from snatching, still ready and proper to the
spoil: Rings that they may consider the end with the beginning, and to think
upon the time present and to come.

Q. What is the occasion that many women have lived chastely in their youth* and
approaching to age, have gi^^ themselves over to wantonness?

A. It may be that in their youth they labored much, for travel is enemy to
love. Or else they were so well looke^^ unto, that they had no leisure or time
to attempt that enterprise.

Q. Whereof does it come, thas loving and amorous women be given to babble and
prate more then others?

A. If love be not too excessive, it renders and makes folks joyful, lusty,
and well spoken. And commonly it seems that heaviness stops the Orgaines
and conduites of the voice: ^^on^rariwise, joy and gladness of ^^^e heart does
open and unloose them.

Q. What is the cause that many wrapped with love, do upon the sudden lose his
love?

A. All they which be of hot complexion be subject to sudden mutations and
changes, and run hither and ^^hither without any rest.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Lovers ^^ose their eating or appetite?

The amorous passions do disperse their hearts into sundry parts, and their
^^ively and vital spirits be unproper to digestion through being too much
distracted hither and thither* and plunged ^^n affections of Love*

Q. Why did the ancients paint Love with a window or a gate in his stomach,
wherein were written these two words: Far off, and at hand.

A. To show that he which is a Lover must love as well in absence as in
presence.

Q. But why was he painted bare headed?

A. To show that between Lovers there should be nothing covered or hidden.

Q. Wherefore do some paint Love with the face of a man, and not of an Infant?

A. To show that a Lover ought to be constant as very men be, and not like the
brutish.

Q. I desire to know wherefore the notable Painter Zeuxis did paint him with a
green Robe?

A. Because Lovers live in continu^ll hope: and green does signify no other
thing then hope.

Q. But why does he set upon the borders of his Robe these words: Death and
Life?

A. Because that true Love dureth both in life, and also after death, and
breaks never for any accident that may happen.

Q. And wherefore did Appelles paint him with these words written in his
forehead: Spring time and Summer?

A. To show that in love there is both prosperity and adversity, which are
represented by those two seasons.

Q. Wherefore do they give him wings?

A. Because the desires of Lovers do tend always to high things.

Q. Wherefore do they make him a Child?

A. Because that whosoever does give himself to love, has no understanding
for most commonly he loses for a thing of naught, matters weighty and of great
importance.

Q. What moved the inhabitants of Cypres, to paint Love, having a Turkey bow
behind his back, and his arrows before?

A. It was because that Love has a custom to wound all them that he meets.
And because that he secretly does the same, they place the Turkey bow behind
his back.

Q. Wherefore be his arrows never blunt, but sharp?

A. Because they should wound the better and enter more deeply, for they make
him sore, to feel that he is wounded with them.

Q. How comes it that one look is more hurtful to Lovers, and wounds them
more then any touching or talk?

A. That is, because Love takes his beginning of looking.

Q. Why do Lovers wax so soon pale and lean?

A. The passions of the mind do bring the body to a poor estate.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Posts, Ryders, Weavers, and generally they which
be accustomed to great agitation of the body, be more veneriall then others?

A. Moving does heat the reins and the vessels of generation. Travel also
does open the conduits where the seed does pass and it is not to be doubted,
but cold does cause the humors to be in a manner unmovable, letting the seed
from coming to the generative parts:

Q. Whereof comes it, that men of hot, strong, and good complexion,
abstaining from copulation with women, do commonly fall into the flux, or
have the yealow Iaundose, or be troubled with immoderate choler?

A. Men with their seed do avoid certain corrupt humors, the which remaining
in the body, be converted either into choler, or else into the yealow Jaundise.

Q. What is the cause that Harlots and whores do smell so rammish?

A. Because they sildome retain their seed, which being out of the Matrix does
corrupt and stincke.

Q. Is it lawful for a Lover to take his pleasure with any other besides his
own Lady?

A. I answer no. Nevertheless his Lady being absent and he cannot enjoy her,
he may have liberty to use another if she resemble his own in such perfection
as she may be termed a second Lady: but not in any wise to fix his heart upon
her. He then, I say, I that uses such a one in his Ladies ahsence is the
rather to be excused, but neither of them is to be admitted in my judgment, if
he mean to deserve the title of a true Lover.

Q. Tell me then, what thing is Love?

A. It is a passion that does blind the spirits, removes the understanding,
takes all the memory away, causes ruin and loss of goods, makes a man
weak, and is the enemy of youth, and the death of old age, the mother of all
vices, the receptacle of pensive minds: a thing without reason, without order
and stability, and the whirlepoole of man's liberty.

Q. What are diverse women of themselves?

A. Beasts unperfect, given to ten thousand passions and pleasures,
abominable to be thought well of. So that if men would do as they ought to
do, they would not follow them nor pursue them, with other desire or app^^ite,
but as things inevitable, which necessity does constrain them to use.

Q. Wherefore be there so few women that can content themselves to love one?

A. Because most of them are given to lust, insatiable. And for this cause they
care neither for number, nor for any thing that is honest, so that he be able
to cover her skin, he is welcome.

Q. What is the cause that love being discovered comes s^ldome to perfection?

A. For the lets that comes thereby.

Q. Why have old men the repulse of young women?

A. Because they have not wherewithal to ease them of their grief.

Q. Why do women count them beasts that be over curious and diligent to serve
them?

A. Because they know themselves unworthy of such service.

Q. Is it true that men say, when one kisseth two mouths one of them must
needs stink?

A. I believe so, if he love perfectly.

Q. How comes it that Lovers be more suspicious then others?

A. Because their minds be continually troubled.

Q. Why is it so noisome for a rich woman to suffer trouble?

A. Riches engenders pride and insolency.

Q. Where do noble minds commonly meet together?

A. Where the fairest Ladies be.

Q. What is required in a perfect Lover?

A. To fear and reverence above all things the mighty power of Love, and to
refer or report to him of all his thoughts and desires.

Q. How do men come to the fruit of Love?

A. By hope and perseverance.

Q. What things are contrary to the Kingdom of Love?

A. Shame and fear.

Q. Who be they that do not let to serve Love, although they be otherwise
pressed with affairs?

A. Lusty and courageous hearts, which in despite of business do not pass to
suffer themselves to enter the yoke of Love.

Q. What be the pains of Love?

A. Hurts and wounds more then deadly: that is, desires full of rage, extreme
travel, exile and banishment, grievous martyrdom, and pride intolerable.

Q. What is the meat of perfect Lovers?

A. Sighs and tears.

Q. Wherewithal do they make sacri^^ to love?

A. With clean hearts, which are not spotted with any covetousness.

Q. Who be the Messengers of Love?

A. Pleasure, Travel, sweet, bitter, war, Peace, life and death.

Q. What are the cause of Lovers sicknesses?

A. Heart-breakings hurtful fastings, the hunger of Love, trembling,
quivering, and continual travels, secret dolours, the extremity of vexations,
and great watchings.

Q. Which are the benefits of Love?

A. Plays, sleep, beds, pleasures, rest, tranquillity, contentation,
abundance, peace, refreshings, and other rejoysings.

Q. Who be most secret in love, men or women?

A. Women be most secret no doubt, because they speak less then men, a thing
likely to be true, but sildom^^ seen.

Q. Is the benefit greater, by being secret in Love, or the hurt by too much
speaking?

A. I think the hurt surmounteth.

Q. Think you that by the dexterity of the spirit, men may know the secrets of
Lovers?

A. The holy Scripture does witness that the heart of man cannot be known, and
that GOD alone does know the same.

Q. Why be the secrets of Love so easily kept?

A. For the great sweetness that men find in them.

Q. Is it better to love them that be fair, or them that be secret?

A. Without doubt the secret wise, are more worthy to be loved, for beauty is
of little continuance.

Q. How should men keep themselves secret in love?

A. They must take heed that they pass not oftentimes by their Lovers houses,
or often follow their haunt, but wait until Fortune present apt occasion.

Q. How should our pleasures be measured?

A. They ought to agree with our age, with our estate, with the time and place
where we be.

Q. What should be the faithful service of a Lover?

A. It ought to be necessary and voluntary with the heart and the life.

Q. What means it, that women for the most part do love them that have ^^low
and unsettled heads, and contemn others which have more amiable qualities?

A. They do esteem perhaps that they shall be better beloved and served of
those meaner spirits, because they have not such knowledge as the other which
are of more understanding then they.

Q. How many sorts of beauties b^ ^^h^re?

A. Three, one in the body, the other does consist in the accord and harmony of
the voice, the third in virtue.

Q. How may they be comprehended?

A. The first by the eyes, the second by the ears, the third by the
understanding. And men may also enjoy the perfection of beauty, by sight, by
hearing, and by thought.

Q. What mean the Poets when they feign of Circes, that she with her
sorceries did change and transform all them that tarried with her into beasts?

A. They would signify by that metamorphose no other thing, but the wanton and
lascivious allurements of Circe, wherewith deteining all those that fell into
her hands, she so far forth made them equal to brute beasts, that utterly
they forgot their true estate of manhood.

Q. From whence come the pains that men suffer in this earthly and vulgar
love?

A. They proceed of that, that we desire things which we cannot always have at
our will and minds.

Q. Do ye think that desire of beauty does hinder the rest and quiet^^sse of
men?

A. No, for that desire is not of any ^^ing Corporal.

Q. Wherefore do men attribute ar^^^^es and fire unto Love?

A. To show how ardent and full of ^^olour his passions be.

Q. Why is Love painted naked?

A. Because that all the acts and deeds (...) Lovers be such, that they cannot
be ^^idden or dissembled.

Q. What is the greatest blindness in Love?

A. To love her whom we think can^^ be contented with the love of one.

Q. Whether do ye esteem greatest, the beauty or the foulness of those that
(...) not content themselves with the love of^^ne?

A. The foulness is far greater.

Q. What deserve they, to be loved, or ^^a^ed?

A. In my judgment they should be ^a^ed and esch^ed as the plague.

Q. Which is the greatest spur that provokes a man to do well and
honorably?

A. The presence and favor of (...) Lady.

Q. To what thing is the servitude (...) Love like?

A. To the service of Princes.

Q. How should a man behave himself amongst Ladies?

A. As in the Court amongst Princes and great estates, to wit, that he must be
bold and hardy.

Q. Is it very true, that he must needs be bold and full of audacity?

A. After my opinion no: but according as a man may use himself, I say yea.
Notwithstanding I suppose that in the Court and train of Princes, and in the
service of Ladies, men ought rather to march in the steps of humility and
reverence, then in too much hardiness and presumption.

Q. Which be the noblest hearts?

A. They whom Love disdaineth not to warm with his sacred heat.

Q. Wherefore do some love many persons at once, and yet do not use to
disclose the same?

A. Noble minds take great pleasure to do so, but to tell and show it, is but
^^sse and shame.

Q. Is it true which men say, that if (...) be in love with another, he then
bears affection to all those things, which resemble the thing he loves?

A. That is too true, for they be in love even with things that be dumb and
without sense, with pictures and engraven things, and such like: if they show
any remembrance of the thing they love.

Q. What is the true pledge of Love?

A. A pure and clean heart.

Q. Why do women very often times blame or dispraise their Lovers?

A. To the intent that others should praise them, thereby to double their
pleasure.

Q. Who has the more lively spirit, and better memory, the man, or the woman?

A. The man, not after the saying only of the Philosophers, but also of holy
Scripture.

Q. Who has the better judgment of the amiable parts, the man or the woman?

A. The man, as being endued (...) the nature of a more high under^ta^ding, and
a spirit more subtle.

Q. May we love the thing that (...) turn us to dishonor?

A. I think not.

Q. What is the greatest recomp^^^^ that a woman can make unto a man?

A. To reveal unto him her secr^^ and finally to make him Lord and Master of
her body, and of all her though^^

Here ends the Questions and Answers of Love.
NATVRALL QVESTIONS and the Answers.
THE II. BOOK.
Question.
WHerefore is not Cheese made of beasts that be toothed on both sides?

A. Because their milk will not curd nor cream.

Q. Wherefore do men cast Smallage into Pondes?

A. Because Smallage does serve fish for a medicine, and also they delight to
eat the same.

Q. Whereof comes it, that D^^ never love to eat of the tail, or of (...)
belly of a Heart?

A. Because the Gall of a H^^ sometimes in the tail, and sometim^ in the belly.

Q. What is the cause that fat people have little blood?

A. Because the grease and fatn^^ do consume it.

Q. Whereof comes the saying (...) the Ancients: that he who is wont to (...)
a kind of pulse called Lentiles, is (...) the most part pleasant and ami^ble?

A. It is because that Lentils do ca^^ cold humors.

Q. How comes it that we be (...) greedy to eat when the North or Northeast
wind does blow, then at oth^^ times?

A. That comes of the cold of th^^ aforesaid winds, which does unite an^^
hold the natural heat together.

Q. Whereof comes it, that to get (...) stomach, men use eager and sharp
things?

A. That is, because all egre things be dry and open the stomach, which
^auseth the appetite.

Q. What causes, that they which ^^ve a feminine voice be not in any ^^eat
estimation or of opinion among ^^e wise?

A. Whosoever has upon him either ^^ember, or mark, or manner of action which
is proper to any other creature whatsoever it be, he is surely participant
(...) the nature of the said creature. And because the woman is of small
practice, whosoever has the voice like a woman, esteemed of the wise to have
little understanding or knowledge.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which be hasty of speech, are of small
^^stancy, ill conditioned, and extreame^^ choleric?

A. All sudden motions come of (...) extremity and excess of heat, which
engenders in men this incon^^ancy and lightness, to promise with^^ any
performing, and through cho^^ most commonly consider not what (...) say.

Q. Whereof comes it, that th^^ which have shrill voices, are most commonly
envious and malicious?

A. The sharpness of the voice p^^ceedeth from the sharpness of the pi^^ and
conduites of the lungs, which rise^^^ through dryness and coldness. Such
(...) melancholic persons, who being nat^rally fearful, dare never disclose
th^^ which they think.

Q. Whereof comes it, that all th^^ which be extreme thirsty do love (...)
sweet wines?

A. All things which may ingend^^ and inflame choler, are apt to make m^^
thirsty, and such is sweet wine.

Q. Whereof comes it, that div^^ religious persons, which naturally (...)
zealous of Chastity, do abstain fr^^ wine?

A. Wine is hot and full of vapo^^ and therefore provokes lust, his he^^
dissolveth seed, and with his ventos^^ causes the courage to rise.

Q. Wherefore did our forefather make difficulty to use at their table^^ verse
meats and sorts of dishes?

A. The diversity of meats cannot (...) digested with one proportion of heat.
And so nature being troubled with in^^estion of such diversity of meats,
causes noy somnesse to the stomach, and specially when it is weak.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the sea is so profitable and del^ctable for
Lazermen and such as have the Dropsy?

A. The sea provokes vomit, and through vomitting, fleame and all other
superfluous humors, which cause such diseases do avoid. And so those that be
infected, do love the sea.

Q. Wherefore is the City of Avignion ^^ther subject to the Plague then any
^^ther place round about it?

A. The subtle air is soon infected, and soon purged of the infection,
con^rariwise, the gross air is not so lightly ^^ected, nor yet so soon
purged.

Q. How may the fine and subtle (...) be known from the gross and cor^upt
air?

A. The ^enuity and subtilty of the (...) is known, for at the rising of the
(...) it is suddenly heated, and waxes cold at the going down thereof* The
contrary does chance to the gro^^ and vicious air.

Q. Why is Music more delectable in the morning, then at any other^^ times?

A. Because that all things be th^^ in silence, the senses be more lusty and
waking, and the mind in great moder^^tion and temperance.

Q. Why ^e fruits commonly believed of all men?

A. For the natural sweetness which is in them: or else because they be of
th^^ temperature hot and moist.

Q. Wherefore is the sight above (...) the other senses most esteemed?

A. Because by the sight we see th^^ difference of all things. Or else we m^^
say it comes by the impression (...) Love, which takes his first force (...)
strength by the sight.

Q. Whereof comes it, that th^^ which have a feeble sight, write smaller
letters then other?

A. Because they write their eyes being in a manner half closed and shut^^

Q. What is the cause that all ill facts (...) discover themselves by the eyes
and the heart?

A. Because the eye is the messenger of the heart. It may also be said, that
the face being tender and open to all vapors the same may easily be judged and
discovered by the alterations, that it shows principally from the heart.

Q. Why be they that have little heads naturally more choleric and
disdainful then others?

A. Because the heat coming from the heart, from whence anger rises cannot
well be cooled, and the choler pro^^eding from the blood, moved and boy^^^ng
about the heart causes heaviness.

Whereof comes it, that by thin^^ng upon strange and horrible things our
flesh does quake and tremble?

A. Because the heat does retire to the inferior and inward parts.

Q. How comes it, that in the heart of a Stagge there is a bone?

A. Nature has there placed it to serve for a stay and foundation of the
continual motion of his heart, both in rest and travel.

Q. How comes it, that in Horses, Mules, Asses, and Crows, men fin^^ no gall?

A. All they have galls, but it is no in one proper place, but dispierse^^
throughout all the veins.

Q. Why are they commonly lea^^ which have great Milts.

A. The Milt does draw unto it much matter and substance, which would els^^
turn to nourishment and fatness.

Q. How come hairs to be placed upon the head?

A. The brain brings them forth, discharging it self of gross vapoun*
which coming forth by the pores (...) the flesh do wax dry, and turn in^^
hairs.

Q. Why do diverse feed upon bones and not upon hair?

A. Because of the overmuch dryness thereof.

Q. By how many ways may th^^ brain be purged?

A. The waterish humors be^^ purged by the eyes: the melanch^^ like by the
ears, the choleric by (...) nose: and the flegmaticke by the hair.

Q. Wherefore has nature made the lungs of all creatures like a sponge?

A. To receive air the better, for the refreshing and cooling of the heart,
and to drive away all hurtful vapors.

Q. Wherefore has nature placed the heart in the midst of the stomach?

A. To give life equally to all the members, even as the sun placed in the
middle of the heaven does equally give light to all things.

Q. Wherefore does it decline somewhat more to the left side then to the right?

A. To temper the coldness of the Milt, which is the seat of melancholy, and
placed on the left side.

Q. How comes it, that all those creatures which have little hearts be more
hardy then they which have greater?

A. In little hearts the heat is better compact and kept: and so by consequence
the more vigorious and of greater force.

Q. Whereof comes it, that some do dye through Joy, and some through Sorrow?

A. Great joy does choke the interior parts, and heaviness does cool them,
so that life cannot endure where heat lacks.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Marmalade of quinces taken before the repast,
does bind and close up the belly, and taken after the repast, does unbind it?

A. Through his great stiptisity or costivenesse it closes the nether parts of
the ventricle: and if it be taken after repast, it closes the superior parts
of the stomach, which being shut, the meats be constrained to avoid by the
interior part.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Radish root does greatly aid and help
digestion, and yet of it self almost cannot be digested.?

A. The Radish is compound and made of diverse qualities. The more subtle parts
thereof are very proper and meet to cause digestion. The other which are gross
be contrary to heat, and so let digestion.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the choleric complexions do soonest attain to
beards?

A. For their great heat, and because they have the pores large and wide.

Q But how comes it that hair does grow in them that he hanged?

A. They be continually in the Sun, and all the humors of their body do
resolve into vapors, which causes the hairs to increase and grow.

Q Whereof comes it, that some have harsh and hard hair, and other soft?

A. The soft hair does come of the little pores, and the stiff and hard does
proceed of the greatness of the pores, for this cause women have their hair
more fine and soft, because their natural cold does restrain and make their
p^res less.

Q. What causes young men sooner to have an appetite then old men?

A. It is because they be of a hotter complexion.

Q. Wherefore do Physicians forbid (...) meats that be too hot?

A. Because they burn the blood, and dispose it to Leprosy.

Q. Whereof comes it that women have no beards?

A. Because that substance which should convert into the beard does turn into
the hair of the head.

Q. What means it, that Garlic and Onions (although they be not in the
ground) do sprowt and grow?

A. That is of the great abundance of the humors that they have.

Q. Whereof comes it, that study is noisome and hurtful after repast?

A. Natural heat cannot travel both in digestion and speculation at one
instant.

Q. Whereof comes it, that when the stomach is grieved, all the body
languisheth?

A. The stomach has certain aliances with the heart, the brain, and the
liver, which are the principal parts of the body.

Q. Whereof comes it, that some do things best with the right hand, and
other some with the left?

A. That proceeds of the hear that comes from the heart which makes that
side more apt and meet unto labor, whereunto it has his principal access.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which have the hicket, by retaining their
breath do ease themselves of it?

A. The blowing and breath retained, does heat the interior parts of the body,
and the hicket proceeds of nothing else but of cold.

Q. Why do old people neeze with great difficulty?

A. Because their conduites be very straight.

Q. Why does wine mingled with water cause vomit?

A. Mingled wine is noisome to the stomach, and does weaken the virtue
retentiue: contrariwise, pure wine does comfort it.

Q. Why be they so subject to sickness that love to drink strong and mighty
wines?

A. Strong wine excessively drunk, does extinguish natural heat, and the
liver being therewith weakened, cannot engender good blood, but does rather
engender a certain aquositie and waterishnesse, that converteth it self into
a Dropsy.

Q. Why be not young children so thirsty and dry, as men of greater age?

A. The moistness of young children does keep them from being thirsty. For
thirst is nothing else but a desire of moistness, whereupon they that be of
greater age be naturally more dry and therefore more thirsty.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the bottom of a Caldron or kettle is cold,
although scalding water remain in it?

A. It is because of the hot vapors which mount on high, whereby the upper
parts being made hot, the bottom is cold, through the continual water that is
in it.

Q. How chances it, that the grain which the Ants do lay upon the ground is
evermore bitten on the oue side?

A. Nature has taught them to do so, to take away the growing thereof for the
better sustentation. For corn in the earth does naturally grow, which if (...)
should, the poor creature should be defrauded of his living.

Q. Wherefore do the Physicians say, that it is dangerous to let one blood
that is fat?

A. The veins of gross men be hidden and small, and besides that, they have
little blood.

^. Why does the Camelion change colors so often?

A. That comes of overmuch fear, and for that he esteems his blood so
dear.

Q. Why be rich men more subject to the gout then poor?

A. Because they stuff themselves with many and diverse meats, or that they be
too much idle, or else because they use not convenient exercise. The ^^me may
also come through too much company with women: for there is nothing that
corrupts more the virtue digestive, then such excess.

Q. Wherefore is it not good to speak when one eats?

A. Because speech does much let and hinder the chawing of meat, or else it is
for fear of entering or falling into some cough and strangling.

Q. Whereof does it come, that the birds and fowls which be fat (in this
Country) if they take their flight into the South parts, or into Ethiopia,
they return leaner then when they departed?

A. The South parts be hot and dry, and does dry that which dwells in them.
Or we may say, that in all places that be hot and cold, both in Summer and in
Autumn there be found fruits and seeds, and the days are more longer.

Q. What is the cause that birds do breed in the spring, when they be lea^^,
and in Autumn when they are fat and in good liking they do not breed?

A. The spring time is a moderate season, and all living things at that time be
most temperate, and by that means are more apt to generation. Contrariwise,
Autumn is cold and dry, and by that means less fit to that matter.

Q. Wherefore do we sooner vomit upon the Seas, then when we travel on foot
or horseback?

A. Because to sail upon the Seas, is a motion the which is not after our
nature, but to run is. To sail is a moving vnaccustomable, and all
extraordinary things do trouble man.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the first fruits as well of Beasts as of Trees, if
they come in their season, be fairer then those that come after?

A. At the first bearings Nature is fresh and lusty, in the other, she is
somewhat weak and impotent.

Q. What is the cause that a dead co^pes is more heavy then a living body?

A. A living body is replenished with air and fire, which does keep it right
up, for their nature is always to mount on high.

Q. Why does the excessive use of women make us weak?

A. Because it takes away from us our natural heat

Q. Why do the Physicians command salt to be cast amongst the clouts of
little Infants, when they be swadled?

A. To harden the skin.

Q. Why did Democrites forbid his scholars (whom he desired to be chaste) to
eat rapes?

A. Because rapes through the great ventosity wherewith they fill our bod^^
provoke lechery.

Q. Wherefore do women with child forbear to eat Rue?

A. For that it causes them to be delivered before their time.

Q. Whereof does it come, that all oily things do take away the appetite?

A. The things which are oily, do swim at the mouth of the stomach where
the appetite is engendered, even as the digestion is made in the bottom of the
stomach.

Q. Whereof comes it that by too much use of egre and sour things, men wax
old before their time?

A. All things that consume natural humidity, does cause age.

Q. What is the cause that things which are salt, be noisome for the ^ight?

A. Because they pierce too much.

Q. Whereof comes it, that women if they chance to fall, do fall most
willingly backward?

A. Because their hinder parts are more gross and heavy then the rest,
through coldness, which unto them is natural.

Q. What is the cause that we be evermore fatter in the belly and in the
guts, then in any other part?

A. Because the belly is near the stom^cke where digestion is made.

Q. Why have women smaller feet then men?

A. Heat being far greater in men then in women, causes them to grow in
height, engrossing and enlarging the superior parts.

Q. What causes man to be more ^^clined to laugh then to weep?

A. Because it is a pleasure to laugh, and a displeasure to weep.

Q. Whereof comes it that some men do snort sleeping, other sleep without
making any noise, some do speak between their teeth and some aloude and
clear?

A. This diversity does proceed of the let that is in the apprehensive senses,
accordingly as they be stopped or free.

Q. Wherefore is smoke so contrary to the sight?

A. For the grossness and sharpness thereof. The grossness is showed in
the fume that it engenders: The sharpness is manifested in that it mounteth
aloft unequally, and as it were like clouds.

Q. Whereof comes it, that brea^^ salted, is lighter then other,
notwithstanding that Salt joined to water should make it more weighty?

A. The heaviness of the Bread comes of the humidity, and the more it is
dried, the more lighter is the bread.

Q. Wherefore is not hot Bread wholesome?

A. Hot bread is very full of moistness and vapors, which do corrupt the
blood.

Q. What is the cause, that when a Dog begins to bark, all other dogs
thereabout do follow him and do the like?

A. A Dog because of choler wherewith he naturally abounds, has both his
senses and his hearing very sharp.

Q. Why is not Bread made of pure meal, nor that which is made of clean Bran,
esteemed good?

A. All extremities are vicious, the Bran because it naturally dries too much:
The floor of meal contra^^wise, causes great nourishment, but (...) slimy
and giving, and consequently of too hard digestion.

Q. Why do gross men and those that have the Dropsy, delight to eat pelt
meal?

A. It loses the naughty humors in gross bodies, and dissolveth the water^
humor which hurts them, and is t^^perate between hot and cold.

Q. Why has man longer hair then any brute beast?

A. Because they receive greater nutriment, and also because brute beasts, do
often change their hair, which happens not to man, except through some great
hurt.

Q. Wherefore do the sweet savours delight us, and the stinking offend us?

A. Like as in tunes there be both consonants and dissonants, whereof the one
delights us, and the other offends us: Even so in savours, sweet sm^^ are
the concords, and agreeable to our nature, and stinking are the discord^, and
dislike us.

Q. Whereof comes it, that about all other meats, we love flesh best, and
that it does profit us most?

A. Because flesh does yield more strength, repl^nisheth better our bodies. Or
else because it approaches more nearer to our substance.

Q. How comes it, that such (...) have the disease called Gonorrhea, avoid
^^eir seed without any pleasure?

A. Because their seed is thinner and less digested and their conduits made
^^ider.

Q. How comes it that they which ^e chollerick have loud voices?

A. That proceeds of the extremity of heat.

Q. What is the cause that Turpen^^^ is commonly smelt in the urine of those
that use it?

A. Turpentine is a substance very subtle, and therefore it does easily
pe^^rate and pass to the bladder where (...) urine is, and infecteth it with
his ^^our.

Q. Whereof comes it that fair ^ather beginning toward night, most ^^^monly
does not long continue?

A. Of the inconstancy of the Moon, which has her principal domination and
power in the night.

Q. What means it, that Cranes (...) prognosticate fair weather?

A. Cranes do naturally feel the (...) and change of the weather, and
accordingly go and depart into other Countries.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Old men remember so well that which they have
seen and done in their youth: and forget that which they learn and do in
their age?

A. Things learned in youth, have already taken a certain habitude in the
person. But things which they learn in age; because their senses be weakened,
are easily lost and forgotten.

Q. Why do men say, that to grow fast is a figure of short life?

A. Because the humor that causes the growing, as it is easily enlarged even
so it soon consumes.

Q. Why do Cranes set themselves in array, when they prepare to fly?

A. To trouble themselves the less in flying.

Q. How comes it, that unhorned Beasts have not teeth on both sides?

A. That comes for lack of the matter or substance which causes the same.

Q. Why be sodden stones more (...) then other?

A. It may be, because the fire has rendered them more solid and better
compact.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Bees are more fierce then other creatures?

A. Because they are of nature dry, and be void of excrements and other
superfluities.

Q. Why do not fat things soon corrupt?

A. Because they be replenished with air.

Q. Why do Trees that grow in marshes dye so soon?

A. Because they are of great moisture, and do receive little nourishment.

Q. Wherefore cannot fire endure, except it be continued and nourished?

A. Because of the great vehemence and impetuosity of his heat.

Q. Why did not nature create Birds to go upright accordingly as she did man?

A. Because they be void of reason and have no care of heavenly things.

Q. How chances it, that Nature (...) no wings to Man?

A. Because man is not created to fly, nor to walk in the air, but upon
earth.

Q. Why do the pulses of young Infants beat so swiftly?

A. Because their heat receives air without any let, and are again suddenly
cooled.

Q. Why do Dolphins when they appear above water, signify some storm^ or
tempest to come?

A. Because at the beginning of the tempest there do rise from the bottom^ of
the Sea, certain hot exhalatio^^ and vapors, which do warm an^ heat the
Dolphins, at what time the^^ mount to seek for cold.

Q. Why be the pulses of young pe^^ple more vehement, then the aged?

A. Because their complexion (...) hotter.

Q. Wherefore do aged people dy^^ as it were without dolor and pain?

A. Because all their senses are d^^litate and weakened.

Q. Wherefore has Nature giv^ the Mil^ to the noblest creatures?

A. Because they have need of greater ^^^iration and breath.

Q. Whereof comes it, that beasts, which live partly on the land, and ^^tly
in the water, do always bring ^^th their young ones upon the (...)?

A. Because they are more participant (...) the earth, then of the water.

Q. What moved Democritus to say, (...) the soul was made and composed (...)
Atomi, that is to say, of things indi^^sible, as those things be, which we see
(...) the beams of the Sun?

A. Because the soul is the fountain (...) spring of all our actions: and
those ^tomi be above all other things most (...) to motion.

Q. How comes it, that creatures (...) upon the land be strangled in the
(...), and those of the water be choked (...) the air?

A. Because that land creatures cannot ^^ath in the water: and those of the
^^ter be stuffed up with the heat of the (...).

Q. Whereof comes it, that overmuch fasting causes thirst?

A. Through default and lack (...) nourishment, whereby natural hea^^ does
extenuate and dry up the body.

Q. Why does not fire go out, (...) covere^ with Ashes?

A. Because the same being covered has the nourishment that it requires.

Q. What moved some of the Sag^^ to say, that death is cold and without blood?

A. Because our life does consist (...) heat and blood.

Q. Wherefore is there more vnder^standing in the head then in any oth^^ part
of the body?

A. Because the head is as it (...) the bulwark and chief part of (...) body.

Q. Whereof is it that among hea^^ and plants, some come up and gro^^ the
seed, and other of the root?

A. That comes of their perfecti^^ or imperfection.

Q. Wherefore do herbs and (...) continue longer then other creatures.

A. Because their nutriment virtue is ^^re lusty, and do easilier find
where^^th to nourish them.

Q. Why is it, that the greater the creature is, the longer he endures?

A. Because the greater they be, the ^^otter they be: and in heat the life and
strength consists.

Q. Wherefore cannot Heaven be subject to corruption?

A. Because it is not composed of contrary Elements.

Q. Why does fear make the heart to beat?

A. Because the blood when we be ^fraid, retyreth to the inward parts, and
has need to be refrigerated and cooled, which thing comes by the b^ating of
the heart.

Q. Why did nature make man high, (...) straight of stature?

A. That proceeds of his heat, which following the quality of fire, causes
him continually to mount and grow in height: or to the end he might with his
hands apply himself to han^^y work, and hardy exploits.

Q. Why can little Children neither go nor stand upright?

A. Through feebleness of the inferior and nether parts, and by reason of the
greatness and heaviness of the upper parts.

Q. Wherefore are the nights more qui^^ then the days, and less windy?

A. The motion of the air is let by the coldness of the night.

Q. Whereof comes it, that men of Red complexion, have more revelati^ns by
dreams then other?

A. Because they be of imagination more free and lively.

Q. Wherefore did the ancients use to drink the blood of those that were
called Glad^^tories, which were hurt and w^unded in the Combats and fenceplaies?

A. Because they were persuaded by the Physicians, that it served against the
falling sickness.

Q. Why is bread hard of digest^^on?

A. Because it lies long in the stomac^, besides that, if it be not well
baked, (...) ^^useth the Liver to fill the veins, called by the Physicians
Meseraiche.

Q Whereof comes it, that they which are drowned, at the beginning do sink
to the bottom, and afterward then they begin to corrupt, do rise above the
water?

A. The body being partly corrupted has many open places called vents to
receive the air: which breaking the powers, the body becomes very light.

Q. What is the cause, that round eggs do bring forth males, and they which
be long, females?

A. Because in the round Eggs all the virtue is equally divided throughout all
the extremities: and in the long egg the virtue is much extended, and less
closed, and so of less heat then the other.

Q. Why is not wine good fasting?

A. Because it engenders the crampe, (...) makes a man dull and heavy.

Q. Why do Physicians use to touch the pulse of the right arm?

A. Because it is the part that is most hot.

Q. But wherefore will they not, that the patient hold his hand hard closed,
nor yet stretched forth?

A. Because the Sinews and arteri^^ be strained, the hand being either
stretched or closed.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Hares have so feeble sight?

A. Because the Hare is a beast very sleepie, and too much sleep hurts the
sight. Or else it is of too much swiftness; for overmuch swiftness is
hurtful to the eyes.

Q. How chances it, that the pawe^^ of a Bear are better venison, then (...)
other part of his body?

A. That comes of their contin^^ all agitation and stirring; for the Bear^^
does continually walk and beat wi^^ his feet.

Q. Why do Physicians call a disor^dinate appetite ( Fames Canina) (...)
hunger of a Dog?

A. Because Dogs are without me^^^ure, in the appetite of eating.

Q. Why do Dogs scommer with so great pain?

A. Because their bowell and receiving Gut is larger at that part where it
joyneth with the belly, then it is at the place where it ends.

Q. Why are they more sleepie that have great heads, then others?

A. The greater the head is, the more vapors it comprehends.

Q. Why do Dwarfes love to sleep much?

A. Because great plenty of humors get forthwith into their heads, which
engender in them a desire to sleep.

Q. Wherefore are they most hungry, that have large and gross veins?

A. Because they be of nature dry and adust.

Q. What causes them that dwell toward the South, to be less subject to
the falling sickness, then ^ther people?

A. Because they be sound within, and full of heat.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the oil of Lentiles does heal the inflamamation
of the Gummes?

A. Because it is good to take away all hot and burning humors.

Q. Why does the edge of a knife turn, when one does cut wax?

A. Because that every Agent, in his action is also patient, that is, subject
to contraries.

Q. How comes the humor in the eye called Glauconia, which is like Crystal,
and hurts the sight?

A. Eyes infected with that humor, be like the eye of a Civet, and does come of
the abundance of the Christ all in humor.

Q. Why does Licorice take away thirst?

A. Because of his moystnesse.

Q. Why is the Liver of a Wolf medicinable for them that be diseased in the
Liver?

A. By reason of a certain secret virtue in the same.

Q. Why be they more hardy then another, that have hairy breasts?

A. Because they have a boiling heart.

Q. Wherefore is Milk evil for the teeth and gums?

A. Because of the immoderate coldness.

Q. Why does Lettise provoke s^eepe?

A. Because it engenders gross humors.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Lent^les and Colewortes be hurtful to the sight?

A. That comes of their crassitude and thickness.

Q. Where of comes it, that by too much eating of Lentiles are engendered
Cankers?

A. That comes of the melancholicke blood, which Lentiles do e^gender.

Q. How chances it, that Lions have no marrow in their bones?

A. Through the extreme heat of the said beast.

Q. But why does the shining and brightness of the Moon hurt the (...)?

A. Because it moves the humors of the brain, and cannot afterward resolve
them.

Q. Why do some dye by too much Joy?

A. Because the spirits do abandon and forsake the heart.

Q. Why should men beware of too much fasting?

A. Because long fasting engenders a heap of ill humors, and causes
feebleness and loathsomenesse.

Q. Why is vinegar very good for choleric persons, and hurtful to the^ that
be melancholic?

A. Because it refreshes choler, and dries melancholy.

Q. What causes the eyes to shed forth tears?

A. Coldness is the occasion which naturally does make thick and restrain
whereby tears proceed.

Q. Why have things that be very sweet and odoriferious, a certain spic^^ of
bitterness?

A. Sweet smells do always search hot places, which commonly are (...) what
bitter.

Q. Whereof comes it, that things that nourish and increase milk, do warm
moderately without drying?

A. Because such things do engender blood, whereof milk comes.

Q. Why be all nourishing things participant with sweetness?

A. Because all sweet things be very temperate.

Q. Whereof comes it, that wine in process of time is of greater heat?

A. Because the waterish parts do vanish and avoid.

Q. Whereof comes it, that some wines are sower so soon?

A. Because in the vintage time they were replenished with superfluous humors.

Q. Why do men rather use Sorrel then Vinegar, against the inflammations of
the Intestines and Bowels?

A. Because that Sorrel is more moderate then Vinegar. And whosoever is
^iseased therewithal should not use any medicine, that is sharp or violent,
but ^^ther pleasant.

Q. Whereof comes it, that yellow Choler is always bitter, and the black
egre and sharp?

A. Heat causes bitterness, and cold causes sharpness.

Q. Why is Catarre or Rewme, sometimes sweet, sometimes sharp, and sometimes
salt?

A. Of a certain mixture of the humors.

Q. Why does the wild Bore piss before he does run or fly away?

A. To dispatch himself of the heaviness of his urine, the more swiftly (...)
run.

Q. Wherefore do Physicians giv^ to Infants and young children a hear^^
called Abrobatum, in English Sother^^wood?

A. Because it kills worms.

Q. How chances it, that Scorpion^^ do smite and hurt side-waies?

A. Because their prick and sting (...) crooked.

Q Why do men wax pale wh^^ they be afraid?

A. Because the blood flies away and retireth to the vital parts.

Q Why does the sea called Mare mortuum, bring forth neither Plant nor ^ish?

A. Through the great bitterness of the same.

Q. What is the cause, that a salt thing being heated again, waxes bitter?

A. Bitterness comes of adustion.

Q. Why has the Scorpion venom in her tail?

A. Because venom is the excrement of the Scorpion.

Q. Wherefore did nature make men's ears so eminent standing out, and of
gristles?

A. To be more quick of hearing, and to be less grieved when they be hurt.

Q. Why cannot Milk, cream or curd, being incorporated with Honey?

A. Because honey with his virtue incisive and abstersive, does let it.

Q. Why does not artery or sinew being cut, grow again as flesh does?

A. Because they be spermatick members.

Q. Wherefore do the leaves of a Service Tree fall together at one instant?

A. Because he has no viscous or slimy humor.

Q. Wherefore is a Bay tree always green?

A. Because the heat of that Tree is always tempered with humidity and
viscosity.

Q. Wherefore is the female more imperfect then the male?

A. Because she is more cold.

Q. What caused Hipocrates to suffer those that had hot and sharp fevers to
drink wine?

A. To aid and help digestion, and to strengthen the patient.

Q Whereof comes the quotidian fever?

A. Of the great abundance of the ^^eame.

Q. Why do the herbs called Peniroyall, Ditton and Nill, cause women to
have their natural disease?

A. Because their virtue and property is to open.

Q. Wherefore is the meal of beans good for the spots in the face?

A. Because it is mavelous abstersive and clensing.

Q. Wherefore do we sleep better when we have traveled, then otherwise?

A. Because the spirits have then more need to be refreshed.

Q. Whereof comes it, that sometimes we be laxative, and sometimes too much
costive?

A. It is because of the feebleness of the virtue retentive, or through sharp
humors that vexes and troubles us, and the cause why we be bound, proceeds
of contrary occasions.

Q. Whereof comes the Tertian agues?

A. Of yellow choler corrupted.

Q. Whereof proceeds the Falling s^cknesse?

A. Of gross fleame, or rather of a ^^ncholike humor which is retained (...)
the ventricles of the brain.

Q. Wherefore did nature make the ^^cull of the head gross, and thick and
^^llow?

A. The scull is gross and thick to defend the brain the better, and hollow
that the vapors of the brain might (...) out of the same more easily: for the
head is a way through the which all the vapors of the body do pass.

Q. Wherefore is not wine good for them that be growing still in greatness?

A. Wine does straight go into the head, and children in their infancy hair
the head grosser after the proportion of the rest of the body, than in any
other age.

Q. Why do Melons and Cucumbers cause men to make water?

A. That comes of their great humidity.

Q. Wherefore is it not good to sleep with the face upwards?

A. Because it heateth the reins, inflameth the blood, and not only the blood
but the spirits also, which are in the hollow vein and in the gr^^t Artery.

Q. How comes it, that Trees are more hard and strong of the North-side, then
they are of the (...) and West side?

A. Because the North wind does better harden.

Q. Whereof proceeds the sweetn^sse of F^uits?

A. Of moderate heat.

Q. Why do old men doat so much?

A. Through the great cold that is in them.

Q. Whereof proceeds the Laske and Flux of the belly called Dissenteria?

A. Of biting and sharp humors.

Q. Why do Herrings in so great multitudes leave the Northern, and go to the
western Sea?

A. To enjoy the temperature of that climate.

Q. What is the cause that the Pulse commonly called Chiche peason, does
provoke Venerie?

A. By reason of the saltness, whereof the hull is participant.

Q. Whereof comes it, that men to see the better do close one of their eyes?

A. Because the one eye being shut, he sees the more perfectly with the other.

Q. Wherefore do Physicians thin^^ them to be of small capacity that have
sharp heads?

A. Because the spirits find not the conduits so free and open.

Q. Why be there no Serpents in Ireland?

A. Because that Region is nothing waterish.

Q. What causes those that have the Iaundise, to think Honey to be bitter?

A. Because of the great choler* wherewith they have the tongue an^ pallet
infected.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the meats oftentimes wax sower in the van^tricle?

A. That proceeds of the coldnes^ of the stomach.

Q. Why is not that air good, whic^^ is both hot and moist?

A. Because it is subject to be cor^rupted.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Ethiopians have curld hair?

A. Of the great ficcity and dryness of their humors.

Q. Why be Drunken persons commonly cold?

A. Because wine immoderately drunken, does cause cold effects.

Q. Wherefore is Venison more esteemed and praised of the learned Physicians,
then other flesh?

A. Because it is of good nourishment and engenders good blood.

Q. Why is the white of an Egg hard of digestion?

A. Through the coldness thereof.

Q. Wherefore do men drink wate^, and yet it nourishes not?

A. Water causes the nutriment to spread throughout all the body.

Q. Why is not the hand hairy within?

A. Because the skin is thick and h^rd.

Q. Why is Autumn so unwholes^me and full of diseases?

A. Through the inequality of his temperature.

Q. Why be the ears immovable?

A. Because they have no Muscle.

Q. Why be no remedies convenient to be received, in the greatest extrem^^^ of
sickness?

A. Because nature should not be hindered.

Q. Wherefore are the bathes of sweet water esteemed?

A. Because they do heat and moysten, and are good against Terci^^ agues.

Q. Why does the Northren wind preserve things from putrefying?

A. Because it dries much.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Buglosse tempered and dipped in wine, rejoices him
that does eat it?

A. Because it augmenteth the blood and restores the forces of the heart.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Piony hanged about ones neck, does heal the
falling sickness?

A. That herb sends certain va^ours to the head, which do dry the brain.

Q. Why be Stockdoves better then Pigeons of the dovehouse?

A. Because they have less dung (...) excrements.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Azure ^^our is pleasant to the eye?

A. Because in that color is a mean all other colors.

Q. Wherefore do we sweat more in (...) upper parts of our body, then in the
^^er parts?

A. The property of heat, is, to ascend, (...) not to descend.

Q. Why does not the dung of wild (...) stink* so much as other?

A. Because they be dry of nature.

Q. Why be our eyes greater in our ^^fancie, then when we be of more (...)?

A. Through the great humidity and ^^ystnesse. Whereof in like manner it
^^mmeth, that we are more desirous of (...) in our Infancy, then in any other
(...).

Q. How comes it, that men's eyes (...) differ so much in color one from
^^other?

A. Of the diversity of the humors, ^^reof they be composed.

Q. Wherefore is sodden water better then the cold?

A. Boiled and sodden water has less ventosities, and is more light and
subtle; because the earth and heavy substance is separated from it.

Q. Wherefore has Nature ordained neezing in man?

A. To purge the superfluity of the brain, even as by the Cough the milt is
purged.

Q. Why do we neeze sooner in the Sun, then when we be near the fire?

A. Because the heat of the Sun, resolves the humor, and consumes it not,
but the fire resolves and consumes it.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the ears of all creatures do move, excep^^ the
ears of a man?

A. That proceeds of a certain^ muscle which is in the Jaws, and does let
and hinder the moving of the ears.

Q. Where of comes it, that A^^ses do sooner lift up their ears when (...)
will rain, then at any other time?

A. Their melancholicke nature (...) it, the like happens to many other
^^^ancholicke beasts to prognosticate ^^raine: as Frogs, Dolphins, Crows, and
Cuckoes.

Q. Why have Birds no ears?

A. Because they would hinder their ^ing, for which cause they are created and
made, as man is made to travel.

Q. Wherefore are the waters of Marshes and Ponds so evil?

A. Because they are so Phlegmatic, and in Summer they do corrupt. In^omuch
as the finest of the water is converted into vapors, and the earthinesse does
remain.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which have hollow eyes, do see better, then
those whose eyes do stand more ^^tward?

A. Hollow eyes have their virtue more fast and better compact, and so they see
the better and further off.

Q. Why do the eyes of Wolves and Cattes shine in the night and not in the day?

A. The greater clearness does ob^^cat^ and darken the lesser.

Q. Whereof comes it, that when we look and behold our selves in a Glass,
we do immediately after forget our favor?

A. The image seen in a Glass does represent it self to our visible sight
very slenderly, and by a certain^ reflection; and therefore cannot long be
retained in memory, but quickly vanishes away.

Q. Whereof comes it, that man smells so little in comparison of oth^^
creatures?

A. That comes of the great h^midity of the brain, whereas Ravens and other
birds having it dry, are not hi^dred by moisture, but do receive the smell
through the air a far off.

Q. Wherefore does that water keep^ better which is open in the Sun and the
wind, then that which is covered and hidden?

A. That which is open to the Sun is better purged of all gross vapors, and
is made thereby more subtle and better digested,

Q. Whereof comes it, that Infants are sooner enchanted or bewitched then
they which are greater?

A. Of the delicateness and tenderness of their bodies, which are not ^ong
enough to resist such impressi^^^.

Q. Whereof comes it, that a bird ^^led in Latin Rupex, does fear to ^hold
those that have their gall spread throughout their bodies?

A. Because the same Bird is sorry (...) the remedy that she gives them, (...)
she draws that sickness to her ^^lfe.

Q. What means it, that the (...) made of ashes of a Figtree, is so ^ood to
cleanse things which are foul and spotty?

A. That comes of his nature, which ^ very abstersive and cleansing, through
^he sharpness whereof, it takes away ^he filth or sweat of our bodies
better ^hen any other thing.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Fig tree, the Laurel tree, the Eagle and
(...) Sea Calfe are never smitten with ^^htning?

A. It may be that comes of the bitterness and sharpness.

Q. What causes nature to give us ears?

A. It was for no other thing, but that thereby man might hear and judge the
difference of voices and sounds. And that by the ears the head might be purged
of his choleric superfluity, even as by the nose he is accustomed to be
purged of his flegmaticke.

Q. But what moved nature to make the lips?

A. To the end that the teeth being of nature cold, should not be harmed with
external hurt, or else because that in any talking they might somewhat help
and temper the tongue, that it should not be too lavish.

Q. For what respect was the mouth made?

A. Because it should be the door of the stomach, and because the mea^e
should be chawed and prepared for the first digestion.

Q. What causes a man to yawne?

A. The gross vapors that repl^nish the Jaws, which willing to come forth,
constrain men to stretch their Jaws: or else yawning comes of unlustinesse,
or of being too full.

Q. How comes it that the teeth have the sense of feeling, and the same to
other bo^^es is denied?

A. Because the teeth might discern hot and cold.

Q. What means it that the teeth do grow daily?

A. If Nature had not ordained the teeth to grow daily, they would consume
themselves, and should be reduced to nothing by continual chawing.

Q. What causes the teeth to grow again, and the other bones grow not?

A. Other bones be engendered and made of the natural humor in the mothers
womb, but the teeth are engendered of the nutritive humor, which daily
grows, and so increases them.

Q. Why have birds no teeth?

A. The substance of teeth is converted ^^to the bill.

Q. Why do diverse stut and stamme^?

A. Through the great moystnesse of the tongue or of the brain.

Q. Why do diverse hold opinion that the tongue of a Dog is medicinable, and
the tongue of a Horse clean contrary?

A. The tongue of a Dog is full of pores, and by that means it draws from
the wound all viscosity and sliminesse: Or else there is in it some humor meet
to heal wounds by licking, which is not in a Horses tongue.

Q. Whereof comes it, that spettl^ being taken and applied fasting, is go^^
and meet for Impostumes?

A. Because then it is more subtil^ and better digested, then at oth^^ times?

Q. Whereof comes it, that (...) br^ath of diverse does stink although they
be but young?

A. Of the evil vapors of the stomach: or else of the corruption of the
members and instruments of the s^^rits.

Q. What is the cause that Lazermen speak so hoarse?

A. Because the organes and pipes of their voices are corrupted.

Q. Whereof comes hoarsenesse?

A. Of a rhewme descending from the brain, which fills the passage of the
lunges.

Q. Why do little birds sing and ^hirpe, better then great ones?

A. The spirit of little birds is more delicate and light, then of the great,
and soul, and therefore at every motion they are disposed to sing.

Q. Why does the male sing more then the female?

A. Because he is more hot.

Q. What moved nature to make the ^^ke of bones?

A. Because it might the better su^^aine the head.

Q. Wherefore is well water the better, when the well is often draw^^?

A. Because by the oftentimes drawing the water has no leisure to be corrupted.

Q. Why have Cranes and Storkes so long necks?

A. Because such beasts take their food and nourishment in deep places.

Q. Why do Pullets and Hens, their throats being cut, move and stir very
long after, which to man does not chance at all?

A. Hens and Pullets have small and little sins, whereby the spirits tarry
the longer.

Q. What is the cause, that Barley bread makes them to be ill colored that
use to eat it?

A. That comes because Barley bread tarrieth no while in the stomach and has
an abstersive and a cleansing virtue, and so does suddenly alter and change the
digestion, which thing causes that Nature cannot with any small nourishment
give good color to any person.

Q. Why should wheaten bread be both salted and leavened?

A. Because that wheat of it self does stop and is slimy, but salt does dry,
and the leaven renders it much lighter.

Q. Why do they serve fruit after meat and not before?

A. Because that a full belly demands sweet things: or else the heaviness of
the fruit drives down all other meats.

Q. What causes the hairs of sick men to fall?

A. Because the nutriment wherewith hair is nourished and entertained, is
consumed of the adust and burnt vapors.

Q. How chances it, that diverse have never any beards?

A. Because they have the pores so great, that the nutriment which causes the
hair, is vanished before the hair h^th taken root, and therefore can bring
nothing forth.

Q. Whereof comes it, that in old folk the hair of the brows grows more,
then in other members?

A. Because in the age the bones of the brows be enlarged, and do open the
way to vapors.

Q. Why is the water better, that runs upon the gravel of Sand, or upon the
earth (so that it be not stinking) then that which runs upon the rock, or
upon stones?

A. Because that earth and gravel does cleanse it better, then either stone or
rock.

Q. Wherefore comes it, that the hair waxes hard and sharp when one is
dead?

A. Because the hair is no more nourished with the vapors of the body, and
because the pores be closed up.

Q. But whereof comes baldness?

A. Of corrupt fleame.

Q. Why be men sooner bald upon the Head, then in other parts of the body?

A. Coldness of the brain is the cause.

Q. Why is it that studious and learned men be so soon bald?

A. Of the great diminution and weakness of their spirits, or else of great
indigestion that causes fleame to abound.

Q. Why do we sweat more sleeping then walking?

A. Because hear in sleeping is united and joined, which has more virtue to
drive away all superfluous humors.

Q. Why do we count rain water to be the best?

A. Because it is better fined and soden in the air, and so more proper and
meet to nourish.

Q. Whereof comes it, that many are healed of a Quartaine, by a sudden fear?

A. Like as the Quartaine is engendered by sudden mutation, even so sudden
mutation does drive it away: for by such sudden: accidents our spirits be
moved, and all their forces awaked.

Q. Wherefore are those waters better that have their course toward the East,
then they that run toward the West?

A. Because that by running against the Sun they do fine, and wax warm, and
do lose their natu^all (...)*

Q. Wherefore do Musicians when they entend to sing, and Advocates before
they plead, eat Leekes roasted in the embers?

A. Because that Leekes have a certain slimish moistness, that cleanses the
pipe of the Lungs.

Q. Why do Physicians give order that meats in winter ought to be of a gross
nourishment, and in Summer fine and light?

A. Because in Winter the natural heat flying the cold, and retiring into the
inward parts, does cause better digestion. But in Summer, heat seeking for
heat is dispersed, and is not of force to digest.

Q. Why does too long watching make brain feeble?

A. Too long watching does engender and multiply Choler, the which by that
means does dry and extenuate us.

Q. But why cannot the child borne in the eigth month live, and the child of
the seventh month customably does live?

A. Because the number of seven is a perfect number. If the opinions of the
Pythagorians be true.

Q. Wherefore be steel glasses better for the sight then other glasses?

A. Because steel is harder, and does represent unto us more substantially the
tire, that receives the light.

Q. Whereof comes it, that vinegar does stop blood?

A. Because the nature thereof is bin^ing.

Q. Whereof comes it, that women and little Children do so quickly weep?

A. Of the great humidity and moistness that is in them.

Q. Whereof comes it, that among bird^ the Sparrow lives least while?

A. Because he is too leacherous.

Q. Wherefore be women with child in more danger to miscary in the first,
second, and third Month, then in the rest of the months that follow?

A. Because the Infant is most tender, much like to an apple that begins to
be fashioned, not yet having the stalk strong enough to sustain it.

Q. Why be children borne more safely in the seventh, eigth, and ninth month
then before?

A. The riper that the fruit is, the sooner and easier it falls.

Q. Why is the travel of some women greater and more painful, then of other
some?

A. There be diverse reasons, for sometimes it comes of the strength of the
woman, sometimes according to the proportion of the substance received,
sometimes for that the child is dead, which causes that they cannot bow nor
turn.

Q. But why are women being with child of a man child, less molested and in
better health, then they that be with child of a woman child?

A. The male is always more lusty and bears himself better, troubling his
Mother less then does the female which is cold and heavy of mooving.

Q. Why is not wine good for Children?

A. Because it heateth and moisteneth too much, and fills the head
inconti^ently full of vapors.

Q. Why do not women commonly exercise both their hands as well as men?

A. To exercise both hands procee^eth of the force and strength of the sinews
and muscles, the which is not in women.

Q. Whereof comes the sterility and barrenness of women?

A. It proceeds of man's causes, either of the coldness of the man, which
causes the seed to be of none effect in generation, or because the seed is
waterish and of small force.

Q. Why is a drunken person cold, the wine being hot?

A. Because natural heat is extinct, by the heat of the wine.

Q. Wherefore have women most commonly the headache, more then men?

A. The vapors of the menstruall blood ^^^end to the head, which causes the
(...).

Q. Why have men more teeth then women?

A. Because they are more abundant both in blood and in heat.

Q. Wherefore do maidens voices change, when their breasts begin to wax great?

A. Because the Organes of the voice are then more loose, and less closed.

Q. Why have women their breasts above their stomakes, and other creatures
underneath?

A. If women's breasts had been placed under their belly (they having but two
feet) it would have hindered their going: which troubles not other creatures
that have four feet.

Q. Wherefore is wine forbidden them that have pain in their sides?

A. Because it burns and sends to the sides diverse burnt* and adust
humors, which increase the disease.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Twins are not so strong as other Children?

A. Because the seed which should (...) to the genaration of one, is parted
into two.

Q. Whereof comes it, that our privy parts are more subject to catch hurt,
then the other parts of our body?

A. That comes of the heat and moistness united together, which are the
cause of all corruption.

Q. Whereof comes it, that fasting spittle is good to take away the spots
of the body: and not spittle after meat?

A. Because the spittle after meat is full of moystnesse, and is partly gross,
by reason of the meat which is mingled with it, in such sort, that it cannot
so well ^^eanse as the other.

Q. Why does the smoke of Brimstone make the hair white?

A. Because it dries up and purifieth the gross matter which is dispearsed
among the hair.

Q. How happens it that man only does become bald?

A. Because he is of a more rare composition and matter, less fleshy, and
consequently more meet and apt to be dried.

Q. Why does a man wax bald (...) upon the head?

A. The head is a member more mo^^ then all the rest, wherein are united great
number of flegmaticke superfl^^ties, and therefore the same sooner wax^eth bald.

Q. Whereof comes it, that (...) which sleeps soundly, dreameth very
little?

A. Because that then all the senses (...) accord to do their duty, and do
(...) wander hither and thither for to provoke dreams.

Q. Why is the Southwest wind (...) sweet and pleasant?

A. Because it is temperate, neith^^ too hot, nor too cold.

Q. Wherefore has the wind ((...) Ceci) East and by North, the power t^ draw
the Clouds unto him?

A. Because that his motion (...) round.

Q. How comes it, that wine (...) after a rotten or perished apple, (...)
bitter?

A. Because that all rottenness is (...)

Q. Wherefore do men bleed so often at the nose?

A. Because the nose has more participation with the brain, then any other
member.

Q. But why is that water which is ^^onest hot and soonest cold, better then
other water?

A. Because it is more subtle and more ^ight.

Q. Wherefore is over great exercise (...) labor evil for the sight?

A. Because it dries the blood too ^uch.

Q. How comes it that men sleep ^^tter and sooner on the right side, then
(...) the left?

A. Because being awake, he does lean (...) rest more upon the left side then
(...) the right.

Q. How chances it that Figs which (...) sweet and tender, do nevertheless
^use toothache?

A. Because they cleave to the gummes, ^ough their viscosity and slimi^^e.

Q. Why do we esteem Goats milk to be better for our stomach, then any
other?

A. Because the Goat taking his nourishment rather of wood and boughs then of
grass, causes his milk to be the more thick, and less slimy.

Q. How comes it, that Cow milk is more medicinable then other milk?

A. Because a Cow being a great eating beast, does feed not only upon grass,
but also upon all sorts of gree^^ herbs.

Q. Why is the blood of a Bull hur^^ full to them that drink it?

A. Because it is very fat and full of threads, and soon waxes hard,
engendring thereby hurtfulnesse.

Q. Why do all beasts refuse to (...) of any thing that a Bear has blow^^
upon, or smelt unto?

A. Because the blowing or smelling of a Bear is pestiferous.

Q. For what respect be they feareful^ that dwell in hot Countries, (...) they
strong which dwell in cold Countries?

A. Cold does restrain and thicken the flesh, which causes the heat to (...)
better gathered and compact with^^.

Q. Wherefore be they that have their (...) rolling and turning, and their
sight (...), deceivers, thieves, and of hot ^^ture?

A. Deceit and theft proceed of the ^^htilty of the mind, and the subtilty
(...) the mind comes of the subtilty of ^^ours caused of heat, that causes
(...) eyes to wander, and the sight to be (...).

Q. Whereof comes it, that the eyes Drunkards do still water?

A. That proceeds of the humors (...) the wine has engendered in the
^^^ine, whereof feeling it self laden, it ^^deth the same again to the eyes,
^^ich of their nature are full of pores.

Q. Whereof comes it, that too much ^^tation and grief brings age?

A. Because it dries: and age is no^^^ng else but a very drought.

Q. What means it, that they which (...) of age feel no grief?

A. It is through lack of heat, whi^^ causes the life to vanish away without
pain.

Q. Why are our eyes so mov^^able?

A. Because they should not so easi^^ be hurt, with that which happens (...)
come before them.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Oy^^ swimmeth above any other Liquour?

A. Because it is fatter: And all fa^ things do participiate very much wi^^
the air.

Q. How chances it, that the Oestrich only above all other Birds has be
claws cloven?

A. The Oestrich is rather a beast (...) the earth, then a bird: and his win^^
were given him rather to help him (...) run, then to fly.

Q. Why be not fat things (...) corrupted?

A. Because they hold very much (...) the air, and the fire.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that m^ birds do soonest assail the eyes?

A. Because they see them clear, (...) with great brightness.

Q. Why cannot the Diamont be burns (...) well as other stones?

A. The fire cannot hurt it, by reason this great hardness.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the fea^^rs of an Eagle mingled amongst the others
of other birds, do consume (...)?

A. It is by a secret virtue that is given ^he Eagles feathers, to have the
^^wer to consume all other fea^^rs.

Q. Whereof comes it, that he that ^^th the thickest blood, is always most
^errie and frollicke?

A. The blood that is gross and fat, ^^keth the spirits firm and constant,
herein consists the force of all Creates.

Q. But what is the occasion that wo^^ be not bald as well as men?

A. It is their great moystnesse: for ^^dnesse comes of dryness.

Q. Why do diverse use to lay chalk (...) the roots of Chery trees?

A. To make them ripe before their time.

Q. How chances it, that the Vine and the Rape or Radish, do not love to grow
one nigh another?

A. Because they are of diverse natures. For the Rape loves cold places:
whereof it comes, that in Almaigne they are as big as little children: But
the Vine loves those places that be warm.

Q. Why do not the Elephants and Cammels drink, but in puddles or troubled
waters?

A. Because they are afraid to see themselves in the water.

Q. Why does a man sneese against the Sun?

A. The Sun through his hea^^ does provoke the humors that remain in the
conduit of the Nose to be open to the air, which causes sneesing.

Q. Why do Melancholicke people sleep so little?

A. Because they have little moistness whereby few vapors ascend up to the
brain.

Q. Why does metal melt better when it is very cold weather then at any other
time?

A. Because then the heat is wholly retired inwardly.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which have green or gray eyes, do see well,
neither in the day time, nor yet in the night: and the contrary chances to
them that have black eyes?

A. Because the green eyes do abonnd is fire: and the black abound with
water.

Q. Why be those Creatures of short life, that engender very often?

A. Because with the spermaticke superfluities they lose much moisture, which
is the true retainer of natural ^ate.

Q. How chances it, that the Lion ^oth so much fear the flame of ^ire?

A. Naturally the fire is hurtful to the sight: and especially to those that
are hot and dry, as chiefly the Ly^^ is.

Q. Whereof comes it, that man^ind has the head more hairy, then any other
creature?

A. By reason of the great coldness of the brain, and heat of the heart,
which pants continually, and brings forth many vapors, which do engender
hair.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Serpent does so much fly the herb called
Rue, and especially the wild Rue?

A. Because the Serpent is cold, dry, and full of Sinews, and the herb Rue
of a contrary nature.

Q. How chances it, that all gelded Creatures are weaker then tbe ungelded?

A. Because the strength comes from the Coddes.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that wh^^ one is hungry the spittle is more bitter
and salter then at other times?

A. Because hunger augmenteth choler: the which easily turns into
bitterness, by reason of his sharpness.

Q. Whereof comes it, that mil^^ sometimes does loosen the belly, an^
sometimes binds it?

A. That proceeds of the diverse qualities which are in Milk.

Q. Whereof comes it, that most commonly women are fatter then men?

A. Because they are colder, and do less labor.

Q. Why have not men so great breast: as women?

A. Because they have no menstruall blood: and further, they have no vessel to
retain it.

Q. Whereof comes it that great nipples or teates are not the best?

A. The heat is better enclosed in a little and round Nipple, then in great
Teates, where the warmness of the milk ^^neth out.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that between thirteen and fourteen years, the
Nipple of young maidens do begin to prick?

A. Because at that age the menstruall blood begins to increase in them.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the milk in a woman's breast suddenly decays if
she give herself to ^e immoderate in lust?

A. Because the menstruall blood does not ascend to the breasts to nourish the
child.

Q. Whereof comes it, that those women that are with child of a Son, have
their right breast harder then the left?

A. It is because the male breeds in the right side: and so the menstruall
blood coming to that side, to nourish the child, makes it more hard and
stiff.

Q. Wherefore has Nature given unto woman but two Teates only, and other
Creatures more?

A. Because other Creatures do bring forth many young ones at once: and women
most commonly have but one or two children at the most.

Q. But why is the thick and plentiful milk a token of a man child, and the
milk that is clear and thin betokens a daughter?

A. The woman being with child with a Son, is of greater heat, which
thickeneth and makes the milk to digest: contrariwise, the milk of a woman
being with child of a Daughter, is less digested, by having of l^sse heat.

Q. Whereof comes it that the milk of fair women is not so good, as of
black women?

A. Brown women are of hotter complexion, and therefore have their milk
better digested.

Q. Whereof comes the disordinate desire that women with child have to eat
things that are loathsome, most commonly in the first or third month after
they have conceived?

A. Such is the appetite as the humors be which are within. And because the
humors of women with child are corrupted, it is no marvel although their
appetite be without reason.

Q. Why do Physicians appoint the bread for those that be sick to be first
tempered before it be given them?

A. The Leave ^ has a certain corrupt heat in it, which augmente^ f^^^ers* in
such sort, that it corrupts the ^read if there be too much.

Q. Whereof comes it, that (...) pasty, the more it is kneded, the better is?

A. It is because the liquour, (...) meal, and the leaven, being well
inc^^porated, and the moystnesse resolv^^ the bread is more wholesome and
b^^ter.

Q. Whereof comes it, that (...) outward parts of the body are more su^ject
to cold, then any other part of (...) same?

A. Because they are thinner, a^ further from the heart.

Q. Whereof comes it that (...) herbs Purslin and Lettice, do (...) cool
and then warm the bodies of th^^ that do eat them?

A. Until the digestion be made, the cool the body: but the digestion mad^
they change into good blood, and (...) increase heat.

Q. Why is the Capon better (...) eaten then the Cock?

A. The Capon o^eth not his moi(...)nesse, because he treads not the (...)
Cock does: and therefore is (...)

Q. What is the cause, that after sleep (...) our selves?

A. To drive away evil: vapors.

Q. Why do they that have traveled ^eepe better then others?

A. Because the spirits desire to be at ^est.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which are drunk, in beholding one thing, do
think that they see two, or ma^^y?

A. That comes of the continual and sudden motion of the e^es, proceeding of
the vapors and exhalations of the wine.

Q. Why is a Drunkard of better judgment in (...) that are bitter, (...),
salt, and of evil east, then any other:

A. A Drunkard has his tongue better seasoned with the liquour and sweetness
of the wine, and has more moistness in his tongue, then he that lives
soberly: whereby he may the better judge.

Q. What difference is there between heaviness (...) head, and Drunkenness?

A. Heaviness in the head causes oppilations and stopping: Drunkenness
comes of subtle vapors, which trouble and mingle themselves with the brain
and the vital spirits.

Q. Whereof comes it, that they which have gross cheeks, are of dull and
hard understanding?

A. Gross flesh comes of gross humors, which also causes gross spirits,
and so consequently dull understanding.

Q. Why, do they rub their eyes that would sneese?

A. Sneesing comes of hear: and the rubbing provokes heat.

Q. Why do the Eagles drive away their young ones, before they be feathered
or fledge?

A. Because that without feathers they be very ill favored: or else because
they be very ravenous.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that most commonly a man does sneese twice together?

A. Because there be two holes or breathing places in the nose.

Q. Whereof comes it that cold water being cast in the face does stanch
bleeding of the Nose?

A. It is because that by that means heat is driven in.

Q. Why is smoke painful to the eyes?

A. Because the eyes be of a weak complexion.

Q. Why do they live longest that dwell in hot Countries?

A. Because they are dryer: and their natural moystnesse and heat does
preserve them the better.

Q. Why do we smell a thing less in Winter, then in Summer?

A. Because the air is thicker, and less moveable.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the urine, the longer it is retained within the
body, the worse it smells: and the excrement, the longer it is kept, the
less it stinketh?

A. The excrement the longer it tarrieth in the body, the more it dries, and
is of less corruption. The urine contrariwise, the longer it is retained in
the bladder, the thicker it waxes and more filthy.

Q. Why does the hair burn so quickly?

A. Because it is cold and dry.

Q. Why do we cover our heads close in cold weather?

A. The head does wax warm when it is kept close: for by that means the
heat is kept in. And the kercheffe or hood serves for the head, as the gown
does for the body.

Q. Whereof comes it that bitter Almonds do keep one from Drunkenness?

A. Because they dry the body: and will not suffer the veins to be filled,
resisting the strength of the wine.

Q. Whereof comes it that women be not suddenly drunk, and old folks are
incontinently overcome with wine?

A. The wine remains longer in the stomachs of old people, being dry by
nature: even as water does in a Tronke of Wood, dry and half putrified. But
women are too cold and ^^moyst, by means whereof they (...) do better resist
the force of the Wine.

The end of Natural Questions.
MORAL AND POLITIQVE Qnestions.
THE III. BOOK.
Question.
WHy did the Ancient^ paint Fortune with a double forehead, the one side bald,
and the other hairy?

A. The shaven side signifies adversity: the hairy part prosperit^, which we
enjoy when it pleases her.

Q. What has moved many to think the seat of the spirit to be placed in the
eyes?

A. Because the opinion of the spirit do appear in the eyes.

Q. Why did the Romans deem him hurtful to the Commonwealth, that would not
content himself with seven yokes of Land?

A. After the Kings were chased from Rome, the Romans desirous to content
themselves with a little, to avoid all occasion of Tyranny, assigned every
Roman Citizen seven yokes of Land, and no more.

Q. Why was it so long before the Romans did plant any Vines?

A. Because they foresaw, that wine made them dull, debilitated their sinues,
weakened their forces, troubled their brains, and made them have a stinking
breath.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Persians breath commonly stinketh?

A. Because of the diversity of meats, and excess of wines.

Q Why did the Romans esteem the men of the Country to be more meet for the
wars, then the Citizens?

A. Because the Peasant and Country man is more accustomed to sleep upon hard
places, to endure cold and heat, hunger and thirst.

Q. Wherefore is he esteemnd more vilanous and infamous that denies the thing
which is delivered him to keep, then he that rendereth not the thing he
borrows?

A. Because there is nothing more villainous, then a man to do wrong to his
friend, for no man delivers any thing in keeping to any man, but to him in
whom he has reposed his greatest trust.

Q. What meant the Romans to have no Bakers in their City, before the wars of
the Persians, which was five hundred and fourscore years after the building
of Rome?

A. The Romans esteemed the Science of Baking to be but the work of women.

Q. But tell me I pray you, why had they no Cooks as we have?

A. Because they are strong and lusty men, not given to delicates, which makes
men faint and effeminate.

Q. How chances it, that the drowned bodies of men do swim upwards, and
those of women downwards?

A. Nature her self has a special regard to the honesty of women, desirous
to cover their secret places. Whereof I would (it might please God) that women
themselves had better consideration and regard.

Q. Wherefore were the Cirthaginians counted deceivers and mockers?

A. The Situation of Carthage did cause the same. For by reason of the
merchandise and traffic which they had with all the Nations of the world,
they were very much used and frequented to to trompery and deceit.

Q. But why were the Carthaginians so desirous, that all their Magistrates
should be rich?

A. Because they thought that the poor man could not faithfully minister
Justice.

Q. What meant many brave and lusty Nations continually rather to love war
then peace?

A. Because war stirs men to virtue and valor, and peace draws them to
idleness and all kind of wantonness.

Q. Why have diverse men in times past allowed and commended Flattery?

A. Because Flattery sets forth before our eyes what we ought to be.

Q. Why does the vice of anger daily displease the wise?

A. Because it is a spice of Folly and Rage.

Q. Wherefore ought the virtue of Justice to be in Princes commendable above
all other things?

A. Because it is the mother of all virtue. But what shall be deemed of that
Realm that is without Justice, if not a very sanctuary of thieves and Pirates.

Q. Wherefore were they of the Country Campagnia, esteemed proud and brave?

A. Because of the fertilty of the Country, and beauty of their Cities.

Q. Why be the people of Beotia more then any other counted blockheads and
asses?

A. Because they eat too much.

Q. What moved them of Locris to make a Law, that whosoever would go about by
any law or ordinance to establish some new device or innovation in their City,
ought without remedy (the Rope about his neck) to recite openly before the
people the law which he would establish, and the reason wherefore?

A. That was to chastise and correct those that love novelties and new devises:
for if the law proposed pleased not the people, or was found to be wrongful
and unjust, the proposer of the law had no more hurt; but suddenly was
strangled. Which ordinance and decree kept the good City of Locris more then
two hundredth years in good estate of commonwealth without any alteration and
change.

Q. Why did the ancients in the old time arm their Soldiers only with the
plackard, without any other armor?

A. To cut from them all hope of running away.

Q. Wherefore did the ancients above all things desire to dye honorably?

A. Because honorable death covers the faults of the life past.

Q. What meant the wise continually to join wisdom with puissance?

A. That puissance might not be converted into tyranny.

Q. Wherefore did the ancients say, that their minds and souls were like unto
Lamps?

A. Because through good instructions they might give light each to other.

Q. What meant many singularly to comm^nd poverty?

A. Because it made men industrious and vigilant.

Q. Why be those that be expert in the Art of war always blamed, if they
enter rashly into combat?

A. Because that the issue of the battles are uncertain.

Q. Why did the ancients paint the Image of virtue girded?

A. To declare that the virtuous man ought to be diligent in his affairs, and
not slothful.

Q. What means it, that women are desirous of revenge above all other
creatures?

A. Their weakness is the cause.

Q. Why were the Persians so curious to accustom their children to avoid lying
and to tell the truth?

A. Because they deemed verity to dwell amongst the Gods. And that they ought
not to premeditate what to say.

Q. Wherefore ought Intemperance to be avoided?

A. Because it brings with it all disorder, negligence, and inordinate life.

Q. Why do some praise poverty?

A. Because she teaches all good manners, nourishes and maintains the good
spirit, and causes assurance in man.

Q. Why is a rich wife to be eschew^^d?

A. Because she does not content her self with the estate of a wife: but would
be Mistress and more then a Mistress.

Q. Why is it better for a Prince to be Ioved, then feared?

A. Because fear cannot always last nor endure.

Q. Why is it said, that in giving of benefits we ought to imitate the fertile
f^elds?

A. Because they yield more then they receive.

Q. Why is delicate fare to be eschewed?

A. Because it corrupts good wits.

Q. Why ought no credit to be given to Fortune?

A. Because she is inconstant.

Q. Why is it not good to follow the opinion of the common people?

A. Because they judge all things by their opinion, and not according to the
truth.

Q. What moved some to give counsel indifferently to avoid the conversation of
women?

A. Because they be all equally instructed in the school of malice, as the
Comicall Poet Terence affirms.

Q. Why ought a man to beware of extreme Poverty?

A. Because it destroys good wits.

Q. Why ought unlawful gain to be eschewed?

A. Because the end thereof is not good, neither does such gain long continue.

Q. Why do they compare a covetous man to him that has the drop^*

A. Because he is sildome satisfied, and cannot quench the covetous thirst
wherewith he is always infected.

Q. What was the cause of the com^andement that we have to ho^our Princes?

A. Because they are on earth a representation and lively Image of God, who
governs all things.

Q. Why did the Persians make their children behold the orders and fashions of
Drunkards?

A. To teach them to abhor Drunkenness, by seeing the disordinance fas^ions
of those that were drunk.

Q. Why did the Ancients say, that it were much better to fall into the hands
of Ravens then of Flaiterer^?

A. Because Ravens and Crows do eat us when we be dead, but Flatterers do
devour us alive.

Q. Why is it not seemly for a man to praise or dispraise himself?

A. Because the one is a sign of folly, the other of inconstancy.

Q. Wherein rests true Amity?

A. In the unity and equality (...) minds, by following and refusing, loving
and hating one thing. Amity is like to the Sun of the world: without which all
things are dark and out of order.

Q. How may a true friend be known?

A. By things uncertain.

Q. Who be they that do least fear death?

A. They that least trouble themselves with worldly things.

Q. What thing gets friends?

A. Good fortune gets them, and ill fortune loses them*

Q. What difference is there between friendship and hatred?

A. The one ought to be immortal, and the other is mortal.

Q. Which is the best patrimony that man can have in this world?

A. To be spare and continent in living: and if our goods be not sufficient for
us, let us be sufficient for our goods.

Q. What kind of avarice or covetousness is counted most honest?

A. The covetousness of time, when it is employed as it ought to be.

Q. What is the state of the rich covetous man?

A A continual torment, and an extreme desire to get goods together, with
fear of loss of the same.

Q. How may a man truly term temporal riches?

A. Heaviness of mind, snares, and n^ttes to catch us: and thorns that pierce
through the heart.

Q. What chances to sluggards, and to the flothfull?

A. To live barely, and to rest without profit.

Q. What is the property of ^ortune?

A. To fear the mighty, and to ^read under feet the simple.

Q. Why have the Ancients praised temperance above all things?

A. Because temperance increases the pleasure that may be had in delectable
things.

Q. Why is the idle and delicate life to be blamed?

A. Because with pleasure it brings a thousand sorrows.

Q. Why did the Ancients so much commend the country life?

A. Because it is the mistress of frugality, diligence and Justice.

Q. Why is a Ieaster or Parasite so displeasant?

A. Because they have but one song oftentimes reciting their lies and jeasts.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the AE gyptians did cut off their skin before
their members?

A. To keep them more clean.

Q. Who be they that indeed are esteemed happy in thi^ world?

A. They that can live and dispatch their affairs without danger: and in ^st
to live in honor.

Q. Which is the first point to attain ^sedome?

A. For a man to know himself: and the more difficult it is, the more
profitable.

Q. In what sort should a man behav^ ^imselfe in other men's affairs?

A. In such sort as he forget not his ^wne.

Q. Whilst we be young, what thing ^ght we most to remember?

A. That one day we shall be old.

Q. What is he that lives well?

A. He that boasts not himself ^^ereof.

Q. After what sort ought the igno^^nce of youth to be corrected?

A. By the wisdom of the old.

Q. What is he that is brave indeed?

A. He that can exalt himself.

Q. What is the property of a glori^^ man?

A. R^ther to abhor death, then to desire life.

Q. How does virtue increase?

A. Through perils and adver^^ty.

Q. How may one avoid advers^ty?

A. By patience.

Q. How should we preserve (...) goods, and become subject to the inconstancy
of Fortune?

A. In giving them to our friend^ and in making participation thereof ^ among
those that wish well to us.

Q. To whom is Poverty noy some^^

A. To him that suffers not the same patiently.

Q. What is the sauce that appert^ neth to travel?

A. That is rest.

Q. Why is Fortune painted blind?

A. Because she blinderh her pur^^ers.

Q. What thing is very easy to be gotten, and very hard to be kept?

A. Good Fortune.

Q. What is he that is free indeed?

A. He that does not beastly (...) himself to his affections.

Q. What is it tha^ makes an evil ^an?

A. Too much Liberty.

Q. What ought he to learn above (...) things that desire^^ to reign and
go^erme?

A. To sustain Envy, with great ^^urage.

Q. What is that which most of all ^th overthrow Princes?

A. The poison of flattery.

Q. How be true Friends got^^?

A. With Fidelity and like du^^.

Q. What is that which so sildome found together, and rests in one per^^?

A. Beauty with chastity, wisdom and riches, youth and continence, Age
without Jealousy.

Q. What is that which men call (...)?

A. It is the death of the memory, ^yson for man, corruption of beauty
^dvertue, and the flower of age.

Q. What is he that cannot speak?

A. He that knows not how to ho^^ his peace.

Q. Where is it most s^^cially req^^ ^it for a man to hold his peace?

A. At the Table.

Q. What is the true Image of (...)

A. The speech.

Q. What kind of man is most (...) hated?

A. Those which use reproach.

Q. To whom ought a man to (...) good?

A. Neither to old men, nor (...) young children because young ^^^^dren do
forget good turns done u(...) them, before they come to the age^ knowledge:
and old men do forg^^ them by and by.

Q. What manner of life lives a (...) without learning?

A. The life of a dead man, or of s^^ a one that lives in darkness.

Q. What things be those that sti^^ us most to virtue?

A. The love of glory, and fear blame.

Q. How may true glory be nouris^^

A. By doing much, and speaking ^tle.

Q. How do Commonwealths begin (...) increase and flourish?

A. They increase by unity, and are ^verthrowen by dissension.

Q. Wherefore did Hieron demand ^f ^imonides what thing God was, and ^every
time he took a great pause to ^ake him answer?

A. To declare that God was infinite and incomprehensible.

Q. Wherefore is it better, according (...) the opinion of Themistocles, to
give ^he Daughter in marriage to a poor ^an being honest, then to a rich man
fill conditions?

A. Because it is better to marry a man without money, then money without a man.

Q. What is it that maintains Commonwealths?

A. Penalty and reward.

Q. What is the most pestilent thing that can be in man?

A. Love of our selves, and delight our selves.

Q. Why ought anger to (...) void and eschewed?

A. Because it is the enemy of goo^ counsel.

Q. And why Riot?

A. Because it is vile and unseemely (...) all ages and degrees.

Q. Why ought humane things (...) despised?

A. Because there is no constancy (...) steadfastness in them.

Q. Wherefore is courage of heart (...) much esteemed: that is to say,
constantly to sustain and bear all sorrows a(...) calamities that may chance?

A. Because it is not inferior to wa^^ like bravery and courage. Whereof many
times the very Soldier himself ha(...) need.

Q. Wherefore is equity and justi^^ (...)nable and meet in a Prince about all
things?

A. Because it establishes Kingdoms, and makes Kings to reign.

Q Why ought pleasure to be con^^ ^emned?

A. Because continually she is accom^^nied with sorrows.

Q. What means the Swanne, when (...) is near unto his death, to fing better
then at any other time?

A. By natures teaching, to declare that benefit we receive by death, which
opens unto us the Gate of eter^all Life.

Q. Why have the wise men of old (...) compared our life to a stage Play
Tragedy?

A. For that many times the worst (...) of men do occupy the places of the
(...), as oftentimes we see in such ca^^

Q. Why do we hate poverty?

A. Because poverty ca^seth many to ^^er out of the right way, who rather (...)
they would be constrained to beg (...) sterve for hunger, apply themselves
(...) and murder.

Q. Wherefore was Gold first found (...)?

A. For the destruction of man. Where they be so covetous, that they care into
adventure each danger for (...) of the same, according to the ^rue verse of
Virgill the Father of ^^^ts.

Quid non mortalia Pectora cogit Auri sacra sames?
Q. Wherefore is Gold so pale?

A. For fear of so many dangers (...) ambushments planted by man to rec^^ ver
the same.

Q. Why were women forbidden w^^^ in the old time?

A. Because wine provokes leach^^ and is noisome unto the sense and (...)
derstanding.

Q. Why were the Magistrates (...) forbidden the same?

A To the intent their brain sho^^^ be good and strong, righteously to (...)
termine and judge.

Q. But why were the Soldier (...) men of warr^ forbidden from (...) same?

A. That by too much drinking the^ should not sleep, and by that mean (...)
occasion of advantage might be (...) from the enemy.

Q. What ^eaneth th^^ saying, that ^^atune does captivate and blind the
^^derstanding?

A. That is when one makes no restance unto her, but suffere^h, her to (...)
at her pleasure.

Q. Why (...) Bacchus termed to be foolish God?

A. Because he makes them fools that ^ste too much of his liquour.

Q. Why be rich men most commonly ^^ked, and those that be good men not (...)?

A. Goodness seeks them that be (...), in them to fix its sure and long
^^tation.

Q. Shamefastness either in man or ^^a^, what is it properly?

A. The bridle and bit that restrains (...) appeti^^s.

Q. What vice blotted the great libe^lity and patience in adversity of Mar^^
Antonius?

A. Play, Drunkenness, Surfeiting, (...) too much familiarity with his ^^shold
Servants.

Q. What made Julius Caesar the first Emperor of Rome so beloved of (...)
Soldiers?

A. The not telling and counting (...) his Soldiers prey, causing every one of
them to take what he list.

Q. What moved Polign^tus to cause at his own costs and ^harges the whole
wars of Troy to be painted?

A. The ardent desire he had to immortalize his name.

Q. Wherefore was Aurelius that excellent Painter in Rome, counted to (...)
infamous?

A. Because he mingled Whores (...) Drabb^s among the heavenly Godd (...) ses,
so far was he enamoured with (...) merry tricks.

Q. Why is it so much requisite to ch^^ a good Nurse for a Child?

A. Because the body does not one re^eive the substance of the milk, (...) the
spirits also do feel it.

Q. Whereof comes it that (...) Romans did not see their Children until
they were of the age of (...) years?

A. Because they would not that (...) should come home to them, before they
^^^d learned to honor them. The French ^^n were more diverse, for they would
not see their Children until they were strong to handle weapons.

Q. Why did they forbid their children the company of Ruffians, Ieasters,
Bablers, and all such Ribalds?

A. To the intent they should not ^arne to give themselves to dishonest,
pleasures, and to forget the good nature, wherewith they were endued, which in
the end would be the destruction both of their body and soul.

Q. What ought the tales and com^u^ications be that are had with Children?

A. They ought to have some sem^ance of truth: and above all things ^^ey must
not be fearful unto them, ^or superstitious.

Q. Why were the Pensions received (...) Princes, abolished in many Ci^^s?

A. Because there is nothing that ^th sooner corrupt the person the^ ^ts: for
they engender great suspi^ion in them, that do receive them. Demesthenes for
receiving of bribes of Arpalus King of Persia, was chased out of Athens.

Q. Why were Coriolanus and Themistocles so much against their own Country?

A. For the ingratitude of their Citizens, who denied them both their due
honors. Caesar also because his Country men denied him his well deserved
triumph, became enemy to his Country.

Q. Why was Cato of many men counted a fool?

A. Because he rather chose voluntary death, then to yield himself into the
hands of Caesar, who sought no other thing of him but friendship, and was
minded to pardon him all his injuri^^ past.

Q. Why did Scipio take heed of going rashly to the Skirmish and Com bat?

A. He knew well that by his nativity he was appointed to be General of
Almiea: and not a simple Soldier* therefore he behaved himself acco^^ing to
the Majesty of that Office, and a like a private Soldier.

Q. Why was Demetrius reprehended ^^en he desired to have the surname of (...)
that had broken the first rank of (...) enemies?

A. The true title of a Prince is rather ^^he just then mighty: and ought
ra^^er to resemble God by virtue, then the Lyonby force.

Q. Why did Plato refuse to reduce the Common^-wealth of the Cirenians, ^^to
good order and discipline?

A. Because the abundance of riches ^^d made it too licentious.

Q. Where of came it, that Marius, Vi^^tus, and Ventidius Bassus, were so
^^cellent in arms, and did suffer (...) patiently the labors of the ^^^res?

A. The one was a labourer, the other ^^epheard, and the third was a
horse^^per, whereby all three were used to (...) travel, to pain, to heat
and cold, (...) to sparenesse of life.

Q. What is the ^rue duty of a Prince?

A. To make his Subjects to live (...) q^^et^y and godly, which thing he cau^^
do, if he himself be not good, just, (...) virtuous.

Q. What difference is there between the equal and just Prince, and the
Tyrant?

A. The one uses the office of a man* the other of a beast. The Prince serves
as a Father to his Subjects: the Tyrant devoureth them.

Q. Why be men naturally afraid to rebel or encounter with a Prince?

A. Because that (after the mind (...) Hesiodus) the Prince is established by
God.

Q. Think you that God has any regard of things to come?

A. There is nothing more certain. Romulus testifies the same, being re^^cued
from the water, and nourished with the milk of a Wolf: Abidus nourished with
the milk of a Hind: and Cyru^^ of a Goat.

Q. Is it any marvel then, (...) though the Persians did worship them (...)
Gods?

A. No truly. Moreover Ho^^er and ^^siodu^ do affirme^ that principality (...)
government is* a gift proceeding (...) given unto men, thereby to (...) the
power of God.

Q. What is that which makes a (...) wicked?

A. To think that it is lawful for him to do all things, and that all
wickedness is sufferable, having power (...) do what he list. His great
wealth and abundance may be also the occasion, and flatterers, evil
Ministers, and truell (...) of war, such as attend about his person.

Q. Which is the hardest thing for him to do?

A. Dioclesian the Emperor said: to know perfectly how to use himself (...)
his Kingdom.

Q. Why are civil ^arres so greatly (...) be commanded?

A. Because he that has the (...) and does not only what he lists but
(...) they that take his part do the ^^me.

Q. Why be Princes esteemed like unto God?

A. As God considers the affection of man, even so the liberal and
^^^n^nimous Prince ought to consider (...) heart and power of him that does him
service?

Q. Why was the liberality of Zeuxis reprehended of the ancients?

A. Because he gave to receive twist the value.

Q. Whereof proceeded the custom that the Kings of Persia had, to give gold
and silver to all women that they (...), and (...) Darts and Arrows?

A. Gold and silver is convenable to women: and weapons to men.

Q. Why did Plato in his laws forbid that any God should be made, either of
gold or silver?

A. Because he deemed those metals to be the very poison of the world?

Q. Why did the Kings of Pers^^ (...) to reward women that brought forth many
male children?

A. Because they filled the Country (...) Soldiers, which served for the
^^servation of the same.

Q. How was Caesar hea^ed of the (...) evil?

A. By sobriety and abstinence from ^^vine.

Q. Why have many wise men studied ^^be obscure in their writings?

A. To astonish dull wits at the first ^^ght, thereby to encourage the studious
(...) search the mysteries and secrets of the ^^he.

Q. How long is it lawful for a man (...) desire to live?

A. So long as a man is out of hatred and necessity.

Q. Where ought true pleasure to be ^^ught?

A. In our selves, and not in other.

Q. Why is moderation so much commanded?

A. Because it increases pleasure.

Q. Why did Epaminon^as make so ^^tle preparation in a feast that he made (...)
certain Ambassadors?

A. To declare that they that can (...) be rich and suffer poverty, may (...)
be corrupted, with money if it be ^^red.

Q. What is most to be feared (...) City?

A. Hunger.

Q. How may a man enrich himself?

A. By forsaking his appetites.

Q. How may we live joyfully?

A. By putting our trust in thing that never shall have end.

Q. How should a man be master (...) himself?

A. By amending that fault in himself, which he espyeth in another.

Q. What ought they to eschew (...) are in prosperity?

A. Hatred.

Q. What is the property of a (...)?

A. To apply well his time.

Q. Where (...) the f^licity (...) man?

A. In the quiet state of the min^^

Q. What manner of thing is Huma^^?

A. It is a virtue joined with good ^^ction: or rather, a benevolence ^^ed and
tempered with dexteri^^.

Q. What manner of thing is Mer^^?

A. It is an affection of the spirit joy^^ with Humanity.

Q. What thing is facility?

A. It is a virtue, which easily ma^^th a man to engender friendship with
^^ers, and does long maintain the (...).

Q. What be they that were (...) facility?

A. Philip, and Alexander his Son: (...) showing the same to Dimocrates, (...)
Architect.

Q. What is Faith?

A. It is such a godly virtue, that all ^^her virtues without the same, is
nothing. Without faith wisdom is folly. ^^perance is displeased, Force is
ancient, and Justice is turned into cru^^

Q. Of all the Ancients, who w^^ most excellent in that virtue?

A. Sextus Pompeius, Son of Pompeius the great, Alexander and Scipio.

Q. Why did Nature make man naked and unarmed?

A. Nature having made man wise, has given him means enough, whereby to arm
himself at his pleasure, and to use at one time sundry kinds of weapons.

Q. Where of comes it, that all men commonly are not wise?

A. The length of the body comes of great moystnesse and heat^^ but dryness
engendereth wisdom in man.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that Iulges, and Advocates are more reverenc^^ of
their Clients, then Physicians ^ee of their Patients?

A. The g^in^ and hope of Clients depends upon the Judges and Advocates: but
the ^^pe of the sick depends not only of the Physician, but rather of God.

Q. Why did the Ancients call (...) falling evil, the disease of Hercules

A. Because Hercules was subject ^^eunto.

Q. What is the office of a thrifty (...)?

A. To remember that which ^^past, and to think upon that to ^^me.

Q. How may a man live godly?

A. To think every day to be the last ^^y of his life.

Q. Why should a man take more care ^^or his soul, then for his bo^^

A. Because the perfection of the ^^le makes the imperfection of the ^^dy: and
the beauty or force of the ^^dy makes the soul never the better.

Q. Where lies the seat of our life?

A. In Wisdom, Strength, and Magnanimity: for there is neither wind nor
tempest that can shake them.

Q. What difference is between affection, and good will?

A. Affection is a general inclination of the spirit, which induces a man
^^loue: and makes him sorry, if the^^ chance any thing evil unto him who
(...) he loves. But goodwill is showed, where being moved with affection, we
endeavor our selves to show pleasure unto them whom we love: in such sort that
goodwill is the effect of the affection.

Q. How shall the virtue of man be known?

A. By adversity: as Gold by the fire.

Q. Wherefore is a plurality of Princes evil, and not to be suffered.

A. All that which may be done by one, is better done, then when it is do^^ by
many. Moreover, if a Kingdom be turned into Tyranny, the Tyranny (...) one is
more sufferable, then of many, and to be short, the reign of one is (...) best.

Q. From whence came the custom^^ not to name the newborn, before the seventh
day?

A. Because they esteemed the child^^ (...) days of age to have escaped the
^^ger.

Q. Why did the Egyptians, desi^^ to live chaste eat no sault?

A. Because through the heat thereof, provokes Leachery.

Q. Why does Homer call salt a di^^ thing?

A. Because it gives taste to all meat, (...) preserves the same from
stinking, (...) has a force and virtue genera^^e.

Q. Wherefore be we afraid to pass ^^ough a Churchyard?

A. Because it represents our (...).

Q. How was the Commonwealth (...) Sparta so long time maintai^^.

A. Some imputed the cause to the ^^gistrates, which knew well how to ^^mand,
some to the people, because (...) knew how to obey.

Q. Who was the cause of the great story that the Lacedaemonians obtai^^ against
the Illyrians?

A. The presence of their King, which was but a child, persuaded thereunto
(...) the counsel of their priests.

Q. What caused the Kingdom (...) Persia so much to flourish?

A. Xenophon says, that it was the great love that they bare to the King.

Q. What thing is hardest for a ma^^ to do?

A. To be secret. Which Philippi (...) affirmed, when he besought Lysimach^^
his friend not to reveal his se^crets.

Q. Wherefore was it written before the Gates of the Temple of Apollo a
Delphos: Know thy self?

A. To induce us to know that spark of Divinity which God has placed i^ us,
whereby we know that God has done all things.

Q. Wherefore is it said, that ther^ is nothing that may better resemble th^^
Kingdom of Heaven, then the state (...) a Monarchy?

A. Because there is but one God which alone does reign and gove^^ all things.

Q. Of what sort of men ought a (...) to be chosen in a Common^^th?

A. He ought to be noble of blood, ought to be virtuous, rich, and puis^^in
arms.

Q. Do you think it to be requisite (...) a Lieutenant General of an Army,
^^ght to be, not only valiant and wise, (...) also happy and fortunate?

A. I think doubtless that he ^^ght to be fortunate. The ill fortune (...)
Pompeius may very well avouch the (...).

Q. What is the principal duty of a ^^nd Prince?

A. To seek means that his people (...) well instructed.

Q. What was the cause of the evil ^^ds of Sardanapalus and Nero?

A. The number of Flatterers in their ^^urts, Ieasters, Parasites, Bawdes,
^^hores, Ruffians, and all sorts of people disposed to vice, where the wise
and ^^ve were expulsed and driven a^^

Q. Why would King Cyrus that Xenophon should be always in his comp^^ny?

A. To give him counsel in thou^^ faires of his Realm. For Xenephon wa^^ not
only wise, but also valiant and well instructed in the deeds of war.

Q. Wherefore would Alexander the great, that Onoficrates should always
accompany him in the wars?

A. To enroll and register his act^^ and deeds.

Q. Whereof ought a Prince princ^^pally to take heed?

A. Not to change his bounty an^ goodness for any occasion that (...) happen,
nor yet to incline his ears (...) flatterers.

Q. What is the chiefest cause of (...) Princes overthrow?

A. Flattery, more then force (...) arms.

Q. What is he indeed that may truly be called happy in this world?

A. The virtuous man of mean^^ wealth.

Q. Whereunto serve riches?

A. To make the mind quiet and con^^^t, without which contentation, there ^^ho
happiness or felicity in this ^^ld. But how can he be in rest and (...) that
has not wherewith to buy ^^bread.

Q. What caused Alcibiades to be so (...), contrary to the nature of the
A^^nians?

A. His Nurse Amilea, which was a ^^rtan woman.

Q. What moved Diogenes coming (...) Sparta and going to Athens, to say: ^^at
he came from men, and was going ^^wards women?

A. Thereby he reprehended the de^^ts of Athens, which made them effe^^ate and
womanish.

Q. Which is most requisite, either (...) the soldiers should defend the wall
the wall the soldiers?

A. It is better, that the soldiers should ^^end the wall.

Q. What is the poison of friendship?

A. Flattery.

Q. What manner of Nurses ought (...) to be which are chosen for Princes ^^dren?

A. Fair, well conditioned, sage^^ discreet, pleasant, courteous, amiable,
chaste, healthy, and of good complexion, eloquent, their speech fine and neat,
that the child may learn to pronounce well.

Q. What is the surest guard of a Prince?

A. The good will of his subjects: For that Prince is unhappy which for the
surety of his person had need of sor^ and diversities of guard and watch.

Q. What is justice?

A. The honor and glory of the^ that do the same, and a great benefit unto
them, upon whom the same (...) executed.

Q. Whereby shall a man know when a Prince begins to be a Tyrant?

A. When forcible he draws unto him the service of his people.

Q. What caused Theseus to be so v^liant?

A. The great fame and renown (...) Hercules enflamed him, to make (...) name
immortal.

Q. How may a man be like unto (...)?

A. In doing good to many indiffe^^ntly, and not to one alone.

Q. What is the greatest shame that (...) can receive?

A. To be surpassed in honesty, cur^^esie, and humanity, by those which be ^^ur
inferiors.

Q. How did Philip King of Mace^^n gain and win all Grecia?

A. By Gold and silver more then by ^^rce of arms, for he was wont to say;
that there was no force or Castle, were (...) never so inexpugnable, but he
would take upon him to subdue it, if so be an ^^sse laden with Gold were able
to enter ^^he gates.

Q. What kind of Tragedies ought (...) not to read?

A. Those which contain nothing ^^se but things that be proud, cruel, and
full of inhumanity. But those we ought specially to read which be honest and
full of grave Sentences, inter^^ced with pleasant talk, as the Tragi^^ies of
Euripides, and Sophocles be.

Q. Why ought we indifferently (...) read all kind of Poets?

A. Because with mavelous sweetness of language, they entermeddle the Graces
with the Muses: whereof it came that Aelius Comodus the Emperor, was so far
in love with Martial, that he termed him to be his Virgil.

Q. Are men to be commended for their corporal beauty sake?

A. No: But for their virtue, wisdom, counsel, and force, which declare what
manner of minds they have within.

Q. What caused Driopas the Athenian to establish this Law: That whosoever had
conceived any evil opinion of God, should have his head cut off?

A. Because there is no worse thing then to have an evil opinion of him, which
has made and mainteineth all things.

Q. What manner of thing is ^^ligion?

A. It is the true knowledge of Gods own service.

Q. Wherefore did Alcibiades reject all kind of Music, saving when he was at
the Table at his meals?

A. Because Music provoked him to conceive delight familiarly to talk at the
Table.

Q. A strange Question, whereof I should feign be resolved. One Stesichorus
lying in his Cradle, a Nightingale lighted on his mouth, and sung upon the same?

A. It was a presage that Stesichorus should prove an excellent singer.

Q. What profit brings Music to him that has delight in the same?

A. It sharpeneth the spirit, not only to know the harmony of the voice, but
also it makes the person to have a better judgment to indite either in (...)
or prose.

Q. What is true Philosophy?

A. The knowledge of goodness, and how to live well.

Q. What caused the Poets to use so ^^ny fictions and inventions?

A. To allure men to abandon their ^^barous conditions and brutish behaviors,
and to turn themselves to virtue and exercises.

Q. What was the cause of the death of Cinna?

A. Because he was cruel toward his Soldiers, and constrained them to fight
perforce and by compulsion.

Q. What is Patience?

A. A voluntary sufferance in things difficult, for love of honor and profit.

Q. What is Constancy?

A. It is a virtue which conserveth good counsel, and makes a man persevere
in honorable deeds.

Q. What is Opinion?

A. It is a stay fixed either in deed (...) word, which makes us obstinately
(...) follow our fancy, although it be without reason: only to be superior in
all controversies.

Q. What is Justice?

A. After the mind of the ancient Poets, it is a celestial virtue powered down
from God into our spirits, that (...) might the better honor, love and
san^ctifie him as author of all things: an^ therefore Princes were, for good
respect called of Homer, Jupiters scholars.

Q. What is the property of Justice?

A. To love and honor God above all things: and our neighbor as our self.

Q. How many kinds of Justice be there?

A. Four, that is to say: Divine, Natural, Civil, and Judicial.

Q. Of what things is the world governed?

A. By reward and punishment.

Q. What is divine Justice?

A. It is that which makes us to acknowledge God to be our Creator, the
beginning and end of all things, and him of whom all creatures receive life,
without participation of mortal things.

Q. What is natural Justice?

A. It is always one in all men, and varieth nothing through the diversity of
Regions and Nations: being always convenable to Nature. And as divine Justice
shows the duty toward God: even so natural Justice is subject to the
satisfaction of nature. The Disciples of Socrates affirmed, that natural
Justice is a knowledging (...) and just things, and agreeable to natural
reason: which thing whosoever does use, shall become good of himself.

Q. What is civil Justice?

A. It is appertaining to a Prince or Magistrate: whose office is to provide^^
that the people be well ruled and governed, and that no harm be done unto the
place whereof he has the rule.

Q. What is (...) civil Justice?

A. That consists in being reasonable to all men, and to discern the just
from the unjust.

Q. Why were Achilles and Sylla* ^^prehended for their victories?

A. Because they were cruel and insolent toward their enemies, when they had
overcome them. The contrary (...) Caesar, Alexander, Hannibu^^, ^^nius, and
Aege^^, all which (...) greatly praised for their victories.

Q. Before whom is it lawful (...) man to vaunt himself of well doing?

A. Before the valiant, or before (...) that know him not, or have small
knowledge what virtue is.

Q. Why was Metellus despised?

A. For being too much desirous to have surpassed Sertorius: to whom
notwithstanding he was not comparable in (...).

Q. How ought a man to use the goods (...) Fortune?

A. That they may become subject to man, and not man to them: following the
verse of Horace.

Et mihires non me rebus submittere (...) conor.
Q. Whereof proceeded the saying of Poets, that Mars was armed with Di^^^^onds?

A. To declare that a Prince ought to be strong, not in body, but in heart
(...) courage.

Q. What is the property of a good Captain?

A. To be gentle, politic, wise, and witty: not be discouraged in hard
fortune, nor inflamed in prosperity. Such was Hanniball. See a further
description hereof in the 24. Novell of the Palace (...) pleasure.

Q. From whence came the great r^^now^ that in old time the Cimbri^^ and
Celtiberians, achieved in the wars?

A. Because they esteemed the (...) of honor to be in the wars: and had
rather fley their own children, then they should be thrall and taken of their
enemies.

Q. Why do some praise Anger?

A. Because it does commonly accompany courage.

Q. How many kinds of Amity be there?

A. Three, that is to say: profitabl, honest, and delectable.

Q. Why was Dionisius expelled by the Locrences?

A. Because he being courteously received of them, in the time of his
^^^^^ishment, used dishonest orders toward^^ their wives.

Q. Why did Amphitryon give (...) son Hercules to Euristeus?

A. To teach him to fly the volu^^tuousnesse of the Thebanes, and (...)
accustom him with honest labo^^ (...) following the virtues of Euristeus

Q. Whereof proceeds the difference between one man and another?

A. By digressing from Philosophy. (...) that it rises through the trayell
(...) ^he soul, when it passes into our ^^cies, descending from God through
the Lodiaque, and the white Circle. In which passage all souls take their
affections, and do participate with all the natures and motions of each Sphere
and Star, according to their aspects.

Q. What is Choler?

A. It is an anger soon come, and soon gone, proceeding of a feeble ^eate.

Q. What is taken of the Planet Sa^^ne.

A. Reason, eloquence, and vnder^^anding, as of Jupiter, force of doing, (...)
Mars boldness, and of the heat (...) the Sun, feeling and opinion, and
(...) forth.

Q. What is hatred?

A. It is an anger that has taken (...).

Q. What is discord?

(...) and Moral and politic Question^,

A. It is a frowardness and anger coming of hatred, which makes men
rebellious to the Commonwealth: which indeed, is the destruction of all
human^^ things.

Q. What is Concord?

A. It is a virtue, which in short time, makes small and weak things to grow,
as Salust says (...) cresc^^^?

Q. Why be Flatterers esteemed (...) then those that are fall^?

A. Because the false man does (...) deceive only, but the Flatterer
corrupts men* and therefore the (...) punished Flatterers by death, as
^^^^goras was.

Q. What was the cause that ^^^igonus lost the most part of his Kingdom, and
was c^nstrained to (...) with the Romans?

A. Because he gave more (...) Flatterers then to Hunnihall, that (...) him
profitable counsel.

Q. What is the office of a good (...)

A. To do well, and not to caro^^ speak evil of him.

Q. Why had Epaminondas no regard (...) be revenged upon them that* spoke will
of him?

A. Because he (...) such pati^nce proceeded of the (...).

Q. What was the cause of the death (...)?

A. His evil life, his lasciviousness (...); and the little justice tha^
(...) used.

Q. Why was Marcellus ^reated Con^^ull of Rome, with Cato that dyed at (...)

A. To the intent that by the gentle (...) good (...) of Marcellus, the (...)
my and rigor of Cato might be moderated.

Q. What caused Nero, to cause the (...) or incontinently to be dispatched of
life?

A. His natural cruelty. The contrary rested in Caesar, for reward whereof, in
the end he received (...).

Q. Why is dominion or rule so weighty a matter?

A. Because it is impossible to ple^ all men.

Q. Why would not Caligula (...) Emperor, hear the accusation of (...) person?

A. Because he would that no (...) should hate him.

Q. What induced Dionisius to (...) over his good nature, wherewith he (...)
endued at the first, and to become, ^r^^in the end*

A. The mockes and cavillations his subjects, who mocked him for (...) looking
a squint, and for the grosen^^ of his body, which is a notable exam^^ to beware
of jesting and backbiting^ Princes.

Q. Why did the Magnesians cr^^^sle Daffitas the Gramarian, upon (...) Mount
Thorax?

A. Because he did speak ill of man^^ specially of Lysimachus their Prince,
(...) dear sovereign Lord.

Q. What is virtue?

A. It is a perfect and entire reason, whi^^ follows the minds of the wise,
(...) procures them to shun and avoid (...)

Q. What is Avarice?

A. A disordinate appetite, a cupidi^in atiable, a disease which infecteth
(...) person, making man vile and effe^nate. But after the opinion of the
^ikes, Plato declares that he which ^ireth to be rich must give over his
^^etites, and heap no treasure together. ^^her Philosophers affirm, that
Co^ousnesse is a disease that poysoneth (...) body, and makes the mind
effemi^^, and can never be recovered.

Q. Why was Acchius the King of ^^dia slain?

A. For his extreme Covetousness, ^^ich caused him to make Taxes and (...)
Imposts upon his people, to ga^^ together much treasure. Where^^ in the end his
people did cast him (...) the River Pactolus, which is full of (...) gold, to
the intent he might glut ^^elfe with Gold, after which he so ^^ch thirsted. The
self same vice of co^^ousnesse was the occasion of the ^^th of Crassus, who
was slain by the ^^sians.

Q. What is liberality?

A. To use Riches indifferently, (...) is to say, to spend neither too much,
(...) too little; So that it is as it we^^ mean between Covetousness and
p^^digality.

Q. Why was Scopas of Thessaly* much contemned of the wise in his (...)?

A. Because he counted hims^^ happy, for that his Counting h^ was full of
those things that (...) profited himself, nor yet any other^^.

Q. What is that m^k^th (...) happy?

A. The bridling of his disordi^^ appetite.

Q. Why did Piso reprehend th^^ heral^y of the Emperor O^ho?

A. Because he gave not his (...) but threw them away. Virtue cas^^ nothing
away, Virtue usurpeth noth^^ of any other man's, Virtue has ne^^ nothing.

Q. Who were they that were ^^ted infamous in Rome?

A. They that spent their goods (...) on dishonest things; and they (...) did,
take Fines to enrich thems^^ (...) lawful means.

Q. What was the cause of the evil (...) of Sylla?

A. Because he grew very rich in ^^ort time, which made him to be sus^^cted of
bribery

Q. Why did Plato say, that to live ^^ietly in a City, both riches and po^^ty
ought to be expelled?

A. Riches makes a man proud, and ^^verty induces him to evil.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Caesar (...) once blamed for his Liberality?

A. Because being but a private man (...) used disordinate Expenses, unmeet
(...) his degree. And it is to be noted, (...) that which is prodigality in a
pri^^e person, is Magnanimity in a ^^ince.

Q. How did Nicias obtain the favor (...) of the people?

A. By spending and giving his ^^ods liberally, although he was not ^^ry much
commended of the Wise. ^^exd^^er was greatly praised for de^^ing of worldly
goods, esteeming his (...) riches to consist in his Friends.

A. Those which are well gotten: an^^ such as do serve us, and not we the^^

Q. What is Anger?

A. It is a certain boiling blo^^ burning in desire to be revenged upon him
with whom a man is offended, (...) is always accompanied with wrath.

Q. What difference is there betwe^^ anger and wrath?

A. The one consists in the (...) the other in the deed; and the one (...) be
without the other, even as a (...) may be drunk, and yet notwithstanding is no
Drunkard; that is to say, (...) customed to be overcome with wine.

Q. Why did the Romans ordai^^ that when their armies did prepare^^ encounter,
certain bands should (...) have to give the onset, and there ^^^all should
utter vehement cries?

A. To astonish the Enemy, and (...) courage their own Soldiers to (...) more
fiercely.

Q. Of what age ought he to be (...) is first trained in the wars, to (...)
him perfect in the art of warfare?

A. The younger he is, the more per^^ he shall be in Warfare: as witnesses
^^nniball, who at the age of ten years ^^owed his Father Amilcar in the
^^rres. Scipio took upon him to be a ^^ldier at 17 years of age.

Q. Amongst the ancients, who has (...) deserved the name of a good and ^^^ant
Captain?

A. J am of the opinion of Antigo^^, who judged Pirrhus to be the har^^st
Captain that ever served in the ^^res, and most happiest, if fortune had
^^ered him to live out his time.

Q. Why was the Camp of Mars at Rome ^^inted hard by the River of Tyber?

A. To the intent, that after sweating (...) exercise of arms, the youth to
wash (...) their sweat and dust, should enter (...) the River, not only to
bathe them^^ves, but also to learn to swim, a thing (...) necessary in a
Soldier, as Alexander ^^pented himself of nothing so much, (...) for that he
never learned to swim.

Q. What causes Idleness?

A. Cato said, that by doing nothing, (...) did learn to do evil.

Q. From whence came the g^^ hardiness wherewith Horatius Co^^ was endued,
when he sustained suc^ fierce assault given by the Enemies (...) the wooden
bridge of Tyber at Rom^*

A. Because he could swim. (...) by the same means Caesar escaped fr^^ his
enemies in the wars at Alex^^dria. Sertorius also used the same, ^^ sing the
River of Rodanus?

Q. Why did the Romans erect (...) Image of Claelia on horseback, and (...)
otherwise?

A. Because they flying from k^^ Porsenna, she feared not to pass (...) row
the River of Tyber on horseba^^ Or else as some say, because she be^^ sent back
again by the Senate of R^^^ to Porsenna, she presented him a (...) Horse
richly garnished.

Q. Why did Lycurgus make (...) Maidens of Sparta accustomably (...) run and
wrestle naked?

A. To make them the stronger (...) abide the travel of Child.

Q. What ought a man chiefly (...) ask of God, according to the min^^ (...)
Philosophers?

A. Good fortune, after a man is en^^d with understanding, how to use (...)
same.

Q. What manner of thing is it to be ^^ry just?

A. To have the knowledge of Di^^ and humane things.

Q. What is the most grievous dis^^ that may happen unto a Prince?

A. To love Flatterers.

Q. Why did Agamemnon the King ^^re rather to have in his company ten ^^tors,
then ten Ajaxes?

A. Because the man that is wise, is her to be desired then he that is har^^
For that occasion Antigonus desi^^ always to have Zeno with him, to (...) him
counsel concerning the af^^ts of his Realm.

Q. What books ought Princes to (...), that they might learn to be (...)?

A. Those that give them admonish^^t of their duty; for no man dares ^^ke unto
them that thing without (...) fear, which they may find in ^^ng.

Q. What was the cause of the gr^^ friendship of Lysimachus toward ^^lippides
the Comicall Poet?

A. Because he did not flatter, wh^^ is many times the property both (...) Poet
and a Courtier.

Q. What is Pleasure?

A. A recreation of the spirit, pr^voking man's mind to think to enj^^ any
thing, although not grounded (...) on reason; and therefore, it is alwa^^ an
enemy to virtue.

Q. What is Joy or Gladness?

A. It is a motion of the spirit, p^^^ceeding of a certain opinion of a th^^
which we hope to enjoy; and there^^ is unseemely for a man of great est^^
because it troubles the mind, and ^^seth it to pass the limits of reason.

Q. Is it requisite then to rej^^ with measure?

A. Yea: chiefly to have respect the inconvenience that might hap^^ by too much
mirth, as it chanced to th^^ two Roman women, that thought th^^ Children to
have been dead in (...) journey of Cannas, which afterwa^^^enly returned safe,
contrary to (...) Mothers expectations; and as it ^^pened to Chilo, who dyed
through much Joy.

Q. To what thing ought a man to (...) most regard?

A. To Virtue, then to his Health, (...) that to honest pleasures, and finally
^^iches.

Q. What is Prodigality?

A. It is a perturbation of the mind, ^^inishing virtue: which consists
spending extraordinarily, and with^^ order of reason.

Q. What was the cause of the death Apisius, that wrote so diligently of ^^ery?

A. He killed himself with nothing ^^ut gluttony.

Q. What is Ambition?

A. It is a troubling of the mind, so ^^ent, that it consumes the heart (...)
spirit, with great desire to attain to (...) dignity, and honor.

Q. What is it, that a man ought to (...) in this world?

A. All things that are honest.

Q. What is assurance?

A. It is a virtue proper to high (...) lofty minds, which approaches (...)
unto confidence* and the property that virtue, is to make a man alwa^^ look
with a bold and merry coun^^^nance, not studying or taking any (...) for ought
that may chance, and prop^^^ly it is a tranquillity of the mind, wh^^ unto
Phocion greatly exhorted Alex^^^der the great, but in vain.

Q. What is Magnificence?

A. It is a virtue proper only (...) Princes: because it consists in gr^^
and hard things, and great expence^^

Q. Who is he that worthily may called liberal?

A. Aristotle says, that it is he wh^^ spends his revenue in good ord^^ and
upon things decent.

Q. Is there any difference betw^^ liberality and magnanimity?

A. Great difference: although (...) seem to be but one. He that is libe^^
ought to have respect how much (...) does spend, what that thing is (...) that
he buyeth, and above all thi^^ ^^at he do not exceed in expense of (...)
revenue. The magnanimous and ^^onourable without any care for pub^^ke expense,
has respect only how (...) may do some great and valiant en^^prise.

Q. Who was the most excellent a^ongst the ancients, to acknowledge and
^^compence a good turn done unto (...)?

A. Pirrhus: of whom it is said, that was thought to have dyed for anger, at he
had not time enough to succor (...) of his friends.

Q. What is the nature of an un^^nk full man?

(...) To forget the taste of good turns (...), if a man do not persevere
still in (...) him good.

Q. Who loves more, either he that (...) the good tnrne, or he that receives
(...) same?

A. He tha^ receives a good turn, is (...) to him that does it. The nature
^^he debtor is to shun the company (...) creditor, and to disdain him when
^^ath not wherewithal to pay him: w^^nt to despise all other Captains?

A. Because he was ready in fight, and knew how to defend himself.

Q. Why was Philip King of Macedonia so negligent and slow in the wars?

A. Because he thought it better to overcome his enemy by policy, then with
effusion of blood.

Q. How chanced it, that the Lacedaemonians, when they had obtained victory by
force of arms, did sacrifice a Cock: and when they came upon the enemy by
policy, subtilty, or knowledge, they sacrificed an Ox?

A. Because they esteemed policy better then strength.

Q. What virtues appertain unto strength?

A. Magnanimity, confidence, assur^^ce, valor, constancy, stedfastuesse* and
patience.

Q. Why was Fabius Maximus crowned universally throughout all Italy with Grass?

A. Because that crown was ordained for Captains and Generals, that could
conduct their Soldiers to the wars, and return with them again, without
loss and effusion of blood. After that sort did Antigonus escape from the fury
of Pirrhus?

Q. What ought a man principally to expect in the wars?

A. Opportunity. Which Pelopidas, Pirrhus, and Marcellus, knowing not how to
use, arrived very soon to the end of their lives.

Q Why did the Lacedaemonians beat their children upon the (...) of Jupiter?

A. To use them to be constant, and to endure stripes without making complaint.

Q. What was the reason of a Law (...) which was that the (...)?

A. Because weeping and (...) do ^^itnesse (...) a (...) faint (...) and
effeminate ^^eart.

Q. What mean the Poets to bring in ^rinces and Knights lamenting the^
^^isfortunes?

A. To mock them secretly, for to pay him: But the credit or desires none
other thing but the health of his debtor, whereby, he may find means sometime
to be paid.

Q. What is Constancy?

A. It is a virtue which properly resists sorrow, and is contrary to
Inconstancy.

Q. What is the property of Continency?

A. To vanquish and subdue the fleshly lusts. And although it be a harder
matter to vanquish, then to fight and resist: yet the Ancients have better
esteemed the continent man then the constant.

Q. What is Trust?

A. It is a sure hope, and presage (...) a good turn that we hope for, as
thoug^ it, should without all doubt happen un^to us.

Q. Why was Chrysippus disdained o^ all other Philosophers?

A. For his arrogance* for he boaste^ that he knew all things.

Q. Why was Hippocrates blamed (...) arrogance?

A. Because he wrote to Xerx^s King of Persia, that he would not utter his
knowledge* unto barbarous people.

Q. And why was Zeuxes the Painter also blamed of arrogance?

A. Because when he had painted Helena, he said that Leda her mother for all
that she was gotten with child by Iupi^^r had not made Helena so fair as he
(...) painted her.

Q. How ought a man to behave himself toward his friends?

A. In such sort as a man must think that in time to come they might be
enemies: although that Cicero makes a mock at that opinion, and says, that
it is the poison of friendship.

Q. How did Miltiades the Son of Cimon of Athens obtain so great renown?

A. Because there was no man how poor so ever he was, but he would give care
to his requests.

Q. Why was Viriatus so much esteemed of the Portugals, who were without danger
they durst not do it openly.

Q. Whereof comes it, that Alcibiades was in his time compared to the fish
called in Italian Polpo?

A. Because he was of a nature so tractable that he could man himself to all
uses and fashions, like to the fish called Polpo, which takes his color of
the Sand, where he gravelleth or groundeth himself.

Q. Upon what reason did Homer ca^^ certain people of Thracia half men* and
why did he say, that the house of Protesilaus was imperfect?

A. Because the people of Thracia lived without women, and in the house (...)
Protesilaus, there were none bnt men* The like affirms Menander of the Geti
or Goths. But what good can a^ householder do without a woman surely in mine
opinion (J speak it no^ to please women) no more then a man can live without
meat, or continu^^ without clothing.

Q. Who was the first that taught (...) man to live an active life?

A. (...): and as Cicero says, such a life is very agreeable to God.

Q. What is virtue?

A. It is an Harmony, or pleasant accord of Nature, with other good things
agreeing thereunto.

Q. What is the chiefest goodness, according to the Philosophers opinion?

A. To feel no kind of sorrow, as Hierom Rhodiotto says: albeit that the
S^orques and Epicurians affirm the contrary.

Q. Why is Lycurgus amongst all the Lawmakers esteemed the best?

A. Because he did observe and keep that which he* himself commanded.

Q. Why did the Poets feign that Prudence was borne or (...) of the brain of
Jupiter

A. To declare that wit and understandings (whereof Prudence does spring) which
causes us to foresee all things undivine.

Q. Wherefore do the Poets fain^ Philocteres to be banished from his
Country, and to wander by Hills and Dales, daily weeping and sighing?

A. To declare that there is no sorrow nor accident, how weighty soever it be,
which ought to induce man to violate nature, or to kill himself.

Q. Wherein consists true force?

A. To abide and support all hard things, and not to imbase his heart in
adversity.

Q. Wherefore did the Ancients (...) before they did sacrifice?

A. To declare that all disordinate thoughts proceeding of beastly affections,
be displeasant to God.

Q. For what reason did the ancient Romans term God to be Optimum Maximum,
so much to say, right good and very great: And wherefore did they place Optimum
before Maximu^?

A. The one Epitheton, signifies virtue, and the other puissance or mig^^^ yet
virtue was always preferred as he chiefest.

Q. What moved Anoxagoras to give all his goods to his friends?

A. The more franckly to play the part of a Philosopher, to yield unto heaven
our true Country (whereof we do take our beginning and issue) the first
fruits of our minds and spirits.

Q. What was the cause that Accius the Poet did make a Comedy entitled Il
Cavallo Troiano: in English the Trojan horse?

A. A desire he had to reprehend those that are slow of understanding, that
were ignorant to use time before necessity, and not afterward when ill fortune
did succeed. Whereof rose the proverb. Sero sapiunt Phryger?

Q. Wherefore did the Romans ^earme Fabius Maximus to be the Targ^t of the
Roman people, and Marcellus the Sword.

A. Because the one gave himself to maintain the Commonwealth, but the other
was eger and sharp to revenge the enemies of the same. And yet both they were
set together by the Senates order, that the gravity of the one might moderare
the hardiness of the other.

Q. Wherefore is Pompeius reproved by certain Historiographers, not to have
been skillful and wise enough?

A. Because at the journey of Pharsalia which he lost, he left in an Island
called Corsu, a puissant Army, wherewith he might have stopped the passage of
Caesar?

Q. What was the cause of the death of the Emperor Otho?

A. The hazarding of the battle (...) his enemies being as it were in despair.

Q. What difference is there between^ prudence and vivacity of wit, otherwis^
called pregnancy of mind, or Sag^ city?

A. Prudence gives good counsel and the pregnant wit comprehende^ and judges
the counsel which is mo^^ requisite, the one being necessary f^^ the other.

Q. Wherefore was Paulus Minuti^ the companion of Fabius, esteemed (...)
prudent and wise?

A. Because he took counsel of himself in that which he knew, and followed
the counsel of others in that which he did not understand esteeming him to be
a sot and a beast, that had not good advice in himself, and would not obey
them that had experience.

Q. What is the duty and property of them which be accounted to be fine witted?

A. To use their wits to each device and quality like unto the fish Balena,
which is a great fish in the Sea, having a ^hole in his head, wherewith he
takes ^yre, thrusting forth abundance of water, sometimes here, and sometimes
there.

Q. Why was Lysander so flouted* and mocked of his own people?

A. Because he ^aunted and boasted himself to be the kinsman of Hercules, not
doing any sign or token of verrue: (...) all that he did was by trumpery and
deceit.

Q. Wherefore was Helanicus of E^^irots so greatly esteemed for his subtil^y?

A. Because all that he did was for ^he public wealth, (...) and not for his
own particular profit.

Q. What is Equanimity, a virtue so much praised?

A. It is a certain pureness and constancy of mind, wherewith we continue
alike in prosperity and adversity, not being pussed up with pride, or abasing
our mind. Socrates the Philosopher, and Antoninus Pius, the Emperor, was
excellent in that virtue.

Q. Where is the seat of the affections in our body?

A. Joy rests in the spleen, Anger (...) the gall, Fear in the heart,
Lechery (...) the Liver.

Q. What manner of thing is modesty?

A. It is a moderation of our appetite which obeys reason.

Q. For what respect did Antioch^ give so great thanks unto the Roman^ for
leaving him so little a Country which before was a King so mighty, (...)
Prince puissant?

A. His modesty did him him to u^derstand, that he was discharged of great
burden, which hindered him ^^fore oftentimes from sleep, from eating and
drinking.

Q. Wherein did Tiberius most of all declare his modesty?

A. In that being desired to take his people, he said that it was the office of
a good Shepherd to sheare his sheep, and not to pull of their skins.

Q. Dionysius of Siracusa, wherein did he show himself praise worthy?

A. For being so modest, that although he were come to the estate of a King:
yet he would not alter the manner of apparel, which he ware when he was a
private man.

Q. What manner of thing do ye call shamefastness?

A. It is a certain passion which makes the person blush, specially in any
good and honest matter, and proceeding of a certain honesty of mind. Many have
termed it to be the mistress of comeliuesse, and the mother of honesty.

Q. What was the cause of the victory that the Persians had against Astiages?

A. The shame that their wives (...) unto them when they fled from the battle,
who seeing them run away like sheep, lifting up their garments, smoc^ and
all, said unto them, whether will (...) and dastardly men, you (...) dare not
stand to the battle. Whither will ye fly: Is there no way left for you, but
to pierce again the wombes o^ your mothers: Which man like word^ although
proceeding from women mouths, made that dastardly Nation to return and gain
the battle.

Q. Wherein appeared the honesty (...) Socrates, so much (...)?

A. Many and sun^^y ways: but specially in this point, for when he hea^^ any
one talk dishonestly, he hid hi^ head with his cloak, until the oth^^ had
done his tale?

Q. What is Abstinence?

A. It is a virtue of the mind, bridl^ by reason, drawing us from disordina^^
appetites, which we have after the good of this world.

Q. What is Continence?

A. It is a virtue of the mind, which makes our sensual appetites subject to
reason: so that by Abstinence, covetousness is refrained: and through
Continence, Leachery is chastised.

Q. Who amongst the ancients was esteemed most abstinent?

A. Paulus Emitius, chiefly in the victory that he achieved of the Persians:
and in the enterprises of Spain and Macedonia: Lucius Acummius at the
overthrow of Corinthe?

Q. And in Continency who has excelled amongst the ancients?

A. Scipio the great, Alexander, and Ca^sar?

Q. What is it that made the Corinthians infamous?

A. Because they sold their Daughters, to enrich themselves.

Q. What was the cause of the defa^mation of Messalina the wife of Claudi^^s?

A. Her dishonest intemperance and filthy lust, who would not stick to
adventure combat with any adventurous Knight.

Q. How did Hieron of Siracusa (...) so great fame, being but the bastar^ Son
of a poor laboring man?

A. By great temperance, honest and valor: which did so shine in him that he
was made Captain Genera^ of the Syracusiant, amongst the Ca^^thaginians: and
in the end he beha^ved himself so well, that he was ma^^ King.

Q. What things are very (...)?

A. Those, which without respec^ either of profit or commodity, (...) deserve
of themselves to be commen^ded. And honesty is no other thing, (...) a
provocation always to do vertuo^ deeds.

Q. What was the cause of the glor^ of Theseus?

A. The affection that he had to follo^ the virtues of Hercules: which cause
him continually to be troubled both^ body and mind.

Q. In what virtue did Pompon^^ Atticus excel?

A. In modesty, the companion (...) honesty. Such also were Hanniball, Publius
Surus, Anaxilaus, Epictetus, and King Philip of Macedonia.

Q. What is the profit of Chastity?

A. To rule and govern the affecti^ns of the mind, to chase away all
disor^^nate appetites, to counterpoise riot ^ith reason, and in all things to
be ^onstant.

Q. What difference is there between hastity and shamefastness?

A. Chastity is a general chastisement four affections, be it either leachery,
(...), or covetousness. But shame^^^nesse is tried only in containing (...)
leachery. Those women then that ^ chaste, are such as have not commit^d
offense, neither in body nor thought, at the shamefast are those which have
(...) to do with any man but with (...) own husbands.

Q. How did Evagoras King of Cy^^s obtain so great renown?

A. By not deceiving any man for ^^ping of his promise, gratifying his ends,
for his valor, for being enemy to vice, and all evil thoughts.

Q. What is moderate sparing properly?

A. It is a virtue near unto modesty which is so necessary unto man, the
without it, he falls into many vices, causes man to spend nothing
superflu^ously, and to spare nothing that is necessary to be spent.

Q. How may we godlily increase (...) goods?

A. By moderate sparing, and by tif^ i^ the earth.

Q. What is sobriety?

A. It is a virtue that rules drink^ and eating: without which, other v^^^tues
are obscure.

Q. How may that man become (...) that is insatiable in drinking and (...)?

A. By considering the follies which they do that are drunk.

Q. Why did the Lacedaemonians (...) in their Feasts always to cause one (...)
be made drunk, for example unto the^ children?

A. To make their children to abhor^ beastly vice.

Q. How ought a man to drink?

A. With such moderation that he ^ay abate his thirst: avoiding drun^ennesse,
the disease of the head and sto^acke, which continually do follow ^e same.

Q. What did obscure the great ver^^es of King Philip and Alexander the ^eat,
his Son?

A. Drunkenness: the like happened ^^so to Cyrus the less, to Cato, Proma^us,
and to the Son of Cicero.

Q. What signifies wine so disordi^^tely taken?

A. The blood of the earth, converted (...) to poison.

Q. What made Masinissa of such ^eat estimation?

A. Sobriety, and his being content ^^ith such victuals, as the meaner
Soul^ers used to eat. And by that sobriety (...) behaved himself so well,
that at ^^urescore and six years of age, he be^^t a child, and at fourscore
and ^^velve, he vanquished the Carthagini^^s?

Q. Why did Solon ordain that man should lie with his wife but th^^ times in a
month only?

A. To accustom his people by li^^ and little to shamefastness: a thi^^ that
advances not only women, (...) also men.

Q. How may a man avoid all hor^^^ble and fear efnll things?

A. By virtue: by which thing only, most cruel Tyrants have beene^^ formed.

Q. Wherefore did Democritus (...) out his eyes?

A. To the intent he might not (...) the prosperity and insolency of (...)
Country men, which lived without (...) stice, and all king of virtue.

Q. What privilege have brave (...) valiant men?

A. To be none of fortunes sub^jects.

Q. Is it possible to find perfect val^^ in one man alone?

A. Homer thinks not so, a^^ holds opinion, that force and val^^ in respect
of other virtues in the sa^^ many times receive certain furious ^^ults.
Likewise he supposes that, ^^e be many kinds of valor: for he ^^seth
Achilles for his anger, and ^^sses for his wisdom.

Q. Why is it requisite for a Soldier (...) Choleric?

A. Because Choler stirs up the ^^rt, and enflameth the spirit. That is
^^ce, says Homer, which enters in at (...) nose, and chafeth the blood.

Q. Amongst moral virtues, which (...) he best?

A. I think it to be force, which by virtue makes a man not to fear ^^th in
an honorable enterprise, and ^^ueth his heart to justice and wife^^me.

Q. Who was the first that rewarded ^^ur with precious gifts?

A. Bacchus was the first that gave ^^sents unto valiant Soldiers, (...) as
^ownes, Spears, Chains, Victories, ^^^ures, and Helmets.

Q. How did the wise define that ^^tue?

(...). Diversely. The Disciples of Socrates said, that it was a virtue, which
will* man not to fear adverse fortune: (...) whom agreed Chrysippus. The
Stoiq^^ said, that it was an affection of the pa^sionate mind, which made them
obe^^^ent to the laws without any fear. T^^ Scholars of Plato said, that it
is a s^^ and stedfa means to chase aw^^ and receive (when time serves) (...)
things which seem horrible. Aristo^^ faith, that it is a mean between
hard^nesse and fear.

Q. What makes a man to be (...) and valiant?

A. Desire of honor and g^^^ry.

Q. Itainus the Soldier of Antigon^^ did he despise death for glories sake?

A. No: but was content to dye, ^^^cause being a very wicked person, (...)
abhorred life.

Q. What means it that Timothe^^ the Musician, always when he li^^ could
cause Alexander the great to en^^ battle, and take upon him arms (...)
weapons, and yet could never move (...) brain of Sardanapalus?

A. That proceeded of the nature of ^^her of them, which could not be alte^^
without great difficulty.

Q. Is there nothing besides Choler (...) does make a man to be vali^^?

A. Sorrow makes a man to lowre though the true valiant man is con^^nt both in
sorrow and harms, and ^^weth always a good face.

Q. They that chafe through Choler, sorrow, may they be called vali^^?

A. No: but rather hardy, cruel, and ^^^ous.

Q. Do you think it a good thing to revenged upon the enemies?

A. Yea: if the revengment be done by ^^ue and valor of heart, and not by a
^^mon.

Q. What is the property of a valiant^^?

A. Not to fear that thing which ^^heth fearful unto him: and that ^^ly for
a zeal that he has to honor (...) not by constraint.

Q. Think you that despair does (...)

Q. Think you that despair do^^ not sometimes inflame the hearts of (...) to
be courageous and valiant?

A. Virgil thinks yea, by saying th^^ Vna salno victis nullam sperare
sal^^^tem. But I suppose that despair in^flameth our hearts against our selv^^
and not against others.

Q. Think you also that necess^^ makes a man valiant?

A. J would suppose so: for so (...) as necessity constrains a man to (...)
what he list. And so were the Ambro^^ans constrained by their wives (...) fight.

Q. Why did the Santians kill the^^ selves?

A. Because they were in despair th^^ they should never recover their libe^^ty.

Q. May a man place hope among the number of Moral virtues?

A. Many have esteemed it to be (...) Queen of virtues.

Q. Who is the Master of (...) things?

A. Use. For which cause the Sould^^ that is not accustomed to battle, da^^eth
scarce show his face to the Enemy.

Q. Whereunto ought a good Captain principally to have respect?

A. To common profit, rather then (...) his own particular commodity. Such was
the advice that Pelopidas the General of Thebes, received of his wife, as he
was going to the wars.

Q. What is the chief end of Magnificence?

A. To get friends.

Q. Why were Caesar's gifts best esteemed, although they were less then others?

A. Because he gave them with a good will, and with his own hand. Voluntary
gifts do engender more favor toward him that gives them, and binds him
more that receives them.

Q. Why did the Persians establish a law against those that were ingrate?

A. Because they knew ingratitude to be the spring of all vice, the enemy of
nature, the poison of amity, and the ruin of gentleness, and benignity.

Q. What was the cause of the death of Epaminondas?

A. Because he would have saved his Army besides Mantinea. The like did Paulus
Aemilius, although Varro his companion did the contrary, through whose temerity
and negligence, the Romans received that great overthrow at Cannas.

Q. Whereof came it, that the ordinances which Lycurgus made for the state of
the wars, were so greatly esteemed?

A. Because they still tended to honorable victory.

Q. How like you the saying of Caesar, which is that a man ought not to violate
Justice, but at such time, when he desires to reign and govern?

A. To enterprise and do things disticill and great, without hope of
recompense, and with modesty and sobriety to talk of the same.

Q. What is the principal virtue that a Prince can desire?

A. To aspire to be the best in doing well.

Q. What moved Caesar to send home Prolome King of Alexandria his prisoner,
considering the ill-wills that the Alexandrines bare unto him?

A. Because he thought to win more honor to fight with a King, then with a
multitude without a head.

Q. What was the overthrow of Galba.

A. Because he committed his government to another, and would not understand
the state of the same, but referred all to certain naughty persons which were
about him.

Q. Wherefore would not Alexander give ear to the counsel of Parme^^nio, who
advised him to assail his enemies in the night?

A. Because he esteemed that, rather ^o be the act of a thief then of a
valiant Captain, which ought to fight by virtue and not by policies.

Q. What manner of thing is Sloth?

A. Tully does say, that it is a certain ^^eare which the slothful man
conceives in himself of the labor and pain that he ought to do, and is
contrary to ^iligence. Demosthenes was not to be reprehended herein, for he
was angry that day that he saw an Artificer or crafts man rise before him, for
which cause, Pithias the Orator was wont to say, that the works of Demosthenes
did smell of the oil and Candle.

Q. What was the cause that Tiberius the Emperor lost the whole Country of
Armenia, which was taken from him by the Persians, Missia by the Dane^ and
Samothracians, and France by the Almaines?

A. Sloth and fear of travel, giving himself day and night to the delights
of Ladies in the Island of Cypres.

Q. Why did the people of Saba the next neighbors of the Nabathei, give
themselves so much to Idleness, considering the diligence and industry of the
said Nabathei their next neighbors?

A. The fertility of Saba made them slothful, and the barrenness of the
Country of the Nabathei, made them vigilant and industrious.

Q. Why did Euripides introduct Theseus to consider and talk of all the evils
that can happen to man?

A. Because a stripe foreseen, does hurt a man the less.

Q. What is Mercy properly?

A. It is a certain heaviness arising of another man's grief: which, as some
say* ought not to move the minds of the good, but rather they ought to content
themselves with their innocence, without taking pain or care what the wicked
do sustain and abide.

Q. What is Felicity?

A. It is an abundance of spiritual, corporal, and earthly goods.

Q. Why was Archagathus the Surgeon, made a Citizen of Rome?

A. Because he was very merciful and cunning in his cures: that the like of
whom, the Romans never saw.

Q. Why was Antonius the Emperor surnamed Pius?

A. Because he reigned without effusion of blood, and was so merciful as ever
Caesar, Alexander, or Vespatian was.

Q. Why do soldiers love hunting?

A. Because it is like unto the wars: which is the place where every man may
learn to live virtuously.

Q. Which is the godliest exercise that a man can learn?

A. Husbandry: in which there is not only profit but pleasure.

Q. Where is the best walk that can be found?

A. That walking place which is furnished with wise men.

Q. Whereof proceeded the great estimation of Homer?

A. Because his works are so full of learning, and very good to encourage men's
hearts to virtue.

Q. Why were the Greek Authou^^ counted great liars?

A. Because they confounded Histories with fables: such as Herodotus and
Hellanicus be.

Q. What is the property of Justice?

A. To deceive no man: even as the property of wisdom is not to be deceived.

Q. When is it lawful to lie?

A. For safeguard of the goods or the life of another: as Chilo did, when he
forsware himself, to save the life of a certain man.

Q. What is the property of a glorious man?

A. To believe rather that which is spoken of him, although it be false, then
that which he perceives indeed to be in himself. For that cause was the fable
of Juno and Ixion feigned.

Q. What is the property of a vile and naughty man?

A. To hide the truth for fear: which never chances to the valiant and
honest, who cannot abide that any man should lie.

Q. Why did the Poets say, that verity (...) memory and time?

A. Because she cannot be long hidden.

Q. From whence came the wheel that Ixion does turn continually, as the Poets
do feign?

A. It is the true token of a common liar, who, the nearer he thinks he is to
virtue, the further he is from it.

Q. Why did the Egyptians ordain that a vagabond and common Jester should not
be taken for a witness?

A. Because such people are not worthy to be regarded; and for a little bribe,
they are ready to all mischief.

Q. Wherefore did the Romans forbid playing for money, except it were in
warlike exercises: as to throw the Bar, to Dance, to wrestle, to vaute, to play
at defense, and other such like pastimes?

A. Because in other pastimes, Fortune rules, and not virtue.

Q. Why did Apelles the Painter set his tables abroad for every man to view?

A. That he might understand men's judgment of his faults. As appeared by a
Cobbler, who found fault in a pantofle or slipper which Apelles had made.

Q. What mischiefs do Flatterers bring?

A. They corrupt all good manners, they tell lies in stead of truth, they do
evil in stead of good, vice in stead of virtue, and are ordained to destroy
the good, and those that do righteously.

Q. Why would not Socrates suffer himself to be praised of a young man?

A. Because that praise in presence, is a kind of flattery.

Q. Why did the Romans so much disdain Prusias King of Bythinia?

A. Because he was the greatest flatterer that ever was borne. Insomuch that
his flatteries were the cause that it was ordained at Rome, that no King should
come thither, without license of the Senate obtained before.

Q. What is Flattery properly?

A. It is a vice proper and particular to vile minds, to women and cowards: for
it proceeds of nothing else but of fear.

Q. What is shamefastness?

A. It is a kind of fear to fall into any infamy, or to be blamed for any deed
doing, or to be worthily reprehended for some fault. Therefore Cicero did
term it to be the Tamer of evil thoughts; for she withdraws man, and
preserves him from committing any offense.

Q. To whom ought a man to be shamefast?

A. To children only; for a man of age it is unmeet to blush, and to say, I
had not thought to do it,

Q. Who is he that worthily may be counted valiant?

A. He that loves life, and fears not death.

Q. What is death?

A. It is an end: from which a man ought not to retire, but to go to it
joyfully, and as some say, it is a gift given of God to men, by a singular
grace.

Q. Why did Mallius say in the oration that he made at Rome against Furius and
Aemilius, that envy was bleare-eyed, and had a very evil sight?

A. Because that the envious man considers those things which are next him,
and not them a far off, which should be more to be envied, if envy were a
virtue.

Q. Why is Envy compared unto fire?

A. Because it always mounteth: for there is no man so mighty, that Envy will
stick to assail, and surmount him also, if it be possible.

Q. What was the cause of the death of Socrates, being so innocent a man?

A. The envy of the Athenians: a usual thing in that City which caused also
the death of Themistocles, and Aristides the just?

Q. Why do the Poets feign, that Marcias was beaten of Apollo, and Thamiras
had his eyes put out by the Muses?

A. To declare that how mighty soever a man be, he has some body that goes
about to make himself equal with him: which is a passion almost like unto
Envy, but not so much different from virtue.

Q. What was the cause of the sudden death of Diodorus the Sophister?

A. The thought that he took, because he could not resolve a question that
Stilpho ye Philosopher put to him in pastime. And excessive thought ought not
to fall into the heart of a virtuous man.

Q. What mean the Poets, by feigning an Eagle always to gnaw the heart of
Prometheus?

A. To declare the continual study of Prometheus, who was very learned, and
wise in Astrology.

Q. Whereof comes it, that in the time of Ptolome there were found so many
Mathematicians: in the time of ^erxes so many pleasures; and in the time of
Nero so many Musicians?

A. Because subjects do always give their minds to that which pleases their
Prince.

Q. Wherein did Vespasian most declare his wicked nature?

A. Because he surrendered the greatest offices into the hands of the greatest
Bribers, that afterward he might have their goods confiscate.

Q. Why did the Persians ordain, that he which procured to establish new laws
amongst them, should be put to death?

A. That they might always continue in their old customs.

Q. How may the just and unjust be known?

A. By law and not by Nature.

Q. What is the foundation of Laws?

A. Virtue.

Q. How did Chrysippus paint Justice?

A. In form of a Virgin, having a severe, grave, and fearful countenance, and
yet nevertheless honorable, shame fast; humble, and full of Majesty.

Q. What is Nobility without virtue?

A. It is a thing stuffed with pride and violence.

Q. Show me I pray you, what things are contrary unto virtue, and which are
like thereunto?

A. The contrary of wisdom is foolishness, and the like to it is subtilty.
The contrary of Co^stancy is inconstancy, and his like obstinacy. Strength has
for his contrary feebleness of heart, and hardiness for his like. Injustice
is contrary to Justice: but Cruelty is kin to Justice.

Q. Why would not Plato return home to his City, although he was greatly
required thereunto by the people?

A. Because they would not understand just and reasonable causes: and because
he could not get them by any means to acknowledge the same.

Q. What is Innocence?

A. It is a certain nature so well engraven in the heart of a man, that it
causes him that he cannot, nor may not do hurt to any man.

Q. What is he that worthily deserserveth to be called happy?

A. He that goes about most of all to resemble God.

Q. Which be the virtues that do conduct or bring us to heaven?

A. Charity, faith, hope, piety, Religion, and godliness.

Q. What things are contrary to them?

A. Hatred, meredulity, despair, impiety, Hipocricy, and wickedness.

Q. Which are the moral virtues?

A. Prudence, Justice, strength, temperance, magnanimity, magnificence,
liberality, sloutnesse of courage, meekness, innocence, continence, gravity,
fidelity, and shamefastness.

Q. Which be the vices that are contrary to the said virtues?

A. Imprudence, Injustice, fury, intemperance, pride, vainglory, covetousness,
fearfulness, choler, noisomeness, incontinency, rashness, infidelity, and
holdnesse.

Q. Is virtue the sovereign goodness it self, or the way to attain
thereunto?

A. It is the Ladder to climb thereunto.

Q. May vices be turned into virtues, and virtues into vices, by the variety ^f
the time, places and customs, or no?

A. Yea, considering the diversity that (...) amongst the people, in their
manner of livings.

Q. May a young man be wise?

A. Wisdom comes not, but by long space.

Q. Nobility, does it proceed of virtue?

A. Yea: and of nothing else.

Q. What is requisite in an History?

A. That it declare first the Counsels, and after the deed, and thirdly the
issue, called of the Latin Authors, Even^^um.

Q. Why were Laws established?

A. To bridle the wickedness of our minds.

Q. Which is the most dangerous Ignorance?

A. Not to know God: and afterward not to know himself.

Q. May a Captain overcome Fortune with prudence?

A. Very hardly, considering that fortune is by the Poets made a goddess, and
placed in heaven.

Q. Why is vertie so much to be beloved or embraced?

A. Because she is conformable to reason.

Q. Why ought not wise men to fear death, but rather to desire the same?

A. Because that our life is nothing else, but a prison.

Q. What Poets are to be eschewed and chased?

A. Those that write only to please and delight the ears, and to corrupt
youth.

Q. Whereof consists the force of an Army?

A. Some say that it rests in council, others in the fortune of the
Captain; some say that it consists wholly in the hearts of the soldiers;
other in strong holds; and some in that the soldiers be well armed and
appointed.

Q. What wars be lawful?

A. Those that be made to obtain peace.

Q. Why was Octavian the Emperor esteemed happy?

A. Because he reigned in peace 56. years.

Q. Is it a fable or History, that Gyges, by virtue of a Ring that he had, was
made King of Lydia?

A. If it be true that Polycrates the Tyrant, by reason of a stone called a
Sardone, did avoid all dangers; and if it be credible, that Appollonius did
live a hundredth and thirty years, always as it were at the flower of his age,
by virtue of seven Rings that Iarcas gave him; and if a man may believe the two
Rings forged by Moses, the one for love, the other for oblivion; and if the
Ring of Bacchus be true, this History of Gyges may also be believed.

Q. Why did they prepare Arkes and ^ageants of triumph at Rome?

A. To stir men to virtue.

Q. What was the true meaning of the three Syrenes?

A. They were three harlo^s, which with deceits, and with sweetness of their
voices, used to deceive those that were given to Banquets and pleasure.

Q. Why was the Temple of Diana of Ephesus erected?

A. Some think that it was built by the will of God: Some say that it was for
Religion, and for the pride of men.

Q. Why is it said, that worldly pleasure is like to a Laborinth or Maze?

A. Because the entry thereof is easy, but the coming out very hard.

Q. Why did Nature make Mercury?

A. To make Alchimists fools, and covetous men poor.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that the Philosophers of our time, are for the most
part covetous, and of evil life and manners?

A. They turn virtue into vice, because they see Princes to make (...) account
of those that be virtuous.

Q. Whereof proceeds the credit that Flatterers have of Princes?

A. Princes for the most part be great lovers of themselves: and therefore do
love those that do praise them: in which point they do resemble certain
beasts which can scarce see at noone days, and in the dark their eyes be very
clear.

Q. Whereof comes it, that dogs do always bark at those that be ill
apparelled, ragged and torn like beggars.

A. Those are the dogs of the Cities, accustomed only to see people richly and
well apparelled; and contrariwise the Country Dogs do never bark at any
peasant or beggar.

Q. Why is wine forbidden women in some Countries?

A. Because it provokes lechery: a thing very uncomely in women.

Q. What means this Proverb. Take away the light, and every woman (...)?

A. Perhaps because they would be all naught, if shame fastness did not let
them.

Q. Whereof comes it, that for y^ most part the learned have very evil sight?

A. J^ comes of the paper which they do oftentimes handle: for there is
nothing more hurtful to the sight then whiteness. Or else we might rather
say, that much study does cool the parts of the body, specially those, which
are cold by nature, as the brain, the stomach, and hinders digestion: in
such wise, that by evil digestion, (...) engenders in the body, and stops
the conduit; then the eyes a^ partakers of such passions, are debilitated.

Q. Of what power is Negromanci^^ and Wit^^craft?

A. If a man may believe the dream of many writers, it can stay the course of
the Element and of the Sun, it can make the Moon to be as red as blood
appease the winds, make the earth to tremble, enchant Beasts, and cause (...)
Man or woman to be loved perforce.

Q. But how can the Negromance do such strange things?

A. With perfumes, conjuration^ ceremonies, charms, and characters.

Q. What is he that is like unto the Image of Sardanapalus?

A. A man well proportioned of body, but of brutish nature.

Q. What does Fortune represent with her apple of Gold?

A. That good spirits are accompanied with good Fortune.

Q. What means a Plow, in the hands of a Labourer?

A. That travel is the true treasure of man.

Q. What signifies a Wolf carrying a Lamb in his mouth?

A. A man that cares not what hurt ^e does to another.

Q. What betokens a man with his Purse open?

A. That a wise man spares nothing for his health.

Q. What signifies a Ship sunk in the bottom of the Sea?

A. That the peril of other ought to make us take better heed.

Q. What does the Ants carrying of ^orne represent unto us?

A. Those that live of the sweat of other men's brows. They teach us also in
youth to provide for age, as they in Harvest do provide to live withal in
Winter.

Q. How may we represent gratitude and acknowledging of good turns which we
have received?

A. By a Storke that nourishes the ^^^mme.

Q. And great travel with little profit, how should we paint that?

A. By a child that swimmeth.

Q. What is to be understood by a Serpent?

A. That an evil disposed person, cannot accustom himself to goodness,

Q. What signifies a man that is painted with Gold in the right hand, and fire
in the left?

A. That he is not worthy to be a partaker of the felicity, which has done no
friendship in time of adversity.

Q. What does he betoken that breaks his head against the wall?

A. That he esteems his life but a little, which contendeth with great men.

Q. What represents a Quadrant unto us?

A. That nothing ought to be done without counsel.

Q. What is Envy?

A. An horrible monster.

Q. Where is her habitation?

A. At the Court.

Q. If she should happen to be banished from thence, whither would she go?

A. To Monasteries and Conuents.

Q. Whereof proceeds it, that children do not love the father so well as
the father does the children?

A. Love is always advanced, and ^oth never turn back again especially for
the desire that a man has to make his posterity perpetual. Or rather it
proceeds of this, that the father has nothing of the son, but the soon has
and holds all of the father.

Q. Whereof comes it, that although every man is desirous of knowledge, yet
very few do apply themselves to scien^es and Art^?

A. Because to attain to sciences, great ^aine is to be taken: and is subject
to his pleasure, a thing contrary to contemplation; or else some do want the
^ight way and mean to study.

Q. Why is a Philosopher painted naked?

A. Because both in verity and Philo^ophy, there needs not coverture, but is
necessary that all things be handled ^ainly and purely, and ought to be ^oyd
of all sophistical colors and car^all affections.

Q. Why did Euripides say in his Tragedy entitled Medea, that women's wit is
unapt to goodness, but very well inclined to unhappiness?

A. Because a Woman is a creature unperfect: and where Perfection is not, there
can rest nothing that is good.

Q. Why is the counsel that a woman gives upon the sudden of much
estimation, and that which she does devise and study nothing worth?

A. Even as unreasonable creatures are induced and provoked to their actions,
without any resistance, by a certain superior occasion, which is Nature: even
so the Woman, although of her self she be evil, yet the understanding and
knowledge that Nature has given her (which will not be deceived, no^ yet abuse
or deceive any person) does provoke her at the first motion to give good
advice. But if she have leisure by study to follow her own inclination, all
that she will do shall be little worth.

Q. Why be women more covetous the^^ men?

A. Because they (...) will set by them (...) riches.

Q. Why be reasonable creatures (...) short life?

A. The perfection of transitory thing (...) not measured by time: for the life
of reasonable creatures, although it be ^^orter, yet is more desired then the
life brute beasts.

Q. Why is death called the last of terrible thiugs?

A. Because she is terrible both to them ^^t think to be immortal, and also
ill livers, and to those that dye of a ^^lent death: but not to others.

Q. Why is sneesing deemed a good ^^ne, and not belching?

A. Because sneesing comes from ^e head, which is as it were the Lord ^^d
Ruler of the body.

Q. Why is it a thing so shameful (...) ill a woman?

A. Because she is weak, and not able resist.

Q. Why did the Painter Phidias, (...) Venus setting her feet upon a ^^rtoise?

A. To declare that a woman of honor is no runner out of the doors, but
keeps her self within her house.

Q. Whereof comes it, that many Ladies have so greatly esteemed the leaves
and seed of Agnus Castus?

A. Because it is enemy to Leache^y.

Q. Why did nature ordain, that when Bees do engender; no man can see them?

A. To teach us shamefastness and modesty.

Q. Why are clothes of silk bette^ esteemed, then those of wool?

A. Because silk is more fine and light, better colored, more bright and
orient then woollen.

Q. What is it that breeds envi^ most in man?

A. To be sad and Melancholicke.

Q. What manner of motion has envy?

A. Slow and heavy.

Of what age is she?

A. Old, crooked, withered, having pale and lean face, her tongue infected
with poison.

Q. From whence comes the beauty that is in the necks of Pigeons, and in
Peacockes feathers?

A. Of the variety and diversity of colors.

Q. What is the property of man's heart?

A. To faigne and dissemble.

Q. Why is the Camaeleon so marvailous?

A. Because he transformeth himself into all colors.

Q. Whereof comes the brightness that is in rotten wood?

A. Nature shows us thereby, that there is nothing so abject, but it has
some virtue.

Q. What is the property of the Sirenes?

A. To bring death by singing.

Q. Wherein consist the effects of virtue?

A. In words and in deeds.

Q. How may a man seem gentle in his behavior?

A. By his gate or going, by countenance, by his manner of living, and above
all things by his civility.

Q. How are secret advertisements disclosed?

A. By letters, by weapons, in love and by courses of arms.

Q. How must a man do reverence?

A. By putting off his cappe, and bowing down his head.

Q. How ought a man to obey his superiors?

A. With fidelity goodwill, devotion, fear and hope.

Q. How is a man modest in his behaviors?

A. When his hand is on his stomach, his eyes looking on the ground, and his
mouth shut.

Q. In Chiromancy, what signifies it when the mount of the Sun is elevated,
or bowing downward?

A. It betokens much good, or much evil.

Q. And that of Mercury.

A. Goodness or dullness of spirit.

Q. And that of the Moon?

A. Happy or unfortunate voyages.

Q. And Mars?

A. Good or evil fortune in battle.

Q. And the Triangles?

A. Strength: even as Angels do signify riches.

Q. How is the life of man divided?

A. Into a life contemplative, civil, solitary, and wild.

Q. What thing is most hard to be tamed?

A. Necessity: which the Gods themselves cannot resist,

Q. What is requisite to be considered of our birth?

A. The conception the form, the birth, and nourishment.

Q. From whence comes deceit?

A. Of Trust.

Q. What be the properties of a wise man?

A. To rule the Stars, to know and govern himself, not to quail through
the assaults of Fortune, with good discretion to spend the time, not to be
afraid of death, and to live neither in fear nor hope.

Q. What is the state of a covetous man?

A. Never to have rest, and to be always gaping after riches.

Q. What is the estate of Courtiers?

A. To be nourished with hope.

Q. What is the estate of him that loves virtue?

A. To aspire always to honorable things.

Q. Which are the goods of the soul?

A. Virtue and her train: honor, glory, quickness of spirit, memory,
counsel and discipline.

Q. Wherein consists true Philosophy?

A. To endeavor to live virtuously.

Q. What is a chaste woman?

A. A miracle of miracles, the path way to immortality, a heavenly thing, and
an inestimable fortress.

Q. Choniclers, can they set forth (...) illustrate the fortunes of Noble men?

A. Yea.

Q. And Poets likewise?

A. They do no less delight, then instruct.

Q. Which be the goods of the body?

A. Nobility, riches, friends, dignity, an honest wife, many children.

Q. What is Felicity?

A. Fortunate virtue.

Q. Which be the true goods, and which the counterfeit of the body, of the
soul, and of Fortune?

A. The counterfeit goods of the body are deformity and sickness: Of the
soul, vice and ignorance: and of Fortune, base estate and poverty.

Q. What is Misery?

A. It is a vicious and unfortunate life, full of sorrows and perils.

Q. Wherein consists the Music of the soul?

A. In temperance, but, as some hold opinion in strength.

Q. What is the office of an excellent, Painter?

A. To know sundry kinds of beasts the differences of their sex, their age,
their properties, and other things.

Q. Why were the wise women called Sybillae, esteemed Divines?

A. Because they were the Secretaries and Trumpets of divine Mysteries.

Q. Whether is it harder to vanquish a Monster, or to bridle the affections?

A. The affections are most hard to be subdued.

Q. What is the office of a Conqueror?

A. To pardon the conquered.

Q. What be the properties of Harlots and Courtizans?

A. To be ^ull of wily fetches, damnable devises, tyrannous, scornful,
subtle, ^icorous, evil conditioned, with ^lluring looks, and shameless
gestures.

Q. Why do men love to wear^ings?

A. Because the same by circle resembling the Heaven, and the precious stone
the Star, besides that, for the most part they are endowed with mavelous
virtue, they give also a ^ertaine gladness to the eye, and to the hand an
honor.

Q. How is the chastity of Lucretia known?

A. By her death: as the like of Penelope, by long abode, Virginia by the
disdain of her Father: the Almaig^^ Ladies by the halter, wherewith they were
hanged, Cloelia by the sive: Sulpitia by the Temple: Dido by he^ ashes: and
Hippo by her leaping into the Sea.

Q. Which be the instruments of Chastity?

A. The Target of Medusa, the Necklace of Jasper, and the Chain of Diamonds
and Topazes.

Q. Whereof comes it, that the Palm Tree represents Constancy?

A. Because the more it is oppressed, and the greater weight it has, the
better it is.

Q. What is the property of age?

A. To make a man to be good of experience, wise in his doings, of good
counsel when time requires, modest and temperate in word and deed, and grave
in considerations.

Q. Why ought a man to avoid carnal love?

A. Because his pleasures do incontinently decrease, but his sorrows do
still remain: and he is stuffed with vanities, dreams, and vain hopes.

Q. What is carnal love?

A. It is a fury full of care a strong sorrow, and a weak strength.

Q. What properties have the Fountains of Chius?

A. To make a man foolish and hard of understanding.

Q. And those of Paphlagonia?

A. To make them drunk that drink thereof.

Q. And that of Suses?

A. To make the teeth fall.

Q. And that of Tharsa?

A. To make the voice pleasant and harmonious.

Q. And that of the Sun?

A. To burn in the night, and to be cold in the day.

Q. What that of Garramanta?

A. To freese twice in the day, and burn twice in the night.

Q. What that of Examphus?

A. Bitter, filthy, and naught.

Q. What Fountains of Arabia?

A. To make cattle change their hair.

Q. What that of Epirus?

A. It lights that which is put out, and puts out that which is lighted.

Q. What that of Carthage?

A. To cast forth oil to heal beasts withal.

Q. What that of Neptune.

A. To make them to dye that do drink thereof.

Q. What the water of Dalmatida.

A. To make him amorous that drinks thereof.

Q. The Rubie, wherefore is it good?

A. Against poison.

Q. What is the Granat?

A. To exhilarate and content the person.

Q. The Balais, what is his property?

A. Never to be hot with any fire.

Q. What the Sapphire?

A. To make humble and chaste.

Q. The lacint stone, the Amethyst, Sardony, and the Asbeste, wherefore be they
good?

A. Against the plague, drunkenness evil fortune, and fire.

Q. The Chrysolith, Girassoll, the ^^sper, the Turquis, and the Agat, wherefore
serve they?

A. To reestablish the brain, to make invisible, to stanch blood, to escape a
danger, and to give good breath to him that runs.

Q. The Berall, the Cassidony, the Corneline, the Coral, the Crystal, and
the Adamant?

A. To make the person amorous to preserve the understanding, to mitigate
hatred and anger, to resist lightning, to quench the thirst, to draw flesh and
iron.

Q. Which is the most worthy person, the man or woman?

A. God has always given increase of excellency, unto the last creature, that
he created. And because the woman was last created, and is as it were the
chief of the work of God, she is truly the worthiest of all, being made of
the most excellent creature that God created, that is to say of man.

Q. Which is most subject to their appetites, either the man or the woman?

A. The woman was most purified in her creation: and so she is most subdued to
her appetites best.

Q. Tell me the properties of the Phoenix, the Eagle, the Swan, the Faucon, the
Popinjay, the Crane, the Pelican, the Peacocke, the Nightingale, the Turtle,
Dove, the Pie, and the Crow?

A. To be immortal, high minded, a good singer to have good wings, to be
beautiful, vigilant, amiable, glorious, delectable, sad, chaste, royal, and to
prognosticate the time to come.

Q. The Lark, the Cock, the Quail, the Swallow, and the Storke, what
properties have they?

A. To be pleasant, magnanimous delectable, sad, and mindful of a good turn.

Q. And the Lion, the Tygre, the Elephant, the Unicorn, the Bear, the Hyaena,
the Wolf, the Panther, the Rhinoceron, and the Leobert?

A. To be vigilant, swift, obedient, humble, furious, inhumaine, a devourer, to
smell well, to be fair, and of great courage.

Q. The Bever, the Heart, the Squerill, the fallow Dear, the Ape, the Fox, the
Gray or Brocke, the Marteine, and the Wolf engendered of the Heart?

A. To be providing, of long life, nimble, fearful, a counterfeiter, crafty,
sleepy, honorable, and spotted.

Q. What signifies the colors of white, green, yellow, golden, pale, Orange
color, blew, pale, and cornation color?

A. Truth, hope, gladness, diminut on of amity, inconstancy, heat, and
revengement, friendship, treason, and sorrow.

Q. The changeable color, the violet, the Sky color, and the Tawnie?

A. Inconstancy, government, high state and low.

Q. The mount of Venus being elevated or declined, what signifies the same?

A. Love or hatred.

Q. The Mount of Saturn, another token of Palmistry, what signifies the same?

A. Riches or poverty.

Q. How ought every age of man to be governed?

A. Sucking babes with milk, the Infant with rods, the child with shame, the
young man with good discipline, the man with arms, the old man with good
counsel, and the latter age is deceit and twice childishness.

Q. What be the titles of the Sun?

A. The Sun is called the Father of the day, the governor of nature, the
life of the body, the eye of the world, the heart of nature, the King of the
Stars, and the visible Son of God.

Q. Which be the wings of Time?

A. The time past, the time present, and the time to come.

Q. What be the teeth whereby Time does consume all things?

A. The day, the night, life and death.

Q. What is the cause that in our time men be not so excellent as they have
been in times past?

A. It is Nature which daily grows worse and worse, or else it is because
virtue is not so much commended or ^steemed at this present, as in times past
it has been. Or else it may be said, that it is the custom of each age to
make complaint of the present state.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

T. WYKES.
March. 14. 1639.

