TO THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF THE COMMONS house of Parliament, and to the
Committees, for Grieuances of the same house.
The humble petition of Edward Hopkins, William Barwell, John Bellamy, Robert
Vilet, John Walter, Robert Wright, and other Wharfingers in and near the
City of London.
WHereas the petitioners and all others using Wharfes for sale of Fuel within
and near the City of London, have time out of mind had the use of a
competent number of Carts and Carres as necessarily incident to their trade, to
carry wood and cole for the necessary use of his Majesty's subjects in and
about the said City, until some of the Woodmongers in An. 3. Iac. (without
the consent of the rest) did not only procure themselves to be incorporated by
his Majesty's letters patents, with power to make ordinances for government
thereof, but also for their own lucre, and to the intent to oppress his
Majesty's subjects and make a Monopoly thereof, upon pretense of better
government, have by color of the said Letters patents made ordinances, whereby
they have drawn the government of Carres into their own hands, and so
provided that neither Wharfinger nor other might use a Carre without license
from the said Company; and upon such as had license for use thereof, laid an
imposition of 17. s. 4. d. per annum, and other great taxes, as sometimes 40.
s. and at other times 4. lib. a man.

ANd the said Company having so settled their said government, did deny the
use of Carres to diverse owners of ancient Wharfes using the trade of
Woodmongers, and either sold them out to others for 40. and 50. lib. a
Car-roome, or else did farm them for 10 s and 12. s. the week; by which
means the said Car-roomes are appropriated to Tapsters, Ale-house-keepers,
Scriueners, Hostlers, Bakers, and such like, not using themselves either Wharfe
or Carre, and become private interests, and go as Chattels to Executours.

ANd when Wharfingers (in case of necessity) used any Carres for use of their
trade, themselves and their servants have at several times been (by color of
the said Letters patents) committed to prison by the Master and Wardens of the
said Company, and there detained sometimes 7 or 8 days; at other times their
Carres have been by the said Company or their ministers taken from them; and
when they have endeavored by course of law to relieve themselves, they have
been unduly staid.

BY which unjust courses the petitioners and diverse others being free of the
City of London, have been most unjustly denied the free use of Carres, and
thereby hindered from using their said trade, and enforced either to buy diverse
Car-roomes, or to farm them at the several rates aforesaid, to the utter
undoing of themselves, wives and children, to the great inhansing and raising
of the price of Fuel, and the great grieuance and oppression of his Majesty's
subjects in and near about the said City, and to the raising of the price of
cariages, with many other inconveniences.

IN tender consideration whereof, and for that the said Grant (accompanied with
ordinances as aforesaid) is not only a Monopoly, but the execution thereof
tends to deprive his Majesty's subjects of their liberty, by unlawful
imprisonment, contrary to the great Charter of the Liberties of England, and to
the hinderance of Legal proceedings and stop of Justice for their goods
unjustly and against law taken from them, and to the destruction of their
trade, and is otherwise enormous and extreme grievous to the petitioners and
others his Majesty's subjects, and may with the like color be put in execution
against Brewers, Scauingers, and diverse other trades; and for that the
petitioners are ready to make good each of the said generals, with diverse
particulars of every sort.

MAy it therefore please this honorably Assembly and high Counsel to take the
premises into consideration, and to appoint some time for the hearing thereof,
and to take such course to reform the said abuses, and punish the said
offenders, as to justice shall appertain:

And the petitioners (as most bound) shall ever pray for the long continuance
and happy prosperity of this honorable Assembly, and all the members thereof,
etc.

