THE CONVERsion of a Sinner: Faithfully translated out of Italian, by M. K.

Psalm. 36. verse. 27. Declina a malo, and fac Bonum.

Leave sin, ere sin leave thee: do good,
And both without delay:
Less fit, he will to morrow be,
Who is not fit to day.
LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for I. P.

To the Reader.
I Do here present unto thy favorable view (most courteous and gentle Reader)
this Pamphlet, which wanting a particular Patron, comes (as it were) a
begging unto thee, for no less then thy whole self, and that chiefly for
thine own good. The way to protect it, is to direct thy life by it, and to
suffer it to possess thee, as soon as thou have possessed it: which if thou be
so happy to accomplish, it will teach thee to win Love by fear: Life by
death: yea, everlasting happiness, by the transitory troubles of this
wretched world. And to give it just praise, in a word, it is a work of the
learned and spiritual Granado, aptly translated by a virtuous Gentleman, into
our English.

Lamentationes
Let Dread of pain for sin in after time,
Let Shame to see thy self ensnared so,
Let Grief conceived for foul accursed crime,
Let Hate of sin the worker of thy woe.
With Dread, with Shame, with Grief, with Hate enforce,
To deawe the cheeks with tears of deep remorce.
Carmen.
So Hate of sin shall make Gods Love to grow,
So Grief shall harbor Hope within thy heart:
So Dread shall cause the flood of Joy to flow:
So Shame shall send sweet Solace to thy smart.
So Love, so Hope, so Joy, so Solace sweet,
Shall make thy soul in heavenly bliss to fleet.
Vae.
Woe where no Hate does no such Love allure,
Woe where such Grief makes no such Hope proceed:
Woe where such Dread does no such Joy procure,
Woe where such Shame does no such Solace breed.
Woe where no Hate, no Grief, no Dread, no Shame
No Love, no Hope, no Joy, no Solace frame.
Non tardes conuerti ad Deum.
A brief Treatise, exhorting sinners to repentance, commonly called, The
Conversion of a sinner.
The Argument.
Sinners are commonly converted to God, through fear and dread. Who if they
read and well weigh holy writ, would tremble and quake, considering the iminent
perils wherein they dwell, and would divert from their wicked ways, to the
path of perfection, thereby the better to rid themselves from the gnawing
gripes of a guilty conscience, and dreadful torments due unto sin, which
otherwise God threateneth upon them.

The first Chapter.
WE read in the divine Scriptures, yt God, before he defaced and utterly rased
the City of Jerusalem, by Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, said to the Prophet
Jeremy in this wise: Iere 32.
Take a book not written in before, and write therein, that which I have said
unto thee, against Judah, and against Israel, from the first day I began to
talk with thee, even until this present day, and publish it in the presence
of all the people, thereby to prove, whether this Nation understanding the
manifold miseries I mind to bring upon the^, will revolt from their
iniquities, that in so doing, I may have compassion upon them, pardon their
offenses, and cease to exercise the whippe of my wrath which I have already
prepared. The Scripture adds further, that Baruch, Scribe to this Prophet,
pronouncing that which he had written, in the open audience and assembly of
the people and Princes, such horror and fear fell amongst them, that as me^
amazed, each beheld others, considering the heaps of woes and wretchedness
which then was uttered before them.

This is the way (gentle Reader) that God then practiced, and has don many
times since, to daunt men's hearts, and violently to wrest them from their
wickedness, as the most effectual and forcible means that may be found to
that purpose. For such and so great are the things which the Scriptures and our
faith daily tells us in the favor of virtue, and hatred of vice, that if
men would read them attentively, and ponder them advisedly, there is no doubt
but their hearts would relent, and their flesh tremble thereat, considering the
dreadful dangers wherein they dwell. Wherefore the cheifest thing that the
Prophet desired above all others, Deuteronomy. ^2
for the redress of this incurable malady, was this, when he said: I would
GOD this senseless generation which are utterly deuoyde of counsel, did
know, and thoroughly foresee what will happen upon them, which if they did (as
in duty they are bound to do) they could not possibly proceed or continue
longer in their so crooked course of life. But they are all sunk in the vile
sink of sensual delights: some hunt after honors, some for high promotions
and dignities, others beating their brains day and night how to cloth
curiously their carraine corpse, and to accomplish their carnal concupiscence:
have no time, eyes, nor heart, to look to their own estate, and with the eyes
of their mind, to meditate upon these things, whereof the Prophet speaks,
very properly, Osea. 7
saying: Behold, Ephraim is like unto a Dove deceived, that has no heart. For
the wicked have heart, wit, and will enough, to love, to covet, and to count
again, and again, upon the pelf of this world, but they have neither wit
nor will, once to think upon the glory of the world to come, which is so
infinite and so inestimable, that if the least part thereof be exactly tried
and examined in the mind, it would suffice to euacuate the filthy smoke which
has shut up the eyes of their understanding, and to make them to acknowledge
and confess their own error. For this cause therefore being moved
principally, I have thought it very requisite to set down certain persuasions
tending to this purpose, to the view of all that list to read or write them.
Following herein the example of the Prophet Jeremy, to show not only the
grievous calamities that God has prepared for the unjust, but also the perfect
bliss that he has provided for his servants the godly, that the evil
disposed returning from their wicked race, may be received into the favor and
mercy of God, released of their trespasses, and delivered from all those
punishments which God menazeth upon them in holy scriptures.

The Argument.
A Christian ought to consider his profession, that he is subject to death, and
must render a straight account in the other life, of all his doings here. Where
he shall discern sensibly, the cries and griefs intolerable, wherewith death
and sin rewards the ungodly, both here and in the world to come, there
neither the beauty and fine feature of the body, neither the flattery of false
fortune, nor yet the pomp of stately dignity, shall ought prevail to
withstand the wrath of the just Judge, against the wretched sinner.

Chap. II.
TAking my first entry in that which is most objected to our senses: Remember
that thou art a Christian, and a man. Concerning thou art a man, hold it for a
ground infallible, that thou shall die: after which death, because thou art a
Christian, be sure thou shall give up a reckoning of thy life forepassed. Of
this, the faith which we profess will not permit us to doubt: that other, daily
experience does confirm assuredly, so that none can shun or escape the one
nor the other. Be he Pope, Prince, or Emperor, there shall come a time wherein
either he shall see bright day continually, or ugly night incessantly. That
time shall come without al doubt, yet thou know not when, whether it will be
to day or to morrow. In what time thou now read this writing, whole and
sound in all thy senses and members, measuring the vayes of thy life according
to thy business, and delights, shall see thy self in a bed with a candle in
thy hand, attending the dint of death, and sentence pronounced against human
kind, which by no manner suite may be released. There shall be presented unto
thee, the deprivation of all earthly delights, the insupportable pain and
passion of death, the end and last Pageant of thy life, the horror of thy
grave, the cursed condition of thy body, allotted to be devoured of woormes.
But the wretched estate of the soul will be much more grievous unto thee,
which being yet in the body, knows not after an hour or two where his
habitation shall be assigned.

Then in a moment, thou shall see thy self set before the tribunal seat of
God almighty, blaming and accusing unto him thine own naughty life. There
thou shall clearly discern she foul enormious crimes whereof thou art
guilty, and shall curse ten thousand times, the day in which thou did
transgress the commandments of God, and the delight which stirred thee
thereunto. Then shall thou marvel at thy self, how for so brickle pleasures
(as are those which thou imbrasedst) did hazard thy self to endure
perpetual torments, whereof thou now beginnest to have a taste and smack, for
that the joys being now quite vanished away, and the doom due unto thee
approaching near, that slender substance which was in them loosing his essence
and being, seems that it was nothing at all: But the remorse and sting
wherewith they presently prick and press thy conscience, appears to be of
inestimable force and efficacy.

Perceiving therefore, how for such transitory trifles, thou art at point to
be bereaved of so incomparable felicity, being abashed thereat, considerest
thine own distress, for that thou having run out thy race, there rests no
longer continuance of life, nor leisure of repentance, neither thy worldly
friends, neither the Idols to whom thou have auowed the whole travail and
term of thy life, can assist or succor thee at all, yea those things which
erst thou louedst most tenderly, will be here unto thee the cause of gretest
grief. Tell me I pray thee, when thou shall see thy self plunged in this
perplexity, whither will thou turn? what will thou do? to whom will thou
cry? To go back it is impossible, so go forward intolerable, to remain as
thou art, thou may not: what then will thou do? Then says God, by the
mouth of the Prophet, the Sun shall not be seen of the ungodly in the midday,
and I will bring darkness upon them in the bright day, and I will convert
their pleasant sports to bitter plaints: their dancing and dallying, to
dolor and deadly dread. Oh what words be these? Ezech. 32
The Sun shall go down in the midday, because she huge heap of sin then
ouerwhelming the wicked, which seeing by the just judgment of God, the course
of their life and time of repentance to b^ abridged, many of them are so
appalled with fear, that they fall to flat despair of the mildness and
mercy of GOD. And abiding yet in the midst of the day, for so much as is
remaynent of their mortal life, which is the very time to merit or not to
merit: it seems unto them that they have no longer respect to do good or
evil, but are utterly excluded of both: verily the passion of fear is of
great force and vehemency, which makes things that be far from us, seem
to be present: and of a trifle, rayseth a tragedy. If the consideration of
this, causes them sometime to quake, a little, what then shall the fear of
their undoubted and just ieopardie cause them to do? They being yet in this
life, begin to suffer sensibly the grief and reproach of the Reprobate, and
in one very moment, are both quick and dead. For bewayling the present
pleasures which they must forsake, begin to seele the future misery which so
much they fear. They hold them most happy which tarry here behind, whereby
they are provoked to envy, which greatly augmenteth their griese. To those the
Sun goes down at noone days, for so much, as which way soever they cast
their eyes, they see themselves debarred on every side from access to Heaven,
and that no beam or spark of comfort appears unto them: for if they regard
the bounty of God, they see how sore they have offended him: if they behold
his justice, they see him in a manner rigorously to rush upon them: for that
hitherto the time and tide has been at their beck, but now Gods turn is at
hand: If they look back to their life forepassed, they see what accusations
grows thereof: If to the time present, they see themselves to pecke over the
perch by peecemeale: If they look forward a little further, they behold the
Judge attending for their accounts. Alas what shall the seely wretches do,
being atteinted with so many trespasses, and affrighted with such furious
fears at once? For this cause the Prophet said, that the bright day shall be
turned into darkness, thereby to give us notice, that those things whereof
the wicked are wont to take their greatest consolation, should then be unto
them the cheifest cause of their discomfort. It is a good thing, I grant, for
a man to see his sons, his friends, his house, his worldly works, and all
that he loves besides: but then this cheerful light shall be altogether
converted to profound darkness, for that all these things shall heap more
heaviness, and shall become most bitter persecuters of their affectioned
lovers. For as by nature and common custom, we take no small delight in the
present possession of those things which we love and like well: So likewise,
the loss thereof brings excessive grief. Therefore let the sweet children
depart out of their fathers sight when he lies at point of death, and let
the mother also absent her self, that she may not give and receive by her
presence so many sharp assaults of sorrow. And his departure being into so
far countries, his journey through so strange and unknown ways, the pinching
smart which he abides, will not permit him to have confidence in any thing,
neither will grant him to take his leave of his friends. If thou stand now
upon the same terms I spoke of, thou shall well perceive I have not swarued
from the truth: but if thou be not yet come to this gulf, believe them that
have made their passage before thee, as Ecclesiastes says, They which pass
over the Seas do tell strange perils: if such things do occur ordinarily
before the departure, what shall happen after? If the eve and vigil be so
dreadful, how shall the feast it self be, and day of salvation? Tell me, I
pray thee, what will thou thinks, when thou being deprived of this light and
life, alone, poor and naked, without any other companion then thine own
guilty conscience, shall make thy appearance bebefore the supernall seat of
the righteous Judge, where a rigorous and seuers reckoning shall be erected of
thee. There shall be no talk of hanging, heading, or depriving of this mortal
life, but only of the death and life eternal. If in the records of this
rufull reckoning, thou be deeply charged with arrerages, debts, and
trespasses, what yrkesome agonies shall thy poor heart then endure? How much
shall thou be confounded? How sore shall thou repent thee to have done amiss?
How distressed of comfort and counsel shall thou be The grief of the Princes
of Judah was exceeding great, when they beheld the pearsing sword and Soldiers
of Sesacke King of Egypt, to be dispearsed through the streets of Jerusalem,
when by their present plague and punishment, they recognized and confessed
their former defects. But what is all this, being compared to the confusion
and we which there shall wrap the wicked on every side? what shall they do?
whither shall they flee? who shall be their shield and befence? For there
weeping and wringing of hands do not move compassion: there detesting of
former follies, is not accounted of: there no petition, no promise will be
accepted: There no truce days or time of repentance can be granted, for that
having finished the last pageant of the play, they cannot enter the stage
again to play their part afreshe: there neither eloquence, nor worldly wealth,
nor favor, may purchase pardon, for that Solomon says: Prou. 11. Ezech. 17.
In the days of tribulation richness shall be of no force, and shall be
despised utterly: only Justice and equity shall defend thee from death. But
who can describe or paint in his colors the severity of his judgment?

This exhortation then being so good and so fruitful, I beseech thee dear
brother, suck out the sap and sweet thereof for thy commodity, scanning
and considering attentively this, whereupon upon thou must trust and depend, as
she thing which concerns thy perpetual wealth or woe, and though herein are
many things well worthy to be noted, yet above al others, let these three
things never be forgotten. Then first, what grievous pain thou must then
suffer, for having purchased by thy desert Gods indignation. The second, how
fervently thou will wish that thou had framed thy lifs according to his
holy will and pleasure. The third, that look what penance thou would the^
be glad to perform, if it might be granted thee: now through mature
deliberatio^, to assay and labor to live in such sort as then thou will wish
to have lived.

The Argument.
At the day of judgment, a Christian must be accountable particularly of each
little thought and fact committed in this life: where the sinner being
co^uicted by the just sentence of God, shall be detruded to perpetual pains,
ghastly shrikes, and to the profound darkness of the infernal prison: and
there being scorched with the glowing coals which be never extincted through,
wrath and fury, shall curse both God and himself, and calling eftsoons to
mind, all the good and evil which he has omitted and committed, augmenteth
thereby his own annoy. He therefore that will not object himself to so many
miseries, must call himself to repentance in time.

Chap. III.
AFter death, follows the particular and special judgment of every man, and
after that the general and universal judgment of all men, wherein shall be
fulfilled ye saying of ye Apostle, We must all of force show our selves before
the judgment seat of God, that every one may give an account of the good and
evil he has done in this body. Many matters are to be considered in this
judgment, but one of ye cheifest, is, to mark of what things we must give a
reckening. I will search Jerusalem, diligently (says God) with a candle in my
hand. Such is the phrase of the Scripture, whereby we ought to be admonished,
how narrowly we shall be the^ sisted and searched, in the very least things that
may be. For there shall not be one fond cogitation, nor one minute of an hour
misspent, but it shall be skored up in this reckoning. Who is not abashed and
appaled at these words of our Savior, saying? Verily I say unto you, that at
the time of this audite, men shall be accountable of every idle word which
they speak unadvisedly. Then if of these words which hurt or hinder no man, a
reckoning shall be required, what shall be required, I pray you, of dishonest
and unseemly speeches, of filthy imaginations, of hands bathed and imbrued
with blood, of wanton looks and vncontinent eyes? In figne, of the whole life
employed and consumed in leawdnesse and treachery? If this be true, as it is
most true, what can be inferred or gainsayed, why this judgment should not
be so rigorous as it is known to be indeed? How full of ignominy shall
he bes, who in the open face of such a reverent Senate, is prossed and
burdened with each vain word that has passed him from the time of his
nativity? Who will not wonder at such a strange demand never heard of
before? and who durst to aduouche it, unless it had been the words of Gods
own mouth? What King has ever exacted an account of any his subjects to the
value of of a pin? O how excellent is the Christian religion, how pure is
the sincerity which by it we are taught, and with how great care does it
demand the same purity again, and how sharply does it punish our defects
herein. Further, how passing great shall be the shame and reproach of the
reprobate, when all the mischiefs which hitherto they have closely covered in
the corners of their house, and all the brutish vehauiour of their youth, with
all the secret sores and festered carbunckles of their conscience, shall be
published in the theater, and open view of all the world. And further, who
stands upon such sure ground, that hearing this, his color does not begin
to chaimge copis? Some rather then they will disclose the secrets of their
heart to one man, in a place sequestered from all access, being overcome with
shame, in eschewing thereof, have bidden the brunt of many huge perils: How
shall they then be confounded when their most covert drifts and treasons shall
be revealed in the presence of God and his Angels, before so many millions of
men and women, as have been from the beginning, are now and shall be
hereafter? This confusion shall be so great, that as the Prophet says, they
shall cry unto the hills, Math. 25.
saying: O ye hills fall upon us, and close us in your Caves, that we may not
show our selves with such exceeding shame. But woe worth ye wretches, your hope
is frustrate, ye toil against the tide, weighing the force of that sentence
definitive, Go ye caitiues into everlasting fire, long since prepared for Satan
and his adherents. What shall that cursed generation imagine then will become
of themselves hearing this? for if, as Job says, we can scarce abide to hear
his mildest words, Job. 4.
who can abide those thundering threats of his omnipotency? These words shall
be so sharp and so pearsing, that at the very instant, the earth shall open
it self wide and large, and into the bottom and bowels thereof, shall be
whirled topsie turuie, all those, who, Job. 2
as the same Job says, here have had their paradise and pleasures, in sundry
sorts of Music and harmony, trifleling out their time and years in all
kind of mirth and iollitie. This fall and crack of the earth, S. John
describes in his Apocalips, in this manner: I saw an Angel descending from
heaven with great power, and with such brightness, that all the earth was
lightened therewith, and he cried aloude, saying, The great City of Babylon
is fallen down, and is made of the habitation of devils, and the cage of all
filthy and abominable fowls. And further he said: I saw another mighty
Angel lifting up on high a great stone, much like to a mylstone, and did cast
it into the sea, saying, With such a violence shall the great Babylon be
thrown into the bottomless pit, and shall never recover his estate again.
In this sort shall the ungodly fall into the black and ghastly prison full of
confusion and utter desolation. Esaias 66.
But what tongue can express the innumerable and sundry sorts of torments, in
that place addressed for the wicked? There their bodies shall be broyled with
furious flames continually: there their souls shall be consumed with the worm
of conscience, which will never cease his greenous gnawing. There shall be that
incessant howling and gnashing of teeth, whereof the Scriptures treats in so
many places. There these unhappy wretches surseysed with cruel despair and
rage, shall wax wood against GOD and themselves, in such dispiteous wise,
that they shall devour their own flesh, and in a frantic mood rent it
with their nails, crashing their teeth together, and spilling their Intrailes
with sorrow and sighing, blaspheming and denying continually their creator
that has adjudged them to such sharp punishments. There every of them shall
cry out upon his cursed condition and unfortunate birth, estsoones repeating
those pitiful bewaylinges, and woeful words of patient Job, Job. 3.
but with a mind and intent far contrary to his. These be the words.
Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and the night in which it was said, A man
is come into the world: let that day be turned into darkness: let it not be
reckoned of God, nor beautified with light: let it be overwhelmed with
darkness and shadow of death: let it be full fraught with obscurity and
bitterness: let that night be ouercast with a black cloud: let not that day
be numbered among days and months of the year. Why did not death receive me
so soon as I was issued out of my mothers womb? why was I not carried from
the place of my birth, straight to my grave? why was I lulled in my mothers
lap? or why did she give me suck? This shall be their melody, their mydnight
mattens, their morning and evening prayer. O filthy tongues, which babble of
nothing else but brawling and blasphemy. O wretched cares, which hear no
other things but woeful mourning. O unhappy eyes, whose object, is misery
upon misery. O wretched bodies, who have for your harbor a fiery furnace.
In what case shall they then be, who here erst wallowed in wealth and
wantonness? O what fleeting delight has wrought continual grief? O what
woeful habitations are addressed for you? Now gone is all your gallant glee and
iollitie, wherein you delighted for a moment, for which ye now lament
eternally. Now what do your treasures avail you? where is your pomp and
pleasure become? the seven fertile years are now ended quite, and in place
thereof, are now succeeded the seven barren years, which shall so consume the
abundance of those which are passed, that there shall not remain any one
shadow or show thereof. Therefore all your former felicity is drenched and
wrapped up in the waves of wretchedness, and are now driven to such straights
and scarcity, that not so much as one drop of water shall be granted unto
you, wherewith ye might somewhat assuage the raging thirst which vexes you so
furiously: neither shall your wonted prosperity relieve your misery, but
rather thereby ye shall be more fiercely afflicted. For therein is accomplished
this saying of Job, Job. 21.24.25.
that the sugared soppes of the ungodly, shall be at the last devoured with
worms. Which S. Gregory in his Moralls, expounds in this sort: The memory of
their wonted joys, makes their present pain to seem more bitter, by calling
to mind how brave and frolike they have been, and how base and vile they now
are come, and how for love of that which so soon slipte away, they suffer
that which never shall have end. Then shall they perceive evidently the subtle
slights of the enemy, and being called to their account, shall mutter too late
these sayings of Solomon: Sap. 5.
Woe unto us wretches, how apparaunt is it now unto us, that we have strayed
from the trade of truth, that the light of instice has not shined upon us,
and that the sun of intelligence has not risen over us.

We have wasted and wearied our selves in the crooked and crabbed way of
wickedness: but we have not stepped one foot in the plain and easy path
which leads to righteousness. What are we now abettered by our Princely
train and treasure? All these things are now vanished as the fleeting shade,
and as the swift Courser chased upon the spur, as a ship driven with the
tide and tempest, which leaves behind no print of his passage.

This and such like in the infernal pit, shall be the talk of those which
have been offenders. For that the hope and trust of sin, is like unto chafe
chased with the wind, or as the skumme and froath of the Sea dispearsed with
the waves, as the smoke sodeinly dissolved into the air, or as the
remembrance of a pylgrime passing by the way. These be there the complaints,
and this the perpetual penance of the ungodly, which shall not assist them at
all, because the time is passed wherein they might have been relieved hereby.
Come therefore in the time of grace and repentance, and you that have ears,
receive the sound advise of our Lord uttered by the Prophet, saying: Iere. 13.
Serve and glorify God before the day be deprived, before the dark night of
death steal upon you, and ere your feet be entrapped, or ye stumble at that
foul black hillocke. Therefore take the time and day whilst ye have it, for
it shall be turned into darkness. And our Lord himself, who better then any
other, knows the deapth of this danger, aduertiseth us hereof in his
Evangelist, saying, Luke 11.
Take heed yt your hearts be not oppressed with too much meat and drink, and
with overmuch care and turmoyle of this world, least that dreadful day catch
you at unawares, which will steal upon you like a thief, and upon all those
which inhabit upon the face of the earth. Therefore watch and pray continually,
that you may be delivered from these huge heaps of calamities, which hereafter
will happen, that you being clean and undefiled, may be presented before the
son of the pure Virgin, the promoter of all our avail and profit.

The Argument.
Those which have loved God, and lived according to his will, shall be rewarded
in Paradise, which is the glory and merit that good men do respect. Which
notwithstanding any difference that is among the elect, brings a common
comfort and pleasure to them all, because there is perfect charity, and God is
all and in every thing. Wherefore no other exercise is used there, or no other
pain or travail, then to love God, to laud and glorify him incessantly for
ever.

CHAP. IIII.
NOw that we have declared the condemnation and sharp sentence to be
pronounced upon the wretched sinner: it follows consequently, that we treat
likewise of the glorious recompense wherewith the righteous shall be endued,
which is naught else, but that happy life and kingdom which God has ordained
for his chosen people even from the creation of all things, which is such and
so excellent, that neither with the tongue of men nor Angels it can be
expressed. But that ye may have some taste of this, hear what S. Augustine
briefly says in commendation hereof, in a certain meditation of his, in this
sort: O life allotted by God to them that love him, a living life, a life void
of care, a blessed life, a quiet life, a pleasant life, a pure life, a chaste
life, a life enemy to death, a life that knows no grief, void of
molestation, of smart, of anxietie, void of all corruption, void of
perturbatio^s, not subject to variety, change or mutabilitie. A life full of
beauty and perfection, where no enemy shall molest thee, nor no trespass
offend thee: when is perfect unity, unfeigned and holy love: where all fear
is far away: where is one eternal day, without alteration: where God is seen
face to face, which is the food of all that there abive. Sweet GOD, with an
insatiable heart and greedy mind, I covet thy hidden treasures, and the more
I long after them, the more I lust and burn in desire: considering thee my
delight, my life and Savior, in contemplation whereof, I feel my self
exceedingly refreshed and revived. O most happy life, O very blessed
kingdom, altogether with out death, and without end, which do not yield
to any succession or alteration of times, where is bright day continually,
without interruption of night: there it is not known what mutation means,
where the tryumphant Soldier accompanied with a glittering crewe of Angels,
sings unto GOD without ceasing, the passing praise of Sion, having gotten the
crown of everlasting felicity. I would to God that my sin, my grievous guilt,
were forgiven me: Thrice blessed were my soul, if after this painful
pylgrimage, I might be worthy to see and behold thy glory, the beatitude, the
beauty, the walls, and the gates of thy City, thy streets, thy palaces,
thy noble Citizens, thy worthy King, settled in his throne of magnificence. Thy
walls are made of precious stones, thy gates are beautified with shining
Pearls, thy streets are paued with pure gold, which resounde and ring aloude
with the peales of perpetual praises. Thy houses are builded with quadrant
stones, adorned with Saphyrs, thy beams and rafters are of gold, where no
corruption can abide, nothing may enter that is defiled. O Jerusalem, our
mother, thou art brave and pleasant in thy devises, the force of no adversity
is felt in thee, neither any of those discommodities are sustained which here
we find. Thy joys are far above any which this wretched life can yield us.
In thee is never found night, darkness, nor change of times. Thy light
issues neither from lamp, nor from the Moon, nor yet from the stars, but God
the light of all lights, is ho which lightneth thee. The supernall Emperor
keeps continual residence in the midst of thee, environed and assisted
with many millions of his ministers. There the angelical quires answer each
to other melodiously: there the fruits of true nobility, do yield a
pleasant sent and spectacle to the beholders: there is celebrated the feast of
those, who being safely arrived from ye bottomless sea of these miseries and
mishappes, are incorporate in one society with those which possess eternal
life: There is the company of the Prophets, the royal rank of the Apostles,
the invincible host of innumerable Martyrs: there is the sacred convent of
grave Confessors: there are the true religious, the devout women, who despising
all delights and dalliance, have conquered their frail inclination: There are
the virgins and younglings, which with their virtuous indnstry, have shunned
she allurements of this vile deceitful world: There are the innocent lambs,
who robbing themselves of all earthly pleasures, do now skip and leap for
joy, in their propper and peculiar houses. And whatsoever difference there be
in glory among them, notwithstanding the solace and contentation, is common to
all: There charity rules being entire and perfect, for that god is all in
all, whom they always see, and seeing him continually, are ever enflamed with
his love, therefore they loving praise him, and praising love him, all their
exercise, all their endeavor, is to magnify him without ceassing or
intermission. O how happy were I, and most happy, if after the dissolution of
this corporal prison, I might hear the sweet musical songs of that
celestial harmony, and sing Psalms of commendation to the eternal king, of
all the worthy company of the most happy City. Now happy should I be, yea
twice blessed, if I might attain to this felicity, to sing and stand before
my King, my God, my guide, and to behold him in his glory, as himself has
promised to be seen, Ioh. 7.
when he said: O father, my desire is, that all those may be with me which thou
have given me, that they may see the clear brightness which I had with thee
before the foundation of the world. And all this is vouched out of S.
Augustine. Now tell me then what a cheerful day shall that be, which shall so
illuminate and clarisie thy courage, if at the full consummation of this
pilgrimage, thou pass from mortality to immortality, and in the same time
that other^ begin to droope, to doubt and dread, thou shall begin to lift up
thy head, be cause the wished day of thy redemption approaches near. Lift up
the mind a little (said S. Hierome unto the virgin Eustochia) out of the
dungeon o^ this corrupt body, and settling thy self before the gate of the
heavenly tabernacle, scan and consider well the mer^ of this thy present
distress, and whatglorious day that day shall be unto thee wherein the virgin
Mary guarded with a troop of pure virgins, shall be pressed to receive and
welcome thee, and wherein thy Lord and spouse himself, with all his holy
Saints, shall meet thee, saying, Can. 2.
Come away and follow me quickly my love, my delight, my dove, for now the
woeful winter is passed, the sharp showers are ceased, the tempests and
whirlwindes are appeased, and here spring up sweet fragrant flowers in this
land of behest. This shall be then the delight and consolation that thy soul
shall receive before the high throne of that most blessed trinity, before the
angels, but specially by him to whose custody thou were erst committed, when
these and all the rest shall declare the sundry tribulations, the travels and
persecutions that thou have suffered for ye love of Christ. S. Luke shows,
Act. 9.
that when ye charitable Tabita deceased, all the widows and poor people
besought the apostle Peter in her behalf, showing him their garments which she
had made: the Apostle being moved thereat, prayed unto God instantly for so
merciful a woman, whereby she was restored again to life. What a singular
comfort shall thou then perceive in thy soul, when those blessed spirits shall
take thee, and set thee before the divine consistory of God, publishing thy
deserts, and reciting orderly thy alms, thy prayers, thy fasting, the
integrity of thy life, thy susteining of wrong, thy patience in affliction, and
temperance in delights, with all thy other virtues and good deeds whatsoever? O
what delectation shall thou then reap of every good action here achieved?
how shall the force and valor of virtue be manifested unto thee? There
humble obedience shall triumph with victory. There virtue shall be rewarded,
and the well disposed shall be regarded according to their desert. Besides this,
what inward and secret solace shall that be unto thee, when thou seeing thy
self arrived in so assured an harbor, shall have regard toward the course of
thy dangerous navigations passed, and shall see the troubles and torments
wherein thou liuedst erst, she wyles, the ambushes of the enemy, the cruel
incurtions of thieves, which new thou have escaped. There it is where
resoundeth this song of the Prophet: Psalm. 93.
Were it not that the Lord was mindful of me, my soul should have hardly
avoided the infernal habitation. But specially, when thou shall perceive how
in this world offenses are multiplied, how daily so many souls descend to
hell and damnation: how among such a multitude of castawayes, God would
associate thee into the fellowship of his chosen people, which shall be the
inheritours of such a renowned kingdom. But that which passes all this, is, to
see the solemn feasts and tryumphes which there are held day by day, for the
welcome of their new brothers, who having overcome the world, finished and
performed the race of their pilgrimage, come to receive the crown of
eternity. O what joy shall it be to behold the accomplishment of that which
do appertain to the setting up and new erection of the walls of the noble
Jerusalem, with what sweet embracing's and cullings shall they be welcomed by
all the celestial court, seeing them come laden and lugged with the spoils of
the vanquished foe. There they shall enter with the victorious barons, with
those worthy women, which have conquered the world, together with their brickle
nature. There likewise the vncorrupt virgins, murdered and martyred for their
spouse sake Christ Jesus, shall enter with double triumph: that is, with
conquest of the flesh and of the worlds, adorned and crowned with Garlandes,
fraught with roses and fresh green flowers, all about their heads. In like
manner, there little boys and gyrles mastering their tender years with
discretion and virtue, shall come in to receive the hyre and guerdon of their
integrity. Where they shall find their friends, know their ministers,
recognize their parents, and culling and kissing them affectionately, shall
hear the glad tidings to be made possessors of eternal felicity. O how then
shall the fruit of bertue taste deliciously, although in times past the root
thereof seemed sour and unsavory. Sweet is the shadow after noone, the
fountain is pleasant to the thirsty and wearied waifaring man: sleep and
rest yield great comfort to him that has trudged and toiled all day: but
far greater contentatio^ peace brings to the saints, after their weary war,
security after perils, and perpetual repose after infinite travails.

The broyle of battle is now appeased, to be armed it needs not, neither on
the right fide; nor on the lest. The children of Israel were armed, when they
went to the land of promise, but after they had conquered the country, they
laid aside their weapons, and every of them forgetting quite the fear and
trouble of war, they all were lodged in the harbor of rest and quietness,
and enjoyed the fruition of long desired peace. There may ye eyes wearied with
long watching, receive their quiet sleeps. Now may ye subtle serpent attending
to entrap us, come out of his ambush: now may ye happy Hierom betake him to
rest, who made the night and day one, in lamenting his defaultes and
trespasses, encountering courageously the cruel conflicts of our ancient
enemy: there the horrible armours do never sound of that bloody beast: there
is no place forth: crooked crafty Serpent: there the venomous Basiliske does
not effende the sight nor his hissing is not heard, but the breath and sweet
sound that distills loath from the love of the holy Ghost, here raungeth round
about. Where is clearly discerned the royal magnificence of God himself.
This is the region of rest and security, scaled above all the elements, where
the dark clouds and filthy vapors do not ouerlappe the bright and pure
air. What happy things are said of thee, O City of God? happy are they,
says Tobias, which love thee, Psalm. 147.
and enjoy thy peace. O my soul, extol and magnify God, who has delivered
Jerusalem his holy city, from troubles and vexation. Now blessed should I be,
if hereafter in the remnant of my time, I might see the beauty and brightness
of Jerusalem, whose gates shall be of Saphyrs, and of pollished Smaredges, the
circuit of whose wall shall be of pearl and precious stone, the streets
shall be of white marble, interlaced with pure Alabaster, and every place
resoundeth with Alleluia, and voices of gratulation. O merry, sweet, velectable
counsel, O high renowned glory, O blessed society, who shall be those happy
Christians, picked or sorted out to dwell in thee? It seems a hard thing to
desire thee, yet no man can live without this desire. O sons of Adam, O
wretched generation of men, how sensual and abject are your thoughts, for if
this be the viands or food ye ought to feed upon, what other thing do you
labor for? whereabout do you go? what, will ye loose a benefit so
inestimable, rather then ye will travail a little? If this may be obtained
with labor and pain, for mine own part I desire them, I call and cry to all
the travails and toils that may be suffered in the world to come upon me,
that tribulations turmoile and toss me at their pleasure, that my body be
vexed with infirmities of all sorts, and my mind afflicted with sorrow and
anxieties: let both the one and the other consume me in grief: let all the
creatures of the world rise up and impugn me: let me be the reproach of me^,
the outcast of the world: let my life be spent in dol^ and distress, and my
years finished in woeful weepings: For all this I make no reckoning, so that
after I may communicate and have my part with the Saints in Heaven, and may
have eternal rest in the day of tribulation, and may ascend to the people
which are clothed and adorned with that shining glory. Go to now, O foolish
worldling, drudge and toil for high titles and dignities, erect lodgings and
palaces, enlarge the limits of thy possession, let Kingdoms, and if thou will, let the whole world be at thy commandment: yet for all this, thou
shall not be so great as the least of Gods servants, who receives that which
the world cannot ginohim, and yet possesses eternity. Thou with thy riches
and riot shall accompany the rich glutton in the dampe of eternal damnation:
he with poor Lazarus shall be carried up with Angels, and conveyed into
Abraham's bosom.

The Argument.
In the pains of hell, the sinner can have no comfort, for as the lot of the
blessed is an universal prosperity, which in it conteyneth all good things:
so the estate of the reprobate is a general and universal misery, which
comprehends all evils in it self. For there the senses of the convicted
sinner shall be tormented particularly, one after another, proportionally to the
crimes they have committed, without all hope of end or release of their grief,
which shall be eternal, eager, infinite, sharp, without intermission.

Chap. V.
THe least part of these rewards, were enough to stir up our earthly and
lumpish hearts to do much more then that which we are eni^yn^^ unto by the
commandments of God. But what if with this glory exceeding all measure, we
adioyne in like manner the unmeasurable punishments provided for the wicked?
For that those cannot there be revealed with this saying: What if I be a
castaway? no other incouenience ensues thereof, then never to see the glory of
God, and to be hereafter as though I never were, not knowing good nor evil.
But they miss in their reckoning, being allotted perforce to take one of
these unequal conditions, that is, either to be glorified with Angels, or
accursed with Devils: to rule with God eternally, or to burn in hell
perpetually. The one of these twain they must needs elect for the place of
their perpetual abode. These be the two baskets which God foreshewed in a
figure to the Prophet before the Gate of the temple, the one of them filled
with dilicate and wholesome figs: the other full of such filthy and unsavory
figs, that every man abhorred to taste or touch them. Which signifies
nothing else then the odds and difference of two fortes of people: the one is
of the chosen, to whom God has bestewed his mercies bountifully: the other of
the abiects, to whom God extends the heavy hand of his justice. And the lot
of the first sort is so excellent flourishing, and that of the others so woeful
and wretched, that the greatness of these two extremes, so much differing
between themselves, cannot be specified by any words. But omitting all other
considerations, the state of the happy is an universal felicity, wherein all
good things are contained: and contrariwise, the condition of the wicked, is
the haven where arriueth all unhappiness, the nourse of sorrow, and harbor of
distress. All the miseries which are in^^dent to this life, be miseries in
special, and therefore do not torment all our members generally, but one or
some of them alone. For example hereof, we see some men grieved in their eyes,
some in their ears, many in their stomachs, others in their bellies, and not a
few at the very heart. Yet none of these infirmities do vex all the senses
universally at one instant, but some of them particularly. Notwithstanding, the
smart is often full sharp and vehement, and the night over tedious to him that
abides either of these greefes, be it but the aching of a toothe or gum.
Admit now, that a certain man should suffer such an universal punishment,
that no member, sense, or joint, should be free from peculiar torments, and
that at one very instant he must abide most bitter pains in the head, in his
eyes, in his teeth, ears, stomach, liver, heart, and to be short, in all the
other members and joints of his body, and that he lay in this perplexity
upon a bed, feeling the several greefes assigned to every member. What
excessive forrow should he suffer, think thou, which were tormented in this
sorte^ or what thing could be more miserable and pitiful to behold? If thou
saw a dog in that distress, it would perforce move thee to compassion.
This dear brother (if any comparison may be used herein) is that, which not
for the space of one night, but for ever, is suffered in the pit that
perpetually burns with fire and brimstone. For as the ungodly do grievously
offend God with all their senses and members, making them ye instruments to
further their frantic follies and excesses: so by the ordinance of God, there
they are all tormented, and every of them abides his proper punishment. For
there the incontinent eyes shall be afflicted and affrighted with the ugly
sight of devils: the ears with confused cries and complaints: the nose with
the intolerable stenche of that filthy den: the taste, with raging thirst
and famine: the feeling, and all the body besides, with pearcing cold and
heat: the imagination shall be tormented with the apprehension of present
pain: the memory, by having still in mind ye pleasures passed: the
understanding, with consideration of the glorious kingdom lost, and cursed
condition that is happened. The divine Scriptures tures signifies unto us this
plurality of pains, where it says, that in hell shall be famine, Mar. 15.
Psalm. 10.
thirst, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, the two edged sword, the spirits and
creatures of revenge, serpents, worms, scorpions, bytles, sour sasages, water
distilled of gall, stormy tempests, and other such like annoyances. By which
it frames and prefers to our presence, an evident pattern of the diverse
and dreadful plagues practiced in hell. Exodus 10.
Finally, there shall be inward and outward darkness, both of the body and
mind, far more obscure then those of Egypt, which might be felt and touched
with the hand. There shall be fire, but not such as we use commonly, which
smarteth a little, and vanishes quickly: but such as is most fit for that
place, that is, which afflicts vehemently, and never cease to torment. If
this be true, how can it be, that those which believe and confess the same,
should line so loosely, and sleep in such security? What danger, what
tedious toil would not any man gladly undertake, rather then he would endure
one day, yea one hour, the least of these torments? Why then to shun a
perpetuity of calamities so tragical, do they not employ themselves to so
easy travail as that which is requisite to the following of virtue? This
thing were enough to sequester a man's soul from his senses, and to bring him
to an extacie, that deliberateth advisedly hereupon. Yet if among these huge
heaps of miseries, were any hope of end or redress, it would quallifie
somewhat their gripings corsies: but alas, they find it there far otherwise,
for the gates of comfort are closed up on all sides. In all kind of heaviness
that may happen in this life, rests always some relief, wherein the
afflicted may repose himself, as that which is administered either by reason of
time, friends, or company of many which do participate with him in the same
mishap, or by hope to be released at last, may mittigate their malady: But in
this evil only, the cundits of grace are so stopped, and the passages of
common comfort so interrupted, that these unhappy creatures can find favor
on no side, neither from heaven, neither from the earth, neither of the time
passed, nor present, nor of that to come, nor of ought that can be else, but
they seem to be pressed and pearsed of all parts, and that all creatures
conspire against them, whereby at last they ware wood and wrath with
themselves. This is the extreme straightness, whereof the wicked bewail
themselves by the Prophet, in this sort: Psalm. 17.
The dread of death has hedged me in on every side, and the infernal frightes
have environed met round about, in such wise, that whereon soever they peep or
pry, their object is always misery exempted of mercy. The Virgins which
stood pressed at the Palace of their spouse, were received in, Matthew. 15.
as the Evangelist says, and sodeinly the gates were locked. O perpetual
pinning fast, O immortal enclosure, O gate of comfort which never shall be
opened, which is as though he had said, Closed is the port of pardon, shut is
the door and hatch of hope and intercession, of grace, of consolation, and of
meriting any more. The six days are vanished, wherein Manna was to be
gathered, but the Sabbath it could not be found, wherefore he must fast
always, which would not provide for himself in time. The y^le sluggard (says
Solomon) fearing the cold will not till his ground in the Winter, whereby he
shall beg in the summer, and nothing shall be given him. And again, He that
labors in the summer and time of harvest, is discreet: but he that then
betakes him to sleep, is the son of perdition. What greater confusion can
there be then that which happened to the rich myser, who might have purchased
his place in heaven with the crumbs of bread that fell from his table: by his
covetousness in deteyning that little, is now brought to such penury himself,
that he craves, and shall crave continually one drop of water, and shall never
obtain it. In whose heart does not this request of that wretch move a remorse.
O father Abraham, pity my case, and send Lazarus, Luke 16.
that he may dip the top of his finger in the water, and may touch my tongue
therewith, for this fire tormenteth me out of measure. What less petition
could be demanded then this? for he durst not request one vessel of water,
neither would he that Lazarus should wet all his hand, nor his whole finger,
(which is to be wondered at) but only the top of his finger, and yet it would
not be granted unto him. By which thou see how close the gates of grace are
shulte, and how far the prohibition and curse stretches, which is prepared
for the ungodly, since they cannot get so small a matter. In such sort, that
cast they their ghastly looks which way they will, let them extend their hand
to what place them list, they shall find no crum of comfort, be it never so
small. And as one fallen into the sea, plunging in the deapth of the waters,
can find no perfect footing, and often stretching out his arm, catches and
graspeth round about in vain, being now even swallowed in the gulf: So shall
it happen to the accursed crew, to whom the world is without any stabilitie,
for wading in the waves of such woe and wretchedness, and always striving
with death, without trust or stay of any succor to lean unto. Of all the
greefes which is suffered in that mischeeuous place and harbor of adversity,
this is the greatest: for if these punishments were determinable by any time,
yea though it were a thousand years, or a hundred thousand million of
years, it were some kind of comfort, for that which has end, is not
altogether to be dispraised: but the pain of the wicked shall be eternal, and
the time of their distress shall be coequall with the divine glory of God: so
long as God shall live, so long shall they dye: and when God shall cease to be
that he is, then shall they likewise leave to be that they are. O dying life, O
living and immortal death, I know not whether I should call thee life or
death, for if thou be life, why dyest thou? if thou be death, how do thou
still endure? I will not therefore call thee the one nor the other, for that
neither the one nor the other, conteyneth ought that good is. Life has his
limits, and death dureth but for a time, which much avails to the asswaging
of sorrows, but in thee are neither bounds nor space at all. What then art
thou? Verily thou art the penance of life, and the plague of death, for thou
have the sting and torment of death everlastingly, and of life thou have the
perpetuity without intermission. GOD spoiled both life and death of their
happiness, and committed to thee, that which was left for the perpetual
punishment of the ungodly. O cursed confection, O bitter pill, berest utterly
of all the benefits and delights that flows from our sweet Samour Christ,
which is the food that all wretched sinners feed upon. I wish therefore, dear
brother, that not sildome thou would erect thy earthly mind to the
consideration of this eternity, and as a beast of the world would sometimes
make thy repast thervpo^. Which that thou may perform effectually, propone
before thy eyes of understanding, the affliction that a sick man suffers in
one night, specially if he be seized with some sharp infirmity. Mark I pray
thee, how often he turns and walloweth in his very bed, how he can take no
kind of rest, how the night seems so long unto him, that he reckons every
hour of the clock, and each hour seems a day long. He looks and longs
for the light, which naught or little avails to moderat his misery. Then if
this sorrow be so great and insupportable, what shall the pain be of that
eternal night, which has no morning nor dawne of day? O profounde darkness,
O night perpetual, O night accursed by Gods own mouth, the light which was
wont to lift up it self in the morning, is not seen in thee. Consider now
what a torment it is to live always in such a night as this is, not couched
in a soft bed, as a sick man is, but rather in a furnace flaming with
fires. What shoulders can be able to abide these so fervent heates? what heart
will not melt with sorrow, to continue in such torment for ever? Which of you
(says God by the Prophet) can sustain that consuming fire, and live in that
excessive heat? O dreadful threats, if that a man cannot endure possibly to
put the top of his finger upon one glowing coal, whilst a Pater noster is
said: how shall he abide to broyle both body and soul in these eternal
flames, which are so fierce and vehement, that comparing them to those which
here we see in this world, seem of no more force then fire painted on the
walls? Is there any judgment in the earth? have men understanding? do they
perceive the weight of these words and threats? think they that those are
devices feigned by Poets? or do they persuade themselves that it touches some
others, and pertains not to them? Wherein they are much deceived, and
sottishly feed their foolish fancy, since it is verified by the eternal
truth, saying, Heaven and earth shall decaie, but my word shall never want his
force and vigor.

The Argument.
We have great cause to be the servants and affectionate friends of God, as
well for the gifts of nature bestowed upon us, and the infusion of grace which
we have already, and hereafter hope to receive, as also for dread of his
wrath. Among which benefits and graces granted unto us, the Sacraments are most
precious. Having then received such and so many benefits of him, we ought not
to show our selves ungrateful, that all his troubles and travels suffered
here on earth, may be for our behoof and profit.

CHAP. VI.
SOme man peradventure will marvel why I should accumulate so many reasons to
justify this that I have begun, and to confirm an approved verity, and a
thing so commendable as is that atchiuing of virtue, but this discourse is not
addressed to that end, nor to extenuate any doubt that may be in a matter so
manifest.

But for that monstrous is the malice of our corrupt mind, and the conflicts
very cruel which strive to destroy the soueraintie of renowned virtue, it is
requisite that her bulwarks be of sufficient strength to bear the brunt and
shocke of all assaults. But for my better proof and progress of this matter,
it shall not be amiss to adioyne here unto, how much we are bound to the
service of God, not only for hope of the hire which we expect at his hands,
nor for dread of his justice, but cheefely for those good things which by him
we presently enjoy. For if all creatures embrace their benefactours, and brute
beasts acknowledge them by whom they have been relieved: yea, if the law of
thanksgiving be of such force, that the fierce Tygres, Lions, and Serpents,
yield to her segnioritie, and live under her lore, how shall I escape to be
accounted more cruel then those beasts, if I should not love and magnify
him, who has been so beneficial unto me? What is there either in me or
without me, whith is not issued from the bounty of God? Thou Lord have
created my soul to thine own image and similitude, thou have disposed the
organes of my body, and beautified it with such feature and variety of
members and senses, that regarding well the curious cunning of the work,
appears that it can be wrought by no other artificier then thy self. Thou
haste and do ordain daily all things necessary for the preservation of
this thy work, thy providence is my guide, thy hand does sustain me, thy
creatures serve me, thy medicines heal me, thy food does nourish me, thy
Angels guard and keep me, thy wisdom instructs me, thy mercy provides
for me, and thy patience supporteth me: Finally, all that I have, are thy
goods, thy grace, and thy mercy.

For who gives me my essence, to be that I am, but thou that art the
Fountain of all essence and being.

By whose benefit do I live, if not by thine, which give light and life to
all them that breath? who gives me judgment and understanding, if not thou
which art the lamp of eternal light? Therefore what should a man do for such
a one, who has him so much his benefactour? Why should he not serve him with
all his forces both of body and mind, who has made him all, and does
preserve him all, both body and soul, and by whose direction he is governed
altogether? Wherefore if we be so much bound unto him for his benefits given
us by nature, how can we gratify him sufficiently for those his gifts of
grace? How can thou counteruayle his courtesy, who amongst so sundry sorts
of people and nations of Infidels, has singled thee out for himself, has
created thee a Christian, and has washed thee with the water that distilled
from his precious side, and there has adorned thee for his son, and has
invested thee with all habites and ornaments that are requisite for that
dignity? But after, when again thou were fallen from this pre-eminence, who
can declare how patiently he did hold thee up, when thou sinnedst? with what
eyes did he behold thee, when thou made no reckoning of him? how carefully
did he guard thee, when thou did procrastinate thy return unto him? with
how many holy instincts did he stir thee? with how many harolds did he sommon
thee to come, that at the last, forsaking thy former follies, should bow to
his holy will and bent?

But what shall I say of that supernall grace, of that most excellent benifite
of our redemption? O Lord the heavens bless and extol thee, and the Angels
sing praises of thy merueilous works. What need had thou of our avail,
or how could our annoy be prejudicial unto thee? If I offend (says Job)
what hurt is it unto him? and if thine iniquities abound, what harm takes
he thereby? and if thou do well, what is he she better therefore? But what
commodity? what reward can he reap at thy hands, who is God omnipotent, so
rich and so free, and far from all wrack and woe? that GOD (I say) whose
wealth, whose power, whose wisdom can be neither augmented nor diminished:
who neither before the co^stitution of the world, nor after he had made all
things, is one jot more or less then he was before: nor if all the angels and
all mankind should be saved, and should praise him perpetually, is any whit
the woorthier: nor if they all were damned and did blaspheme him, is less
glorious at all. This so great a lord, not drawn nor driven by any straights
at all, but of mere grace and bounty, whilst our acts of hostility were yet
in fresh memory, was content to incline the heavens of his royal majesty,
and to descend into this Cave of calamities, to cloth him with the vesture of
our mortality, to charge himself with the deep debt of al our sins, and for
satisfaction thereof, to endure such torments as were never suffered in this
world. For my sake, O Lord, thou wast borne in a stall: for me thou wast laid
in a manger: for me thou wast circumcised the eight day: for me thou wast
conveyed into Egypt: for me (to conclude) thou wast persecuted and turmoyled
with a number of infamies: for me thou watchedst: for me thou trauailedst: for
me thou swettest: for me thou did weep: for me thou have proved all those
evils which my enormous crimes have deserved, thou being innocent and
guiltless. Finally, for me thou wast apprehended as a malefactor, abandoned
of thy friends, sold, denied, presented before the tribunal seat of those
judges, where thou were accused, bufferted, defamed, whipped, spitted at,
scratched, condemned, crucified, blasphemed, pierced with a spear, dead and
buried. Therefore with what desert of mine, can I acquit my self, I will not
say of all these courtesies, but of the least drop of blood shed out of thy
holy side, for me unworthy wretch. How is it possible that I should love him
sufficiently, who so has loved me, so has created me, so has redeemed me,
and has bought me so dearly? If I be lifted up from the earth (says our
Savior) all things shall be drawn after me. But with what chains, with what
violence?

With the force of love, and with the bonds of his benefits. With the rope of
Adam (says our Lord) I will draw the^ unto me, and with the knot of love.
Therefore who will not be lifted up with this draught? who will not suffer
himself to be caught and carried with such chains? If one little drop of
water falling continually upon a stone, will pearce and break it at the last,
how shall not the bonds of so many benefits be enough to rent my stony heart a
sunder? And if the very earth wrought in the fervent heat, is sometimes
converted into fire, how shall my heart be free from burning, being so beset
with the glowing coals of such unmeasurable love? if it be so heinous an
offense not to love this Lord, what shall it be to offend him, to despise him,
and to transgress his commandments? How can thou have any heart or hand
to offend those hands which have been so bountiful unto thee, which for thee
were spread upon the cross? When that lascivious woman besought the Patriarch
Joseph, that he would betray his master, the holy man repelled her with this
saying, Behold, O wretched woman, what trust my Lord has reposed in me, to put
all that he has into my hands, except thee his wife, therefore with what face
can I commit this vilanie against my Sovereign? Which is as if he had said,
If my Lord has been so friendly affectioned toward me, if he has committed
all that he has to my custody, if in such wise he has fancied and honored
me, that in me only it rests to dispose of his affairs: how may I, being
tied with the bonds of so many benefits, have any hands at all to offend a
Lord so liberal? And it does not content him to say, It is no reason to
offend him: but, How can I offend him? for the greatness of good turns, do
not only restrain the will, but in a manner all power and possibility to
annoy the benefactor. And it binds fast both the hands and the feet of a
man, that he cannot strive against it. Wherefore if these kind of ceremonies,
as to be grateful for good turns be of so great force, what shall we think
of the benefits of God? That man committed to Joseph's fidelity all his
business, and God has put into thy hands all that he has. Consider then how
much Gods treasures are more worthy then any that Pharao did possess, for
that so much more is this which thou enioyest, then was that which Joseph did
receive. But tell me what thing has God, which he has not given into thy
hands? heaven, earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the sea, birds,
fishes, trees, beasts, and finally all that is contained under the golden
globe, he has bestowed upon thee: and yet not that only which is here
below in earth, but likewise all that is in the Heavens above, which is the
glory, the riches, and the delights of Angels and Saints, which are there
praying busily for thy commodity. All things (says the Apostle) are yours,
whether it be Paul, Paul.
or Apollo, or Peter, be it the world, be it life, be it death, be it the
time present, or that to come, all is yours, for that all serves for your
behoof: and yet not that alone which is above the heavens, but the Lord of
heaven himself, has given us his only son, after sundry sorts, sometimes
as a patron, sometimes as a defendor, sometimes as a savior, sometimes for a
teacher, sometime for a Physician, sometime for a reward, sometime for a
conservation, sometime for a remedy, and for each other our need. The Father
has given us his son, the son has merited for us the holy Ghost, the holy
Ghost has made us meritorious of GOD the Father himself, from whom flows
the streams of all felicity. Therefore if this father (as the Apostle says)
has given us his only son, which was the greatest gift he could bestow on
us, how will he not deliver unto us with him all other things whatsoever?
Therefore if it be true that God has given unto thee all that he has, if he
has wrapped thee fast with obligation of so many benefits: how is it possible
that thou should molest or grieve so liberal and bountiful a benefactour?
If it be a grievous crime, not to be thankful for so good turns: what shall
it be to adioyne to ingratitude, the contempt and offense of the benefactor? If
that young man found himself in such bondage, and so impotent to annoy him
who had committed to his fidelity the charge of his house: what heart or
courage can thou have to offend him, which for thy behoof has created both
heaven and earth? O more ungrateful then the very beast, O more cruel then the
Tigres, O more insensible then the senseless creatures, not to consider so
great a fall: for what beast, what Lion, what Tiger, did ever hurt the man that
did them good?

Saint Ambrose writes, that a dog all one night howled and bewailed his
master, which was slain by his enemy: whither repairing many the next
morning, to view the dead corpse, amongst whom the murderer also made his
appearance, whom so soon as the dog beheld, furiously ran upon him, in such
wise, that the malefactor was detected thereby. Wherefore if a dog for a
piece of bread did show such loyal love to his master: how can thou
become so ungrateful, to suffer thy self in the law of reason and humanity,
to be inferior to a dog? If that beast was wroth against him that had slain
his master: what will not thou be wroth against them that have killed thy
Lord and Sovereign? and who are those that have killed him, but only thy
offenses? these are even they that took him, that bound him, that whipped
him, that nailed him to the Cross. For all the torments had not been
sufficient for this exployt, had they not been assisted by thine offenses.
Wherefore then do thou not wax wood against these so cruel murderers which
have bereaved thy Lord of his life. Wherefore, seeing him dead in thy sight,
does not thy affection increase toward him, and thy wrath toward sin, which
has killed him, knowing that whatsoever in this world he has said, done, or
suffered, was to imprint such an hatred in our hearts against sin, that we
should detest it utterly. To slay sin he dyed himself, and to bind it hand
and foot, has suffered himself to be bound upon the cross. Why then will thou make frustrate all the labors and pains of Christ? Will thou run
headlong into the thraldom and bondage from whence Christ has delivered thee
with the ransom of his precious blood? why do thou not tremble and shiuer
at the only name and sound of sin, now that thou have seen the extremities
that Christ used in the remoouing thereof? what could GOD do more to restrain
us from sin, then to set himself before us bowed pitifully upon a cross? who
durst displease God, if he saw heaven and earth open before him? yet much more
it is to see God stretched upon a cross, then all this. Wherefore, whosoever is
not stirred with this motive, there is nothing in the wide world, whereby he
may be reduced from the fond and perilous journey wherein he is entered.

The Argument.
God does not suffer those to want any thing necessary to this world, which
be righteous, and do keep his commandments, but does comfort them with his
graces and gifts infinitely, as well temporal as spiritual, present, as those
to come. Whereof the ungodly have exceeding great scarcity, for that noble
virtue is evermore associated with all good things, and contrariwise, vice with
mischiefs and miseries.

CHAP. VII.
BUt peradventure thou will say, that all these things before treated of, are
right just, as well ye good things as ye evil yet desire to see some present
motine, which should serve to eleuate thy heart, fithe the things objected to
our daily view, do move us more forcibly. Of these things also we will give
thee thy glut, and thou shall have thy sacietie of that thou desire. For
admit our Lord had kept the best wine and meat fill the end of the banquet,
yet for all this, he will not that his servants should faints with famine by
the way: for he knows very well if they should be so scanted, they cannot
continue in their journey. Wherefore he said unto Abraham, Fear not, O
Abraham, for I am thy defendour, and thy reward shall be great. By these words
two things are promised, one in this present life (as he was his defendour in
all things perteyning thereunto) the other in the life to come, which is the
guerdon reserved for him. But how great the first promise is, and how many
sweet solaces it conteyneth, no man knows, but he that has read the
Scriptures diligently, which inculketh and repeateth nothing more then the
singular prerogatives which our Lord has promised to his servant in this
life. Read the holy Psalm of the Prophet, Psalm 25. Psalm. 91. Psalm. 18.
Dominus regit me: Read, Qui habitat in adintorio: Regard with thy
understanding, Diligam te domine fortitudo mea: read the benedictions and the
curses of Deuteronomium: finally, read the new and old Testament, and thou
shall see apparently, what favor and friendship is promised to the just and
righteous in this life. Hear the verdit of Solomon in his Proverbs upon this
matter, Blessed is the man that has found wisdom, for it avails more
to-possesse that, then all the heaps of gold and silver, be it never so fine
and precious: it is of greater price then all the riches of the world: and all
that can be wished for, and desired in the heart of man, is nothing comparable
thereunto. The length of his days are in his right hand, and in his left, are
riches and glory: his ways are fair, and his paths peaceable, and to all
them that obtain it, and to every one that with perseueraunce shall enjoy it,
shall be happy. Mark then, my son, the constitutions and counsels of God,
for this shall be likings and life to thy soul. Then shall thou take thy
journey void of care, and thy feet shall not fail thee: if thou sleep, thou
shall not be affrighted: and if thou betake thee to rest, thou shall have a
quiet repose. This (dear brother) is the solace and quietness that the
righteous have in their ways: but consider how much the ways of the wicked
differs from this by the sentence of the Scriptures: unhappiness, and
lucklesse chance is ever in their way, neither know they what it is to tread
the steps of peace and tranquillity. And again, Ecclesiastic says: The path
of the unjust is full of lets and obstacles, and at the end of their journey
for an harbor is addressed for them, hell, darkness, and pain. Does it
seem now good unto thee to divert from the way of God, to follow the way of
the world, being so contrary each to other, not only in the and, but also in
the midway, and at every step? Which then is the greater inconvenience, to
endeavor through one torment to get another torment, or else with one repose to
atchieue an other repose? But that thou may discern more clearly the
manifold benefits which presently do accompany this good thing, be
attentive to the promise that GOD himself made to the Prophet Esaias, to the
obseruers of his commandments, in these words, according to the intent of
diverse Interpreters: When thou shall be (says he) such and such, as I have
willed thee to be, unawares shall come upon thee the dawne of bright day (that
is the light of justice) which shall cast out and bannish quite the dryerie
darkness of thy errors and defaultes, and shall quickly know true health,
and the equity of thy well doings shall stand before thee as a burning
lamp, and the glory of our Lord, shall enuiron thee on every side, that thou
may be honored in the sight of God, and men. Then shall thou call upon the
name of our Lord, and he will hear thee, because thou louedst him, and shall
say unto thee, behold me here pressed to accomplish whatsoever thou can ask.
Then in the midst and deep darkness of the tribulation and distress of
this life, the comfortable beams of divine favor shall shine upon thee, and
thy tribulation shall be as the midst of the day, for that our Lord had
ordained, that thy miseries themselves, and thy transgressions passed, should
accumulat unto thee greater felicity, presenting always to thy mind assured
peace, and firm tranquillity. And in the time of scarcity and famine, he
shall feed thee full, and shall supply thy wantes aboundauntly, and thy bones
shall be delivered from death, and from the flames of eternal fire, and thou
shall be like unto a moist garden, and as a fountain which runs
incessantly: and in thee, that shall be accomplished which many years has
been unfinished, to the end thou may stand upon a sure foundation, from
generation to generation, and if thou will endeavor to celebrate my festival
days, not contriuing them in foolish delights, nor in preferring thy will
before mine, observing carefully my will and behest in this voyage: then will I
create thee a Lord, and will give thee such solaces as shall far surpass all
pleasures of the world. And I will exalt thee above the highest turrets of the
earth, to a most blessed state of life, whereunto neither fortune nor human
nature can add or detract ought at all. And after all this, I will enstal thee
into the precious inheritance that I promised to Jacob thy father, which is
the benediction of glory, because the mouth of God has spoken it. These are
the rewards which God promised to his servants, of which although some are yet
to come, notwithstanding many of them pertain to this present life. As is that
new light and heavenly brightness, that abundance of all things, that assured
trust in GOD, that divine assistance to al petitions and demands, that peace
and security of conscience, that divine providence and protection, that
flourishing Gardein (which is the deo king and garnishment of grace) the
fountain which flows continually, which is the great plenty of all things,
those supernall joys which exceed the capacity of man, that lifting up of
the spirit which cannot be augmented by assistance of humane nature.

These favors and prerogatives promised by God, are all the works of his
mercy, the influence of his grace, the testimonies of his love, the effect of
the fatherly providence he extends to his servant. Upon every one of these
I could say much more then the brevity of this volume will permit, for that
every of them would ask a several Treatise. Wherefore the just shall rejoice
of all these good things, both in this life, and in the life to come, whereof
the unjust shall be utterly destitute. By which means, mark what odds is
betwixt the one part and the other, now that these are so favored from
heaven, and those in such distress and penury, for if thou consider advisedly
all things before treated of, and do weigh the estate and condition both of
the just and unjust, thou shall find that the lot of the righteous is in the
favor of God, but that of the ungodly in utter disgrace: The estate of the
good and of the evil.
these are his friends, the other his professed foes: these enjoy the light,
the other dwell in darkness: these participate in delight with Angels, those
with dririe swine: these are free indeed, and masters of themselves, those
other the thrals and vassalls of Satan: these live in unity, those other in
deadly discord: the trust and testimony of a false conscience, delights
these, and to the other minds, resorteth always the guilt of their filthy
facts: these with a resolute mind abide the brunt of tribulation in their
accustomed place, those other, as light chafe are repelled by the wind: these
depend upon the anchor of hope, those other have no stay to lean unto, being
objected to every chance and change of fickle fortune: the prayers of these
are acceptable to the ears of the Lord, the other petitions are odious and
execrable. The death of these is quiet and glorious with divine honor, and
that of the others troublesome, defamed, fraught with a thousand fears.
Finally, these live as children under the guard and government of God, they
sleep securely under the wings and shadow of his providence: but the others
excluded from this divine protection, wander too and fro as scattered beasts
without head or guide, thrust out to apparent perils and alaroms of fortune.
Then if such and so excellent perfections do accompany virtue, what restraynt
can there be, why thou should not embrace so sovereign a thing? what can
thou allege for thy excuse herein? To wrangle and say, this is not true,
cannot extenuate thy guilt, seeing thou see how it is founded upon the
infallible word of God, and testimonies of the scripture. To say these
perfections are of small price, avails not, for that (as I have before
mentioned) they exceed all that man's heart can wish for. To allege that thou
art thine own enemy herein, and that thou do not desire these good things,
is most untrue: for a man is by nature a friend to himself, and human will
has felicity for his subject, which is the end of his desires. To affirm
that thou have no sense nor taste hereof, suffices not to acquit thy crime,
considering thou beleeuest them to be true, although thou can not taste them.
Original sin bereaved thee of thy taste herein, but not of thy faith, and
faith is a testimony more sure, more secure, and more doubtless, then all
other experiences, witnesses, and warrants of the world. Wherefore then do
thou not prefer this testimony before all the other allegations? Why do
thou not attribute more to faith, then to thine own sottish seeming and
judgment? O that thou would determinately commit thy self into the hands
and arms of God, and trust to him only, how suddenly should thou perceive
in thy self the accomplishment of these prophesies, should soon see the
greatness of these treasures, should see how senseless and blind all
worldlings are, which do neither feel nor fancy this felicity, and should
see with how just reason God commanded us this kind of life, saying, Come
unto me al ye that are laden and weary, and I will ease your grief. Receive my
yoke upon you, and then ye shall find comfort in your souls, for it is full
sweet and delectable. God is no deceyuer, his promises are neither false nor
fraudulent. Which since it is so indeed, why do thou flee or faint? why do
thou abandon peace and pleasure? Wherefore despisest thou the allurementes and
sweet soundes of thy Pastor? How dare thou to chase virtue from thee, having
such a gallant superscription, as here thou see graven by the hand of God?
It was much less then this, that Queen Sabba had heard of Solomon, and yet
she came from the uttermost parts of the earth, to try whether those things
were true which were reported unto her. Wherefore then hearing such and so
certain tidings of virtue, do thou not betake thee to a little travel? If
thou will be assured hereof, grant thy self unto the word of God, and
confidently commit thy self into his hands, loose thy self from the hands
which has wrapped and won thee, and thou shall see that the same of virtue is
less then her merit, and that whatsoever we have said is nothing, in
comparison of that she is in her proper effect.

The Argument.
To persevere in sin, with a thousand excuses and delays; intending to amend
his life hereafter, deceives a Christian maruellously. For by this means he
blinds and burieth himself in the durtie dunghill of vice, and waxes daily
more prone thereunto, in such wise, that iniquity taking deep root in the
intrailes of his mind, it will very hardly be removed.

CHAP. VIII.
NOtwithstanding all these assertio^s whereby the condition of virtue is
justified sufficiently, the wicked will never want their wonted excuses and
delays: for as it is written, He that will shake off his friend, searches for
a cause of quarrel, but in so doing, he meriteth a grievous reprehension and
controlment. Yet some there be which with one only word will easily reply to
all this, saying, It suffices them to amend hereafter, and then to reduce the
course of their life to a better order: foolishly feyning to themselves, that
it is too hard a matter presently for them so to do, and that in time to come,
they may attempt and atchieue this thing with more facility: How fondly man
deceives himself.
which is one of the grossest errors wherewith a man may delude himself. For
if thou mindest so long to proceed and persevere in that perilous path
wherein thou art entered, still augmenting the heap of thine iniquities, how
can thou so easily hereafter forsake it at thy pleasure, thy naughty
conditions being grown by continual custom into an habit? Further, if thou
continue herein, evil custom shall be more fortified and confirmed, and
nature shall be corrupted the more, and the devil shall prevail and have more
power upon thee, and shall be still farther from the favor of GOD, and
consequently more blind, more inclined and plunged deeper in the stinking
puddle of iniquity. Then how can it be more easy for thee to perform this
business, being increased with these new difficulties, by reason of thy
perseueraunce in sin. If every time that thou do offend, thou leauest
behind th^^ a days journey of thy voyage toward virtue: how can thou more
readily frame thy self thereunto hereafter, having let slip so many days
journey, as thou have committed offenses? It may well appear, that by this
answer thou art instructed by the father of lies and falsehood, that after thou
have so long inured thy self to vice and folly, and haste runned a race so
far from the trade of virtue, shall then be most easy for thee to attain
thereunto. But among these things, what shall I say of the great power of
custom, and of the force she has to bind and wrap thee fast in wickedness?
For true it is, that as they which fasten a nail in any thing, with every
stroke they drive it further in, and yet with other strokes further, and so the
more still they strike, the more they fasten it, and waxes thereby the more
hard to pull out again: In like manner, by each evil fact we commit, vice, as
it were with a beetle, is more deeply rammed into our mind, where it is fixed
so fast, that there can very hardly be found any force able to remove it.
Whereby we see not seldom, that the old age of those who in their
flourishing years were wholely given to carnalitie, is often subject to the
dissolute manners of their youth, yea although they then abhor them, and
nature thereof disclaymeth utterly: which only comes to pass through the
tyranny of evil custom. For it is affirmed by Job, that ye bones of the
wicked, shall be full of those vices that they used in their youth, which shall
accompany them in their graves, in such sort, ye vice has no other end then
death, which is the dissolution and extinguishment of all mortal things, which
only suffiseth to redress and cure it. And the cause hereof, is custom
confirmed, which now is grown to nature. For vicious appetites, taking such
root in the bones and bowels of their souls, is even like unto a joint ague,
which having settled it self in the intrailes of a man. is become incurable.
The very same thing is showed by our Savior in the resurrection of Lazarus,
which had lien dead now four days, whom GOD called again to life with such
vehement shrikes and cries: notwithstanding he raised many from death before,
with such falicitie, thereby to make it known unto us, what a wonder it was
that God raised him again, who four days had been dead and buried.

This long since, is espied to be in sin. For (as Saint Augustine opens
this place) of these four days, the first is the delight we have in sin:
the second is, the consent of mind: the third, the accomplishment in deed:
the fourth, the perseverance in sin: and he that is come to this point, is
Lazarus lying dead four days, who cannot be received but with the loud
lamentations and tears of our Savior. If peradventure this chance unto thee
(which very seldom happens to any) tell me what law can thou allege for
thy leawdnesse, that God before all worlds having loved and created thee, to
inuest thee with the glory of eternal felicity, wilt not consume in the
service of him, who has bin thy benefactor and friend so long, in this short
and brickle life that thou enioyest.

The Argument.
Repentance ought not to be deferred to the end of life, for the^ God does
seldom grant them his grace to dye well. For he that has lead a leaud life,
has commonly a worse death: and so finds a righteous recompense for his
unjust deserts.

CHAP. IX.
But some there be so blind and shameless, that it suffiseth them not to have
sinned all their life passed, but they resolve with themselves wilfully to
wallowe therein, until they sensibly feel themselves assited with the very
sommons of death. O dreadful time, full of perplexity, what think thou
with this price to purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, and to merit the society
and seat of Angels? Do thou not see, that whatsoever is done at this time,
is necessity, and not will: is forced, and not free: is constraint, and not
consent: is fear, and not friendship: yet it is love, not the love of God, but
self love, which shunneth naturally his own annoy? Do thou not perceive,
that these things are mere opposite to the rule of equity, that thou having
dedicated the whole term of thy life to devotion of the devil, wilt in the
end require to be rewarded of God? Do thou not behold herein, even that
which the five foolish Virgins did prepare, whereof the Evangelist shows,
that they were making them ready, when they should have given up their
accounts? Therefore, how can thou expect any better success, then thou art
admonished by this example, continuing in the selfsame carfulness? God is
mighty, and can inspire upon us true repentance when he list: but how often
it happens at this hour, and how few they be, which then repent heartily,
ask S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, and all other Saints, and thou shall
see how precisely and scrupulously they speak in this matter, and thou shall
well perceive what a madness it is, so confidently to commit thy self to the
mercy of a gulf, whereunto so many skillful Pilots did pass, with such great
horror and fear. To dye well, is a knowledge which ought to be learned all
the life before, for in the hour of death, the diseased is cumbred with so
many cares and greefes, that he has no leisure to learn to dye well. It is a
general rule, that as the life is of every man, such is his daath. The death
of the wicked is conformable to their life.
Whereby it follows, that if the life be mischeenous, the death is
miserable, except God for some special purpose does dispose it otherwise.
These be not my words, but the Apostles sayings: The end of the ungodly, shall
be like unto their deserts. For speaking generally, neither do we look for a
good event of wicked beginnings, nor of good attemptes, cuill happes. Read
over the whole Bible, and thou shall not hear any thing repeated so often as
this: What seed a man sows, such croppe shall he gather: and that in the
extremity of death, the unjust shall reap the fruit of their travels: and
that God will impart to every man according to his merits: and that the death
of every man, shall be conformable to the life he has lead: and that the
justice of the righteous man, shall be upon his head, and the curse of the
^^godly upon his head, likewise with a thousand such like sentences. If all the
divine scriptures might be powered out, to see what would issue thereof, scarce
any thing would appear more often to our view then this.

Wherefore if thy works be wicked, and thy life likewise, what other thing can
we prognosticate thereof, but that the end will succeed as the beginning and
middle has been? What thing else shall we think him to gather in the other
life, but corruption, who in this life has sown nothing else but corruption?
Peradventure as our Savior says, We may gather roses of thorns, figs of
furse-bushes, etc. If the house of the wicked, as Solomon says, declineth
toward death, and his foot path leads directly to hell, what other port can
be expected after this navigations, but even such an end as where the wall or
tree shall fall, which bends to one side, but in that part whither it howeth
most. For he whose life, whose doings, whose thoughts has been their only
regard to hell, (for that they have all deserved it) where shall he settle
himself after all this, but even there right? where shall he have his
habitation, if not in outward darkness, which always walked in inward
darkness? how would thou bring to pass, that in the end of his journey he
should arrive in heaven, which has always pursued the beaten pathe that lies
straight to hell?

The Argument.
We ought not to abuse the mercy of God, perseuering in sin, upon
confidence thereof. For if Gods mercy can suffer so many Infidelles in the
world, and in the Church so many wicked Christians, and that all those should
be cast away quite: he will also suffer that every one which still remains in
sin, shall perish eternally.

CHAP. X.
ANd if on the other side thou say, that great is the mercy of God, which
does embolden thee in such that continuing in thy naughty life, are yet
assured of thy salvation. But tell me, how can thou offer greater ini^rie to
the mercy of God, then of his benevolence to take occasion to displease him?
Who taught thee to argue in this sort, that because God is good and gracious,
shou should have leave to be ungracious, and to merit heaven thereby? The
holy Ghost never taught thee this kind of reasoning, but rather in this
fashion, That God being so good, ought to be honored, obeyed, and embraced,
above all other things: wherefore since God is pitiful, it is good reason,
that in him I should repose my whole trust and considence that he will pardon
my treipasses, be they never so heinous, so that I detest them utterly,
turning my self unto him with a sincere heart. But proceeding always in
sin, believe it well, he will not abeare it, yea, he will condemn thee and
hate thee the more, whom he suffers so long. Thou can not gainsay me,
that of an hundredth parts of the world, there is scarce one repleated with
Christians, and that of ninety and nine which abide in the world, none are
saned. For as in the time of that great flood, none was saved out of the Ark of Noah, nor out of the house of Rub, none escaped of those which dwelt in
Jerusalem: so none can be saved out of the house of God, which it his church,
even that which we call Christianity. Behold in what pickle and perplexity
it stands in these days, and thou shalt find for certain, that in this
whole mystical body from top to toe, is scarce any thing entire and sound.
Set aparte some principal City where discipline takes place, and range
abroad through all Towns and other places, where (as I said) is no talk of
discipline, and thou shalt find much people, of whom may be verified that
which GOD said touching Jerusalem: Search all the streets and houses of
Jerusalem, and if thou shalt find one just man, for his sake I will have
compassion upon the City. Raunge abroad (I say not now through Innes and
Markets, for that these an^ places dedicated to deceit) but through the best
Citizens houses. As Jeremy says, Listen thy ears to that they speak, and
thou shall hardly hear ou^ good word, but bitter backbytings and murmr shall
fill thy ears. Their disorder, their oaths, their blasphemy, laughter,
discord, threats, and of all sides, both heart and tongues, debate of earthly
dross and gain, but very s^dome of God and good things, but altogether in
swearing and forswearing his holy name, which is the memory he has left unto
us. The same Prophet saying, Let them be mindful of me, but not in swearing
falsely by my name, i^ such sort, that by the external show, a man can scarce
conjecture whether that nation be Christian or Heathen, except it be by the
sound of belles, and ruthful rage of swearing and forswearing, which ringeth
round about, wherein they ^^ceede all Infidels. Then how can the^ be united
to the number of those (...) whom Esaias speaks in this wise, All they that
behold this people, shall quickly know them to be the plants to whom God
gave his benedictio^. Wherefore if such ought to be the life of a Christian,
that all they which behold him, may soon judge him so be the son of God,
in what sort shall we deem of those which seem rather scoffers and contemners
of Christ, then Christians indeed? If this then be the life of these, what hope
can we have of their salvation, according to the general rule we have set
down before? All this is spoken, that thou may perceive, if God,
notwithstanding his so great mercy that thou alledgest, suffers so many
Infidels in the world, and so many evil Christians in the church, and if all
these Infidels do perish, and so many Christians too, he will also be
contented that thou shall perish with them, if thy life be conformable to
theirs. But peradventure the heavens were favorable to thy birth, and
therewith all the commandments of God were altered, and the law of his
Gospel and of his justice, that for thy sake should me made an innovation of
all things. With this pity he suffered the fall of Angels, and the
transgression of our first Parents, and with them the blot of human
generation, and destruction of the whole world, with the great flood, and the
dreadful desolation of Jerusalem, of Babylon, of Niniuie, and of many other
noble Cities and Provinces.

And with this, he suffered also that hell should be enlarged, and that daily
so many millions of souls should tumble thither: And will he not suffer
likewise that thine shall pass the same way, living as disorderly as they did
before thee? But thou may object, that then God was rigorous, and is become
now more mild and courteous, and yet with this pity and clemensie, he has
suffered all that thou have heard, to the end that thou should likewise
fear thy fall, although thou be a Christian, whilst thou art wicked. Since it
is certain, that fruitless faith is not the instrument of salvation, but the
cheifest matter of aggrauate damnation. Perchance Gods glory shall be
lessened if thou enter not therein, Or art thou of such power, that God
stands in need of thee, and must hear with thee perforce? Or have thou any
bill of his hand, whereby he is hound to bestow upon thee such passing
privileges? If the children of David which were privileged by the merit of
their parents, God did not spare to punish them according to their deserts, for
that they offended grievously in his sight, so that many of them died miserably
in his disgrace: whence have thou this confidence so to assure thy self of thy
safety? Thou do ere, dear brother, yea thou offendest, if thou take this
to be trust and hope in God: this is not hope, but plain presumption: for that
which we call hope, is, to believe that a man repenting and forsaking sin, God
will forgive him all his grievous crimes: but thine is presumption, if thou
beleeuest, that persisting still in wickedness, shall not fail of thy
salvation.

The Argument.
To say that the love of the world is the cause of sin, is a vain excuse,
proceeding from a corrupt and carnal Christian, who has no taste nor sent of
supernall bliss. Wherefore he abiecteth those which are true and sincere, and
searches busily after false, frail, and momentall pleasures, which presently
he perceives not. Then should he know the deceit and danger of them, and how
perfect good are the spiritual delights.

CHAP. XI.
BUt perhaps thou will say, that the love of the world has thy heart and hands
fast hardle with the fetters of her slourishing vanities, and that she it is
that makes thee to decline from thy well attempted voyage. This is the excuse
of one that has not tasted of the spiritual delights, and therefore desires
corporal comfort. The country clown deemeth that there is no brauer Palace
any where, then his rude Cottage at home, for that he never saw the lo^^e
furress and curious workemanshippe of Castles and Cities. The little babe
woefully weepeth being descended from his mothers womb, because he is ignorant
yet how much this world is better whither he comes to dwell, then the
prison where he was pent before. Our first parents made great reckonings of
their villages and houses made with straw, before they espied the brave
buildings framed with timber and stone. To whom we may well resemble all
sensual men, who having yet no taste of spiritual spices, nor proved their
sap, their sweetness, their beauty, dignity, and nobility, covet more
greedily the shadows and shows of happiness, because they know not any part
of perfelt selicitie indeed. For if they had any true knowledge hereof, it
were impossible but that they should utterly despise all sensual solace.
According to this saying of the Prophet Esaias, In that day thou shall detest all
silver and gold, and the idols which erst thou did adore, even as durtie
rags of no reputation, and shall say unto them, when thou art cleansed: Depart
from me, get you out of my house, in such sort, as men contemn their false
gods, after they know the omnipotent God: So will they reject the vanities of
the world, so soon as they have a smacke of the true celestial bliss. For
(as Saint Bernard says) at the first taste of spiritual comfort, all flesh
from whence issues each earthly delight, leeseth his sent. For this is that
Siren song, that dream of Sirces, which has bewitched so many foretches. But
in opening this deceit, mother fraud that lurked erst, appears in sight,
which is, that they are not only ignorant of the spiritual bliss, but also
of the temporal joys themselves, for if they knew them thoroughly, it is not
possible that they should like them so well as they do. For tell me, what is
the world and all the iolitie thereof, (if with in corrupt eyes ye rightly
regard it, his guise, his beginning and progress) what is this world I say,
other then a heap of woe, a school of vanity, a market of deceit, a
bottomless pit of errors, a prison of darkness, always infested with
thieves, a durtie dunghill, a sea of stormy troubles? This world (as the
Philosopher said) is a barren land, a stormy field, a wood of thorns, a
green medowe, full of serpents, a gallant garden, but fruitless utterly, a
fountain of vain thoughts, a pleasant poison, a fable finely framed, a
delighting frenzy: what good things are therein, which be not altogether
false and frail, and what evil things are incident to it, which be not tried
to be true? his purpose is restless, his security without safety, his pains
to no purpose, his tears avails not, his intent without event, his hope
frustrate, his mirth fatned and forced: his dolours to be true, is order full
of disorder and confusion. So that dear brother, take it for unfeigned
verity, that the quiet and contentment which thou expectest, cannot be had in
this world, but to be rich in the favor of God, but in contemning thereof,
and in esteeming less of earthly things then they be indeed. Go round about
the sea and land, wander whither thou will (as says S. Augustine) and thou
shall find wretchedness every where, if thou walk not in the way of the Lord,
in whom consists all felicity and contentment.

The Argument.
The way of God is now nothing difficult, nor austere at all, but is become
very plain and easy, by the instruction and ensample of Christ, but especially
by his passion, his resurrection, and assention, and after by his sending down
of the holy Ghost.

CHAP. XII.
OTher there be which excuse themselves, saying: The way of God is very hard,
and this is only because his precepts are repugnant to the inclination of man's
appetites. This is one of the principal causes that makes men to loath this
labor, but the authors of such allegations, though they be Christians, and
live under the law of grace, they know not yet the first letter that stands
in the Alphabet of this law, nor have any smacke of this mystery. O thou
unhappy wretch which make profession to be a Christian, tell me I beseech
thee, wherefore came Christ into the world? wherefore did he shead his blood?
why did he institute so many sacraments? why sent he the holy Ghost? what is
meant by the Gospel, by grace, by this word Jesus? what does this renowned name
of Lord and Savior signify which thou woorshippest? If thou know not,
ask of the Evangelist, who says: His name shall be Jesus, for it shall be he
that shall save his people from their sin. But what is it to be a savior and
deliverer from sin, if by him we do not meritte pardon for our offenses
passed, and grace to excuse those that are to come? For what cause came Christ
into the world, if not to help us to salvation? Wherefore dyed he upon the
Cross, if not to slay sin? why did he rise again after his death, if not to
revive us? Likewise, wherefore spent he his blood, if not for a medicine able
to heal thy festered wounds? wherefore ordained he so many Sacraments, if
not for a special remedy against sin? what is she cheifest fruit of his
coming and possion, if not to show us thereby the way to Heaven, which before
was austere and difficult? Esai. 40.
As appears by Esaias, where he says? At the coming of Mossias, the
crooked ways shall become straight, and the bitter passages pleasant, large,
and wide. Besides all this, why did he send his holy Ghost, if not of flesh to
make thee spiritual? and wherefore did he send it in the form of fire, if
not to the end thou should be inflamed as fire, illuminated, fortified,
and transformed into himself, and should draw thee to heaven, whence he
descended, that he might power upon thee the grace and virtue that flows
from him abundantly, thereby to lighten the heavy yoke of sin, and to
mittigate the exercise of virtue, by rejoicing in adversity, by hope in perils,
and by ouercomming in temptations. This is the beginning, the middle, and end
of the Gospel, that as one carnal man and a sinner (which was Adam) made us
all earthly and sinners: so an other man being celestial and just (descending
from Heaven) made us all celestial and just. What other thing did the
Evangelists write of? What other promises did the Prophet forespeake of? what
else did the Apostles preach of? There is no other divinity but this: this is
the word abreuiated: this God wrote upon the earth: this is the consummation
and abridgement heard by the Prophet Esaias, which was verified by the sequel of
the great abundance of virtue and justice, which came into the world
immediately after.

Then (dear brother) behave thy self, as though thou were newly converted to
christianity, and ask of some skillful Divine, what thou art charged to do
by this thy Religion: of whom thou shall receive no other answer, then that
it behooves thee to be a good man: which to accomplish, this profession
gives thee comfort and courage, and causes the carnal man to become
spiritual, giving unto him the holy Ghost, the better thereby to proceed in
the promises. Surely it is a great oversight, that thou bearing the name of a
Christian so many years, know not yet what difference is between the
written law and the law of grace.

In this then consists the difference (since thou know it not) that law
enjoined a man to be just, not furnishing him with forces necessary for that
exployt, but this also charge us to be just and good, giving grace and
ability to accomplish this commandment: therefore for this cause and no
other, it is termed, the law of grace. That pressed us to battle, without
weapons to fight: willed us to ascend to Heaven, but gave us no ladders to
climb: prescribed to men that they should be spiritual, yet did it not
inspire them with the holy Ghost that they might be spiritual. But now it is
otherwise, for this law ceasing, the other succeeded, which far exceeded it,
by his merits, and by the sacred blood of Christ. And yet as though the old
law were not extinguished, nor Christ come into the world, thou stand
Iewishly coniecturing, that of thy self thou art sufficient to fulfill and
execute this law, and so to be justified. Wherefore every one that
understands this, shall perceive apparently that many Authors agree, that
this way of the Lord is both sweet and sour. Psalm. 18.
For love of the words issuing out of thy mouth, says the Prophet, I trudge a
journey hard and unsavory. I am delighted with thy Commandments, as with the
greatest treasures. For this way contains in it self both parts, that is,
it is difficult and easy: difficult in respect of nature, easy in respect of
virtue and grace: in such sort, that which was hard by one reason, is light
by another. As our Savior shows when he said, That his yoke was easy, and
his burden pleasant: for a yoke and burden is all ene in signification. But
to say it was sweet, declares the facility he had in bearing it here,
through the grace which was given unto him: So that if thou demaundest, how it
is possible that being a yoke it should be easy, seeing it is the property
of a yoke to be heavy and hateful? Whereunto it may be answered, that God
does quallifie the grief of those that willingly submit themselves to the
said yoke, as he has promised by the Prophet Esaias, saying, I will be as he
which loses the yoke, and as he that vnloadeth a man's neck from the weight
thereof. What thing is more worthy of admiration, then this, that a yoke is
easy, and that by God it is made portable, for that himself supporteth the
burden? Wherefore then does it seem a thing incredible unto thee, that this
burden should be pleasant, seeing God does help to sustain it? But will thou see both these contrarieties to concur in one person? Heart what Saint
Paul says, Romans 5.
We suffer adversity in sundry sorts, yet are we not impatient: we live in
extreme penury, nor for this are we ouercommed: we abide persecutions, yet
are we not destitute: we are humbled, yet not confounded: oppressed even to the
earth, yet not rejected utterly. Now regard on the one side the loathsome
load of labors, and on the other side, the delight that is therein by the
benefit of grace, Esaias 40.
which yet the Prophet Esaias shows more manifestly, saying, They which trust
in the Lord shall change their strength, shall ruime swiftly without
sweating, shall go still and never be weary. See here the yoke made easy by
the virtue of grace. Behold the fury of the flesh abated and converted to the
force of the spirit, or to term it more rightly, the might of men turned
into strength of God. Hear how the Prophet did not restrain himself neither
from labor, nor from rest, nor from the commodity he gat of the one and
other, where he said, They ran, and it greeueth them not, they went forth
still and were never weary.

Wherefore well-beloved brother, thou ought not to divert from this way,
though it seem somewhat hard and sour, since God and his grace are thy guides
therein. For it is no reason that nature should more prevail then grace, nor
Adam to be of more power then Christ, nor the devil to be greater then God:
nor yet the custom and long use of evil, then the habit of virtue and well
doings.

The Argument.
A man should not prognosticate his conversion to God, nor his repentance and
auersion from those offenses, whereby he has displeased the divine majesty
of God, and his neighbor: for the more he is spotted and infected with the
filth of vice, and the slower he is in cleansing and curing thereof, so much
the more he does aggrauate the burden of his penance.

CHAP. XIII.
WHerefore if the causes be so many, and so great, which of the one part does
move thee to change the course of thy life to a better race, and on the other
side, have no sufficient excuse to withhold thee from so doing: Tell me, I
pray thee, when will thou be ready to revolt from sin? Turn back thy eye,
brother, a little, toward the life that is passed, and consider of what years
thou art now: for now is the time, for the hour of entrance is passed, and
the beginning to unload thy self from thy former faults. Behold that thou
being a Christian, regenerate with the water of holy baptism, having God for
thy father, and the Church for thy mother, which God formed and framed with the
law of his Gospel, and with the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists, and
(that more imports) with the food of Angels, and yet thou live so loosely
as thou were an Infidel altogether, and never knew God. But tell me, what
sort of sin, what folly can be found, wherein thou art not culpable? what
forbidden tree is there, wherein thou have not fixed thy eyes? what green
medowe, where at least in thought thou have not glutted thy lascivious lust?
what pleasant accident has been objected to thy sight, whereunto thy desire
has not been extended? What appetite of thine haste thou not assayed to
accomplish? Calling God to thy mind, and how thou art a Christian, what more
could thou do, then to have a faith without expectation of the other life,
and fear of future judgment? What has thy life been else then a web of
wickedness, a sink of sin, a pathe of pleasure, a perpetual disobedience
to God? How have thou led thy life hitherto, but as thy appetites has guided
thee, as best fancied thy flesh, in exalting thy self, and in the glory of
the world? These have been thy Gods, these the Idols whereunto thou haste
kneeled and crowched, whose hestes thou haste fully performed. But in the^
mean time, what account haste thou kept with the divine law of God, and thy
allegeaunce due unto him? Perchance thou have esteemed him no more then if he
had been a God made of wood, for many Christians there be, which will as
easily believe that there is no God, as they think to offend him scotfree.
For they do no less believing the one, then they would if they believed the
other. What greater wrong, what greater despite may there be, to so great a
Prince, then thou believing all that the Christian religion instructs thee,
live no otherwise then if it were a fable? But art thou not appalled at the
multitude of thy former offenses, done without gruge of conscience? Does not
his omnipotency cause thee to quake, against whom thou haste committed such
enormous crimes? Lift up thy eyes, and regard the immeasurable greatness of
that supernall Lord, adored of all the Potentates of Heaven, before whom the
whole circuit of the world lies prostrate, in whose presence, all that is
created is as light chafe tossed with every puff of wind. And consider what
a thing it is, that such a silly worm as thou art, have so often pronoked the
wrath of that eternal God. Look upon the exceeding greatness of his
justice, and the sharp punishments which hitherto he has used in the world
against sin, not only in particular persons, but in Cities, Nations,
Kingdoms, Provinces, and in the universal world: and not only in the earth,
but in heaven, and there not in sinners only, but in his own innocent son.
Then if this were executed upon green wood, and for the faults of others,
what shall be done in withered wood ouercharged with the weight of proper
offenses.

Wherefore what can be more indecent and intolerable, then that such a vile
vermin should delude a Lord so puissaunt, that with a beck or a word can
detrude thee into the deapth of hell and damnation. Look in like sort upon the
patience of this Lord, who now so long has looked for thy return, as thou
have been an offendour. If after so long sufferance, thou will still abuse
this merde in incensing him to anger, he will unload his bow, will empty
his quiver, and power upon thee the darts of damnation. View the
profoundnesse of his deep judgments, whereof we read and see daily things
worthy to be wondered at. We may see a Solomon after all his wisdom, his
parables and profounde mysteries of the Cantickles, to forget God, and to fall
down in renerence of Idols. We may see one of the first seven Deacons of the
Church, which were enspired with the holy ghost, not only became an heretic,
but also a teacher, and a father of heresy. We may see day by day many
stars to fall from Heaven into the earth, with a miserable fall, to tumble in
dirt, and to be fed with the draffe of swine, which erst at the table of
our Lord, were sustained with the bread of Angels. Therefore if the righteous
for their secret pride, or negligence and ingratitude, became so vnmi^d full of
God, after they had been his dutiful Servant so many years: What do
thou look for, having framed thy life to no other trade then to accumulate one
sin upon an other? Therefore, whosocuer we see to live in this sort (as we
have told of before) shall it not be expedient, that he should now at the
length, cease to fill up the measure of his iniquities, and to assay to
please God, and to deliver his soul from bondage? should it not suffice him,
that he has lived so leaudlie till this hour, addicting himself wholly to the
world, the flesh, and the devil, and hereafter to employ himself, and to
run out the remnant of his race, (...) the homage and honor of God? is it
not needful after so long time, and so many injuries committed against his
Divine Masestie, to fear his severe instice, which the more patiently it
bears with the wicked, so much the more rigorously is revenged upon them in
the end? shall it not be reason that he should be afraid to lie so long
swallowed up in the gulf of sin, deprived of the grace of God, and to have
so strong an enemy as is he, who of a dear father, through his deserts is
become his adnersarie and his judge? Shall it not be reason, to dread, least
the force of long use be turned into nature and habitte, making of vice
necessity? How should he not fear by little and little to fall into a
reprobate sense: whereunto when a man is come, he does not any thing that is
acceptable in the sight of almighty God? The Patriarch Jacob said to his
father in law Labin, Fourteen years are passed since I have scrued thee, and
have had charge of thy business, and now it is time that I attend upon mine
own affairs, and that I begin to provide for mine own house.

Wherefore I pray thee, since thou have bin so long, not a retayner, but a
daily waiter to the world, not letting slip any opportunity of this life,
which was either appendaunt to thy pleasures, or agreeing to thy appetites:
shall it not to be reasonable for thee now at the length, to get some
commodity for the soul, and for the bertering of thy estate, in the other
life? certainly there is nothing more short and unsure, then the life of man.
Why then thou providing so carefully all necessaries for that which is so
momentall and transitory, do not likewise make some provision for that which
endures for ever?

The Argument.
A man ought to remember himself, and that he is a Christian, and that he
believe firmly all that he is taught by his faith, which should move him
either through love or fear. All things inuit him to the love and service of
God, among which he should acquire wisdom, and harken to the words of
Christ, who fixed himself to the cross for our redemption.

CHAP. XIIII.
NOw therefore if it be true as I have said, I beseech thee dear brother, and
charge thee by the precious blood of Christ, that thou remember thy self that
thou art a Christian, and that thou take all that which our faith teaches for
unfeigned verity, which plainly proves unto thee, that besides other things
thou have a judge, to whose eye lies open all the actions and moments of thy
life, who will come at a day unawares, wherein he will exact an account of thee,
even of every idle word. This faith tells she farther, that a man at his
death, is not quite extinguished, because after this mortal life, succeeds
an other, which lasts eternally: and shat men's fowls do not perish with
their bodies, but that the bodies resting, and raked up in their graves, the
souls yet enter into a new Kingdom, and into an other new world, where such
condition and company shall be assigned unto them as their manner and behavior
has bin in this life. Here unto this faith adioyneth yet more, that as the
reward of virtue, so the scourge of vice is so infinite, that although the
whole world were full of books, and every creature were a Scriuener, the
writers would sooner dye, and the world be at an end, before it could be
known and treated of particularly, that which each of these does contain in
it self. This faith also informs thee, that our debt and duty is so great,
through our benefits received of God, that though the number of a man's years
did surpass the sands of the seas, yet they should be too few to acquit
himself in his service toward him. The same faith affirms, that virtue is
of such passing valor, that all the treasures of the world, and all that a
man's heart can desire, may in no respect be compared the reunto. Wherefore if
such and so great things do exhort us to virtue, why be there so few which
embrace it, and endeavor themselves to attain it? If men may be moved with
any advantage or interest, what greater gain is there? what life more
perdurable? If with fear, what sharper punishments? what paint more permanent?
If with the bonds of bountious liberality, what greater debt have we then
that which we owe unto God, of whom we have received all things? If the dread
of dangers may stir us, what greater peril can there be then that of death,
whose coming is so uncertain, whose account so straight? If peace, if
liberty, if the gifts of the holy Ghost, and the solace of a sugared life, be
desired of all men, it appears evidently, that all these things are found
more readily in that life which is lead by virtue and reason, then in that
which is ruled by rage and passions, for that a man is a reasonable creature,
and not a beast. But if all this be not regarded, shall it not be sufficient,
that for the maintenance of veriue, GOD descended from Heaven to the earth,
and was made man, (who having created ye world in six dais) employed thirty
and three years in this work, wherein he also spent his blood and life. God
dyed to slay sin, yet for all this, we endeavor to revive in our hearts
those whom God would destroy with his own death.

What should I say more? for all reasons are sufficient to promote this matter,
or to show it as it is. Fo, I say, not respecting the cross only, but which
way soever we turn our eyes, we shall find, that all things do cry and call
us to this commodity, since there is no creature in the world (if he be well
noted) but does inuit us to the love and service of our supernall Lord: in
such sort, that look how many creatures there be in the world, so many
preachers there are, so many books, so many voices, which do stir us
thereunto. Wherefore, how is it possible that so many shriking sounds as here
thou hear, so many promises and thundering threats, can bear no part to
persuade thee thereunto? What should God, or could he do more then that he
has done, either by promising or threatening, to draw us to himself, and to
withdraw and terrify us from sin? This notwithstanding, being of such
weight, what shall I blame the boldness or bluntishnesse of men, which
believing this assuredly, doubt not to dally out the day in sin, to sleep
with sin, to arise with sin, and to bathe themselves in the beastly puddle
of all iniquities: and to do all this without fear, without scruple, without
abridging their sleep, or abating their fare, as though all their belief were
a dream, and the sayings of the Evangelists, fables of Titius the Giaunt, and
such like? How could thou do more then thou do, if thou did doubt
of thy belief? since it is evident, that hitherto only the shame and fear of
the wordle has brideled thy appetites: yet the fear of God cannot restrain
thee from satisfying thy sensuality, nor make thee blush in executing thy
devilish devices. Tell me, blind as thou art, deprived of understanding,
being in such security and confidence, whereupon works the worm of
conscience? whither is faith vanished, knowledge, judgment, reason, which
only endued thee with the title to be called a man? Do thou not dread so
huge, so certain, so undoubted dangers? If thou were set at the table and
served with meats, and some man should come unto thee (though a known liar)
saying, that the meats set before thee were impoysoned, thou would doubt
and dread to cate it, were the meat never so delicate, and he a liar that did
advise thee: Then if the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Evangelists, if God
himself does cry unto thee, saying, Death is in the pot, O wretched man,
death dwells in gluttony, which the devil presents before thee, and dare
thou to receive thy death with thy own hands, and to drink the dram of thy
damnation? What now avails this belief buried in thy bosom? where is his
light, his firmness as steel, his pearsing sharpness, seeing none of all
these things can extenuate thy sin?

O mad myser, O frantic fool, made senseless by the subtle sleightes of
the Serpent, adjudged to eternal darkness both within and without, for that
thou go straight from inward to outward darkness. Blind thou art,
because thou see not thy misery: senseless, because thou do not perceive
thy perdition: and more obdurate then the Diamonde, because thou feel not
the weighty beetle of the word of the Lord. O wreche wrapte in woe ten
thousand fold, worthy to be bewailed with no other tears then those which
shall lament thy damnation, saying, If thou knew the contentment, the quiet,
the peace, and riches that God in this life has offered unto thee, which now
are thus shut and kept from thee. O wretched was the dismal day of thy
nativity, but much more miserable shall be the day of thy death, which shall
be the very door and first step to thy damnation. How much better had it
been, if thou had never been borne, then to be tormented for ever? How
much better had it been for thee never to have been baptized, nor to have
known the faith, sith there they serve thee to none other end but to make
thy fault more grievous? for if the reach of reason be sufficient to cause
the guilt of the Philosophers to be inexcusable, for that they knowing God in a
sort, did not glorify him (as the Apostle says.) How much less can he
excuse himself whosoever he be, having received the light of faith, and the
water of Baptism, and yearly receives the holy Communion, and every day
hears his doctrine, does nothing that belongs thereunto, as the
Philosophers themselves have showed to have done in their lives? But what shall
we infer of all that we have said before, if not to conclude briefly, that
there is no other fence, no other wisdom, no other counsel in the world,
but to reject all the lettes and intricate cares of this life, and to pursue
that only pathe, where is obtained sure peace and eternal bliss? To this
reason does inuit us, justice, law, heaven, earth, hell, life, death, and the
mercy of God. To this the holy Ghost does enjoin us by the mouth of
Ecclasiastick, saying, My son, employ the flourishing years of thy youth to
discipline, that in thy age thou may suck the sweet sap of sapience, as
he which tilleth and sows, expects with patience the commodity that
grows thereof. Thy grief and smart shall be very slender, and soon shall
have a plentiful harvest. My son harken to my words, and despise not the advice I give thee: put voluntarily thy feet into the fetters, that prudence
has prepared, and thy neck into her yoke: bow down thy shoulders, and take
her bonds upon thee, and let it not grieve thee to be tied therewith: Couple
thy self to her with all thy heart, with all thy forces, and with all thy
might: Follow her footesteppes, search her diligently, and thou shall find her,
and when thou have found her, leese her not again in any condition. For she
shall give comfort to thy crooked age, and that which erst seemed sour and
tedious unto thee, shall become sweet and delectable, and her fetters shall
be the foundation of virtue, and her chains the jewels of glory. For in that
happy life, her bonds are the bulwarks of health. Thus much says
Ecclesiastic, by which words he notifieth unto us, the great beauty, the
delights, the liberbertie and riches of true wisdom, which is virtue it self,
and the knowledge of God, of which we here treat. But if this be not suffient
to mollify thy stony heart, lift up thy eyes, and look not to the water of
the world, which fleeteth quickly, but behold that Lord, who dying upon the
Cross, and sharply satisfying for that which thy sins deserved. Where he
stands in that form as thou see, with his feet fastened, to stay for
thee, and with his arms stretched abroad to receive thee, and with his head
declining to give thee at thy coming (as to the prodigal son) the sweet
kiss of reconciliation. There he calls to thee (if thou have the grace to
hear him) with so many cries as he has wounds in all his body. Imagine with
thy self that thou hear his words in thy heart, sounding in this sort:
Turn unto me, turn unto me, O Samaritane, turn unto me, for I will receive
thee. Thou know well that thou have committed adultery, with all those
lovers thou lustest after, yet for all this turn unto me, and I will pardon
thee: turn unto me, I say, for I am thy father, thy God, thy Creator, thy
Savior, thy faithful friend, thy only benefactor, thy full and perfect
felicity, thy final end. In me thou shall find rest, joy, peace, health,
truth, wisdom, and all treasures. In me thou shall find the flowing vain
of the lively water, which chasest thirst away, and lifts up a man to life
eternal. In me thou shall stand like unto the tree planted by the rivers side,
which yields his fruit in due and convenient time, which never leeseth his
verdure, and all that he does shall succeed prosperously.

My brother, these are the voices, the drums, and trumpets, wherewith Gods
eternal wisdom, calls sinners unto him, if thou will harken to this
harmenie, and not lysten to the Siren songs of the subtle Serpent, turn thy
self unto to God, and amend thy life speedily, to the which end this
Treatise is addressed. But how this is to be performed, shall be showed in the
next volume.

The end of the Conversion of a Sinner.
Sundry profitable Contemplations, gathered by the said Author.
The Argument.
A Christian man which couetteth to come unto God, must make his entrance
through the gate of compunction, generally confessing all his offenses.
Whereunto it shall avail him much, to exercise himself every day in certain
Prayers and godly Meditations, and in the considerations of death and of Gods
severe judgment.

CHAP. I.
HE therefore that is departed out of Egypt, and begins to march toward the
land of promise: he that like unto the lost son reremembreth himself, and
opens his eyes to behold the beams of glittering virtue, and knows the
perplexity wherein he is plunged, and the fraud of this frail life, and
desires to return to the plenteous repastes of his fathers house, his first
passage must be through the straights of penance, where it behooves him
ruthfully to record in his mind the former ryots and excesses, and firmly to
purpose the amendment of them. And for that this discussion and examination
ought to be as the Prophet says, with affliction and remorce of conscience,
it is the part of the penitent, at that time to use al such prayers and
ronsiderations as by any means may stir him to tears and dolor. To the which
avails much the consideration of death, of Gods final judgment, of the
pains of hell, and of the passion of Christ, suffered for the satisfaction of
our sins: Since it is apparent, that if there had bin no defects on our side,
there had heene no cause of his grievous annoy. These and such like
considerations may move us to sorrow, and to the detestation of sin, which is
the cheifest part of repentance. In the which we should exercise our selves,
not only the space of five or six days, but the greatest part of our life.
Wherein many penitents are deceived, who being most diligent in scouring their
conscience, and scanning their faults, are quite careless in bewayling of
them, whereas both the one and the other are most necessary, but chiefly the
last. And I think verily, that the cause why so many faynte in the following
of virtue, and in long time cannot attain to perfection, and sometime to
surcease their journey begun, is, because they have not laid a sure
foundation, nor have not planted the roots deep enough in this exercise. For
this being the pillar of all the building, when the foundation it self is
feeble, the work cannot be firm which is erected upon it. To the which
end, it is very necessary to assign certain days, many or sewe, as the
holy ghost shall direct us, wherein (as I have said before) we may exercise
our selves in all such prayers and meditations as may induce us to this
sorrow. For the plainer declaration of this doctrine, I mind to impart unto
you a few of the foresaid considerations, which may serve, not only to stir
us to be sorry for our sins, and to the hatred thereof, but also to allure us
to the love of virtue, and to the fear of God, and to the contempt of the
world, for all this is needful to nouices and beginners.

The Argument.
He that list to incline his heart to the hatred of sin, and to the dread of
God, must convey himself into some covert corner, and must bend and employ his
mind to the contemplation of the heavenly bliss, and the iniquities which
abound here in earth.

CHAP. II.
Whosoever then will have his heart settled hereupon, and will fasten this
firmly in his mind, must every day once or twice, take a time most quiet and
convenient for that purpose, and sequestring himself into a secret place, al
other earthly thoughts and vain imaginations being laid apart, arming himself
first with the shield of faith, and humbly craving the grace of the holy spirit
to assist him in this behalf: assuming to himself, the mind of that devout
Publican, which durst not to lift up his eyes toward Heaven, for the confusion
and horror of his offenses. Let him repeat some general confession, or else
the Psalm Miserere mei deus, with so great devotion as he can devise, and
suddenly let him apply his mind to the considerations following, that by this
means he may attain the fear of God, through the sorrow, the dread, and
detestation of sin.

The Argument.
In the first consideration, a christian ought to run over the multitude of
the mortal offenses that he has committed.

CHAP. III.
THe first sting that may stir us to the woe and hatred of our iniquities,
is, to consider the infinite number of them, and to fix them before our eyes,
as a terrible troop of armed Soldiers, that the soul may be appalled with so
hidcous a spectacle. Run over therefore breefely all the commandments of
God, through all the capital sins, through all the senses, the powers and
parts as well of thy body, as of thy soul, and thou shall perceive, that there
is scarce any commandment which thou have not transgressed, nor any sin
wherein thou haste not sunk, nor any sense external or internal, which thou
haste not abused, nor any benefit which thou haste employed to that end for
which it was given thee: But as the Prophet says, God has given thee his
gold and silver, and therewith thou haste served Baal. Look therefore into
thy self thoroughly, and view the race of thy life passed, and thou shall see
a huge web fraught full of deceit, of treachery, of pride, of lies, of
sloth, of envy, of covetousness, of hatred, of entisements, of blasphemy,
of malice, and of a thousand other manners of mischiefs: and thou shall find,
that like a brutish beast, in all and every of these thou haste followed and
fulfilled thy sensual delights, without regard of the law of justice or
reason, and thou shall perceive, that thou have lived as a Gentile or Pagan
altogether, which never knew God, or as though thou so beleeuest, that there
were no God, no death, no judgment, no pain, no bliss, nor any thing else to
be thought, but even to be borne, and to dye. He then that has lived this many
years so disorderly, shall it not be reason, that he employ the few days
that are remaining of his life, in bewayling his former years fondly consumed,
and to feel sensibly the ruin and decay of the powers of his soul, and the
time that he might hane gained in this while, which he shall not get
hereafter? For time lost can never be recovered.

Throw therefore thy self down prostrate before the feet of thy sauionr, and
with a pe^siue heart, say as follows. My sins, O Lord, are in number about
the sands of the Sea. I have spotted my self with the filth of every vice, and
my offenses are so multiplied, that I deserve not, nor dare not to behold the
Heavens, because I have provoked thy wrath, and have done evil in thy sight.

The Argument.
In the second consideration he should consider, that by sin is lost the
grace and comfort of the holy Ghost, the mutual amity, the favor and
fatherly protection of God, the participation of all the good things don in the
universal Church, and the benefit^ of Christ's passion.

CHAP. IIII.
Weigh farther, of how great treasures vice does rob and spoil thee, which
is one of the considerations that should most affright a Christian, whatsoever
he be, examining thoroughly on the one side, what is lost by sin, and on the
other side, with what facility careless men offend daily. For by sin is
lost the grace of the holy Ghost, which is the most precious gift that God can
bestow upon his best beloved in this life. It robs us also of the favor
of God, which always accompanies his grace. And if it be a great grief to
leese the favor of an earthly Prince, how much greater should the grief be,
to incur the displeasure of him that is king of heaven and earth? It
bereaueth us of the virtuous flowing from above, of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, wherewith the soul is made bright and pure in the sight of God, and is
armed and animated against the force and violence of the enemy. It robs the
soul of his interest in heaven, which proceeds from the same grace, since
that by grace glory is given (as the Apostle says.) Also of the spirit of
adoption, which makes us the sons of God, and instead thereof, insecteth us
with the fury of rebellion, which causes us to impugn his holy pleasure,
whereby we leese the entertainment due unto sons, and the fatherly
providence which God takes of those whom he receives for his children,
which is one of the greatest treasures that in this life may be enjoyed.
Wherein the Prophet rejoiced not without good cause, when he said, I am right
glad (O Lord) because I see my self shrouded under the shadow of thy wings,
which is, under the protection and fatherly providence that he has of his
chosen people. By sin, is lost, the peace, the quiet, and comfort of a
guiltless conscience, the sweetness and solace of the holy Ghost, the
fruit and merit of the virtuous actions that thou haste wrought all thy life
before, even until that hour, the participation of all those treasures which
the Church holds in her custody. Finally, by sin is lost the participation
and fruition of the merits which flow from Christ's passion, who is our head,
because a sinner is not incorporated in his body as a lively member through
grace and charity. All this is lost by one mortal offense, and that which is
gained thereby, is, to be adjudged to eternal torments, and for that time to
be cancelled out of the book of life, and in stead of the son of God, to
be made the vassal and bondslaue of Satan: and in stead of the temple and
seat of the most blessed Trinity, to become the den of thieves, the neast
of Serpents, the receipt and harbor of venomous Bafiliskes. This is the
guerdon convenient for sin, whereby thou may learn, whether it be not
good reason to tremble and quake, beholding with how little scruple of
conscience, with what facility and confidence, so many careless men offend
without measure. And farther, what reason it were that thou bedeawest thy
cheeks with bloody tears, if not for the love of God, yet at least for thine
own distress, which have lost such inestimable riches, for so small a myte
as is the delight and taste of one trespass. If Esau wayled and wept so
bitterly, because he had lost his inheritance in lewe of the like taste: with
what cries and complaints should thou fill heaven and earth, for the loss
of so worthy of patrimony? that with grief and sorrows sharp, thou may
recover the thing thou have lost by dalliance and delights.

The Argument.
In the third consideration, he should think upon Gods benefits bestowed
upon man, that he might be abashed thereat, and be ashamed of himself. And
therefore enjoin himself to some sharp affliction, for that he has been a
creature so ungrateful and unkind.

CHAP. V.
FOr the better replication of this, ponder in thy mind the infinite number of
Gods benefits. For how much the more a man wayeth how bountiful God has been
toward him: so much the more he shall be confounded in himself, seeing how
wicked he has showed himself to God. In this sort the Prophets did often
persuade the people of God to repentance. And in this manner Nathan the Prophet
began with David, when ere he reproved him of adultery, laid before him the
favor and regal dignity, whereunto God had promoted him, and what else he
had reserved for him. In like sort, a man should chiefly regard these ten
kinds of benefits that ensue: that is, the benefit of creation, of
conservation, of redemption, of baptism, of calling, of divine inspiration, of
preservation from evil, of the Sarraments, of peculiar grace and private
prerogatives which he has received of his Savior, and lastly, of the glory
which he expects hereafter to have. And particularly, let him fix himself
upon the benefit of vocation, which is this, that God has looked so long
for his conversion, and has suffered and supported his sundry sorts of
sin, with such exceeding patience, breathing upon him eftsoons godly motions
and divine inspirations in the very midst of his naughty life, thereby to
withdraw him from his iniquities, and to stir him to repentance.

Weighing then with equal balance, this wonderful liberality and benignity
of our Savior on the one side, and on the other, our stubbornness,
ingratitude, rebellion, and abominations committed against so merciful and
bounteous a benefactor, who will not be abashed and appalled thereat? who will
not rent his clothes? whose eyes will not yield streams of tears? whose
heart and intrailes will not be consumed in sighs? who will not call all
creatures to revenge and to wrecke their wrath upon a caitiffe so ungrateful
and rebellious?

The Argument.
In the fourth consideration, a Christian should consider the contempt and
injury he has done to God by his offenses: esteeming more, and preferring
earthly dross before his divine Majesty.

CHAP. VI.
COnsider farther, the despite and great wrong yt is done unto God through
sin, for that so often as we offend, the judgment and practice thereof does
still pass into our hearts, weakeneth the understanding, whereby we banish all
fear of transgression, nor we feel not the weight of sin, which if it were
set diametrically in the one part before the interest of sin, which is some
delight, or gain, or step of dignity, or such like, and on the other part
the displeasure of God, whereby we leese utterly God himself, who is the top
of our felicity. In such sort, as though God were contained in one balance,
and the taste aforesaid in the other, and a man placed in the midst,
deliberating and giving sentence which should be rejected, despises God, to
enjoy that fleeting delight: what greater contempt, what more ignominy, what
so great reproach can there be offered to the divine Majesty of God, then to
prefer and esteem better of dross and filth, then of Gods excellency.
Wherein we much resemble the Hebrews, when Christ and Barabbas being
presented before them, to know which should be delivered, with one accord
they rather chose Barabbas then Christ. And this is as though we would say
unto God, we will no more account thee for GOD, but we will adore and have for
our God and final end, our own delights and proper gain. For he that so
much regards a delight, that he prefers it before the love of God, and
esteems and accounts it of greater price then God himself, assayeth to
rob God of his royal dignity, who is the prop and pillar of our beatitude,
bestowing it upon some brickle or beastly pleasure, which is as though he
would bereave God of his crown, and give it to a creature. What thing can be
more horrible then this: God commanded the Heavens being senseless
Creatures, that they should feel this defect, and should wonder thereat,
saying by the Prophet Jeremy, O ye Heavens be astonished thereat, and let
your gates crack with maruelling, for my people have offended me grievously
after two sorts: They have forsaken me the fountain of the water of life,
and they assay to assuage their thirst in stinking puddles, which can hold no
water. He then that considers how many thousand times he has done unto God
the very same contempt and injury, what should he not tremble to have
committed so grievous crimes? should he not wish that his eyes were turned
into fountains of tears, to bewails night and day so great evils and excesses.

The Argument.
Fifthly, we ought to consider how much God hates sin, and for the same, how
many men be scourged with sundry calamities.

CHAP. VII.
COnsider the execrable hatred that God bears to sin, which cannot be
comprehended in the understanding of man, for that the malice of sin is
conformable to the majesty of the person offended. Wherefore as the greatness
and omnipotency of God is infinite, so also is the malice of sin committed
against him. And farther, as the bounty of god is infinite, so he has an
infinite hatred to wickedness. And yet if thou will know this gear more
clearly, and wilt imprint deeper in thy mind the hugeness of this hatred,
and therewithal wilt fix in thy heart the fear of God (which is the
foundation of all our avail) mark the dreadful and bitter punishments yt he
has executed against sin, and thereby shall understand it the better. These
punishments are innumerable, but thou may set to the view of thy
consideration, the most notable amongst them. As was the wrath of God extended
upon his cheifest Angel, and all his adherents: Upon the first man, with all
his posterity: Upon the whole world, by the general flood: Upon the five
great Cities consumed with fire and Brimstone, discending from Heaven: Upon the
two sons of Aron, Nadab and Abiu, because they would offer up sacrifice to
God with other men's fire: Upon David, for his adultery: Upon Saul for his
disobedience: Upon Hely, for not chastening his Children: Upon Anania and
Saphira, for their avarice: Upon Nabuchodonezer, for his pride: Upon
Jerusalem, Babylon, and Niniuie, and other Cities, which for their diverse
offenses, were vttterly destroyed and left desolate. Consider also, the
fierceness of hell fire, and the torments thereof, which GOD provided for the
revenge of sin: the satisfaction and punishment that his son was forced to
endure, before he could cure the guilt and grief of sin, which is more
terrible then all the rest, for the worthiness of the person, upon whom it was
executed. Every one of these punishments, if it be scanned advisedly, with his
due circumstances, shall much avail to advise us of the dreadful severity of
Gods justice, and the mortal hatred he hears to sin, whereby may be driven
into our hearts, the dread of God, and dolor of sin.

He therefore that considers how often he has incurred this so heinous
indignation of God, shall it not be requisite that he shrink and shiuer
thereat, and that he with for a sea of sorrowful sobbes and tears, to quench
therewith the fury and flame of Gods hideous hatred enkindled against him? A
man therefore meditating in his mind with a vehement passion of dole, that the
mighty Lord of hosts will lay upon him, all the plagues before mentioned,
or at the least some part of them: let him meekely prostrate himself before
the presence of God, and being truly humbled in the very bottom of his
heart, say he thus.

A Prayer.
O Supreme Creator of all things, I reckoning in the secret records of my
mind, my grievous guilt committed against thy divine Majesty, do marvel at
my folly, yea at my madness, weighing how benign and mighty a patron I have
abandoned. I accuse and curse my ingratitude, seeing that from such liberty, I
am come to so wretched thraldom: I know not what to expect or hope for, but
hell, death, and desperation. For the justice which I cannot shun, does gall
and crush my conscience: yet remember contrariwise thy infinite mercy and
clemency, which by the testimony of thy Prophet, excels all other works,
and by the which in a cortaine manner thou masterest thy self, suddenly a
joyful spark of hope does recreate my sore afflicted soul. For why should I
despair to obtain pardon of him, who by his Prophets does so often inuit
sinners to repentance, saying, I wish not the death of a sinner, but rather his
conversion and life. And thy only begotten son by many Parables has
manifested unto us, how ready thy remission is to all true penitents.

This he showed by the Jewel which was lost and found again: by the
prodigal son, whose perfect image I acknowledge to be in my self. For he I
am which have wrongfully renounced thee my most affectioned father, and he
that wasted his blood riotously: and following the pursuites of my fleshly
desires, have fled from the^ pleasant path of thy commandments, and have
fallen into the beastly bondage of sin, and consequently, have been
oppressed with extreme distress and misery. From whence I know not who can
restore me home again, but he only from whom I have revolted. Sweet
Savior, let thy mercy receive the man that humply prays pardon, whom thou
have graciously expected even till this hour. But because this is not due to
my merittes, in stead of them, I offer unto thee all the travails and deserts
of thy dearly beloved son, and all the sorrow and torments that he has
suffered for me.

Therefore, most merciful father, for the fervent love and petitions of thy
dear son, forgive the faults of thy histoyall vassal, regard the noble
sacrifice offered by thy son, and race out of thy remembrance, the
disobedience of thy leaud servant. For the ransom that he has paid for my
delivery, surpasses far any my debts or trespasses whatsoever. Oh that it
would please thee to put in a pair of balance my lewdness and thy
liberality, my wickedness and thy wounds, no doubt the peise of them would
be more weighty a great deal. For what guilt can be so grievous, for which
such sorrow cannot satisfy sufficiently? which cannot be washed away with
such affliction, with so many tears, and with such obedience and humility,
with such invincible patience, and above all, with such immeasurable love? What
crime can be so enormous, which may not be cleansed with that bloody sweat,
yea whole floods of blood? What sin is there so execrable, which is not cured
by Christ's death? Oh heavenly Father, I offer here unto thee, the selfsame
my Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ thy son, beloved most tenderly. His
sharp sorrows, his agonies incomprchensible, the which thou know exactly
to be suffered for my defects: and in stead of the contrition which I ought to
have for them, I offer unto thee his bloody sweat: in stead of my tears,
which I cannot shed because of the adamanticall harness of my heart, I offer
unto thee, his humble and fervent prayers, for all my slouths and negligences.
For end: I offer unto thee all his loathsome labors, and virtuous exercises,
his austere life, and all that he has wrought therein, and the bitter torments
that he did abide, as a worthy sacrifice of thy divine glory, for all the
iniquities wherewith my whole life I have offended thee, and for the good
things which I have omitted and left undone. Which live and raignest for ever
and ever. Amen.

The Argument.
In the sixth consideration, a man should think upon death, the last judgment,
and bell pains. And how grievous will be the separation of the soul from the
body, by means of death, which by reason of diverse accidents occurring then
together, is the very receipt of excessive sorrows and anxieties.

CHAP. VIII.
TO these considerations, I will add other three, out of Sarasinus of Fermus,
that is, death, judgment, and she pains of hell, which are a very necesry
appendix to all yt we have treated of before. The same Doctor tells us, that
to him that is newly converted, nothing is more behouefull and requisite, then
the meditation of death, both for that it repelleth vain delights, as also
because the practice thereof is of such facility, as the which we daily view
with our eyes, and feel with our hands: yea, we may rather say, that our
surest portion is with death, and that we dye continually, having a body so
corruptible, that every hour alters and changes his shape, and never
rests in one estate. Like unto a river that passes with a furious and
headlong course, whereof no part can be marked thoroughly: for it running
swiftly, whilst ye note one wave, straight it is not the same that ye looked
upon before, but is turned into another. Many devout considerations may be had
concerning death, which the matter it self yields sufficiently to him that
advisedly deliberateth hereupon. Of which, minding to collect a few, I do
affirm, that if thou intend to reform thy life, when thou risest in the
morning, persuade thy self so much as thou may, that the same will be the
last day of thy life, and dispose of thy soul and worldly affairs, in such
sort, as though in very deed thou should not live one hour longer, and
think not that thou deceiuest thy self in so doing, for if death may attache
thee every day, thou should likewise daily attend his coming. And farther
I say unto thee, that no one day of thy life shall pass without many
negligences, unless thou do enforce thy self to believe that every of them
is the last of thy life. Think also upon the dreadful stroke of Death,
which because it is so uncertain, ought to be feared continually: And
consider to how many perilles of death we are subjected, and thou shall find
that they are innumerable, as well within the body as without, in so much
that if thou look warily about thee, thou shall perceive Death to be painted
in every place, and business. Think also what pressures and agonies shall
assault thee at the point of death.

To this consideration, it shall assist thee much, to behold sometimes a man
dying. Mark the accidents and painful passions of that hour, how his body
lies forsaken of natural heats, his senses without force or moving, as
though it were a very stone, the extremities and uttermost parts wax colds,
the face is turned into the color of lead, the bowls of the eyes dipped in,
the mouth full of foam, the tongue swollen, the neck winding to every side.
Then mark also how the breast beats and pants, and is ready to burst
asunder with pain, the lips wax blewe, the teethe become dumb. Finally,
all the body dissoluing it self, and being forsaken of the soul, with
sorrow inestimable the man rests a lump of earth. Thou perceiving and
viewing well such perplexities in other, may likewise represent the same
spectacle in thy self, imagining that the Phisttians have now given thee
over, as knowing the malady to be incurable; thy friends and kinsfolks
about thy bed, whose presence shall augment the grief of thy departure. O how
dreadful shall that separation be, where wealth shall not assuage thy woe, but
shall rather plunge thee deeper in the gulf of calamities, neither shall
honors assist thee? yea thou shall leave them with like vehement smart, as
thou gottest them with greedy desire, and for thy wonted delights, shall reap
the fruits of a gnawing conscience. What then will thou do being brought to
this point? what counsel will thou then take? To go out of thy body will be
intolerable, to abide there impossible, to defer thy departure, cannot be
granted thee, neither may thou return to thy sensual delights, which
now are senseless together, but knowing thy self, and scanning them more
narrowly, shall be abashed at thine own brutish behavior, and if it were
possible, would fly from thy self. Shall see thy self beset with horrible
monsters, that is, with thine own sins, of whom whither soever thou
wandrest, thou shall be pursued and hedged in, all that is passed shall seem
unto thee as the twinkling of an eye, and shall know the time to come to be
infinite. Then may thou well say with the Prophet, The dolours and dangers
of death has enclosed me round about, and the fury of hell has assaulted
me. By this minding and meditation of death, thou shall acquire many great
commodities. First, thou shall be stirred and incensed to the service of God,
the fear of whom is the foundation of wisdom, and beginning of true bliss.
Endeavor therefore, so to arm and address thy self at all points, that thou
be not vanquished by sin. Farther, shall view thine own wretchedness and
infirmities, which will serve as a corzie to quallifie the swelling rancor of
pride, and to establish humility, the very queen and guide of all other
virtues. And shall easily reject hateful avarice, and greedy gaping for
earthly vanities. For the memory of death, causes thee to know, that none of
these things can be called thine, which thou can not carry with thee out of
this world. And thou continuing in this exercise, unawares thy dread shall be
turned into desire, and death shall not seem so terrible unto thee, for that it
depriueth thee of thy temporal life, as delightful and acceptable, because it
gives end to so many greefes and miseries, and gives entrance to life and
light eternal. And thou shall perceive how little cause thou had to
complain, or to be sorry, weighing that whilst thy body does perish and
consume in the grave, thy soul lives blisfully in heaven, with a firm
belief to rise again at the last day to life everlasting.

The Argument.
In the seventh consideration, ought to be premeditated how severe and rigorous
Christ will be at the day of judgment: for that his countenance will then
declare to the wickid beholders, nothing else but furious wrath and revenge,
which none can escape, for there must be given up an exact account of all
things done and thought of in this world.

CHAP. IX.
EAch man proves and perceives in himself by often experience, that his
understanding, by the apprehension of some fearful object or weighty
consideration, retireth and coucheth closely within it self, and for that
instant, repelleth easily all other idle imaginations. For which cause, it is
most prositable counsel, that a sinner at his first conversion exercise
himself seriously in such cogitations, for that by this means, peevish
fancies, sometime through dread, sometime through wonder, will be either
brideled or banished quite. If the memory of death, as is aforesaid, has
such force to cut off, and to restrain our vain and bagraum thoughts: how
much more may this be done by the remembrance of that which insueth after
death immediately, which is Gods judgment, and the pains of hell? By which
meditations, if thou often think upon them, shall be brought to pass, that
which Ecclesiastic affirms, Remember thy days, (whereby he means that
which then shall happen unto thee) and thou shall never do amiss. S. Hierome
not without just cause said: Whether I eat or drink, me thinks still I
hear the sound of the Trumpet buzzing in my ears: Arise from death, and come
to your judgment. Which how terrible it shall be cannot be imagined, since all
other terrors or tragedies whatsoever in comparison of this is nothing at all.
Many times God has manifested his judgments in this world, as when he
drowned the world with the great flood: when he burned Sodom and the Cities
adjoining: when he struck Egypt with diverse dreadful plagues: when he made
the earth to open in the desert to swallow up sinners: all which judgments,
being compared to that general judgment which shall be exercised in the last
day, are but shadows, but shows, and figures of the verity. If then thou
desire to come to thy self, and to gather thy wits together with the
remembrance of this, represent to thy imagination the terriblenesse of Christ
thy judge, whose countenance shall declare nothing else but rigor and revenge,
as at the first coming he showed mildness altogether. From whom thou can
not appeal to any other, because he is supreme Judge: neither can thou
avoid his fury, because he is most puissant: and for that he is the very
fountain and God of knowledge, nothing can be concealed from him. And because
he hates iniquity out of measure, he will not suffer any sin to be
unrevenged.

There thou must be accountable of all thy transgressions, debts, and
trespasses, whereof if the least be enough to put thee in extreme danger and
perplexity, who can make satisfaction for so many debtes and arrerages, as
shall be exacted at thy hands? Then thou shall be examined how thou have
vestowed thy time, how thou haste ordered thy body, how thou have gonerned
thy senses, and how thou have guided thy heart, how thou have answered to the
divine inspirations, how thou haste acknowledged so many courtesies. In the
which accusation, thou shall be convinced with so many witnesses, as are the
creatures which thou have abused by sin, which then will be so stirred to
revenge the wrong done unto their creator, that if it were possible, those
which are immortal would dye with fear. For it shall be a horror inestimable,
to see the world all on fire: the buildings and princely Palaces overthrown
and torn in pieces: the earth to tremble: to view the elements to change
their course: the Sun to be darkened: the Moon and Stars to leese their
light: to behold the death and destruction of all creatures: the open gaping
of graves: to hear the voice of the terrible trumpe, and woeful waylings of
nations: to mark the discovering of consciences: to regard the monstrous
deformed devils, and she in^^^nall furnace sparkling with furious flakes. But
of all other things shall be most terrible to look upon, the victorious
flagge of the Cross, clittering in the air, with all the ensigns of the
glorious passion of our Savior: To see the Judge to charge his enemies for the
making frustrate, yea the reitteration of so many torments as he has suffered
for their redemption. Who might more easily endure the smart of hell pains,
then to see themselves so accused and accursed of the Lord of bounty and
courtesy, and to be expelled from his presence to perpetual punishment.

The Argument.
In the eight consideration, we ought to premeditate upon the intolerable
terror of hell pains, which shall be perpetual. But of al those torments,
the most grievous is the loss and lack of Gods cheerful countenance,
without any hope for ever to gain it again.

CHAP. X.
BUt it may so chance, that mauger thy might, for all these considerations,
idle thoughts will not forsake thee, though it must needs be a sound fleepe
and a very drowzie dream, that will not be awaked with such incitations. Yet
thou must not be discomforted, but how much more difficults do arise, so much
the more stoutly thou should strive to atchieue thy enterprise. Assay then
whither the search of hell pains will be more behouefull unto thee,
concerning which, two things are chiefly to be noted, that is, the vehemency
of their smart, and the time of their continuance. The least of these is able
to mollify the most stubborn and stony heart of the world: but the which is
not moved neither with the one nor with the other, is either dead in his
soul, or else believes not that which the Christian faith shows.

For though the greatness of hell torments cannot be imagined nor expressed,
filled with most just fear. If thou accustom thy self to such exercises, a^^
do persevere therein, in short space thou thalt become a new man, for by
these meditations thy mind shall be brought to despise the world, to shun
sin, to fear these pains, and to love virtue. And though at the beginning
thou be appaled and affrighted vehemently, yet hand patience a while, for thy
cold fear shall be qualified and tempered with the heat of love, as the black
night is turned by little and little into the bright shining day.

EINIS.

