A marvelous Medicine to cure a great pain,
If a Mayden-head be lost to get it again.

To a pleasant new tune.


ONce busy in study betwixt night and day,
with choice of inventions I had in my mind,
And many odd matters my mind did assay,
but any to please me I could not well find:
Then suddenly casting the nose in the wind,
I smelt out a Medicine both precious and plain,
How to help silly Maidens that had been somewhat kind
to get by good order their Mayden-head again.
First the Maid must be brought into a sleep,
for three hours together before she awake,
And seven days after this diet must keep,
with these kind of compounds the which she must take,
She must eat neither rost-meate, sod, neither bake,
but all kind of dainties she must refrain,
Save only this medicine, the which if she take,
then it will restore her Mayden-head again.
The first day give her the slime of an Gele,
blown through a Bag-pipe with the wind of a bladder,
With two or three turnings of a spinning wheel,
boyld in an Egge-shell, and streind through a ladder:
The tongue of an Vrchin, the sting of an Adder,
boyld in a blanket in a shower of rain,
With seven notes of music to make her the gladder,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
The second day give her the peeping of a Mouse,
with three drops of thunder that falls from the sky,
And temper it with three leapes of a Louse,
and put therein three skips of a Fly,
With a gallon of water of a Widows eye,
that weeps for her husband when death has him slain,
Let her take this medicine and drink by and by,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
The third day give her the chattering of a Sparrow,
roasted in a Mitten of vntan'd Leather,
Give it her with the rumbling of a wheele-barrow,
and baste it with three yards of a black Swans feather,
The juice of a Whetstone thereto put together,
with the far of a Friar brought hither from Spain
Let her lay all these in an ell of Louse leather,
and lay warm to her belly to help her great pain.
The fourth day give her the song of a Swallow,
well tempered with Marrow wrung out of a log,
With three pound and better of Stock Fish tallow
hard fried in the left horn of a Butchers blue dog,
With the gaggling of a Goose, and the friskes of a Frog
the bill of a shouell, or a Humble-bees brain:
Give her this fasting, with the grunting of a Hog,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
The fifth day give her betwixt eight a clock and nine,
some gruell of Grantum made for the nonce,
The brains of a birdbolt powdered very fine,
and beat in a Mortar of Ginne-wrens bones,
Boyld in a nut-shell betwixt two millstones:
with the guts of a Gudgin before she be stain:
Let her be sure to drink all this at once,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
Now mark well the sixth day what must be her trade,
she must have a Woodcocke, a Snipe, or a Quail,
Baked fine in an Oven before it be made,
and mingle it with the blood of a Snaile,
With four or five Inches of a Iacke-an apes fail:
what though for a while it put her to pain,
Yet let her take it without any fail,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
The seventh day give her a pound of Maids moches,
brayd in a basket of danger and blame,
With conserues of Coleworts bound in a box,
to comfort her stomach with the sirrup of shame:
Although she be past all hope of good name,
and unto her honesty a very great stain.
Let her take it to remedy the same,
and it will restore her mayden-head again.
Lo these are our Medicines for Maidens each one,
which in their Virginity amiss somewhat fell,
Pray you if ever you hear them make moan,
and gladly would know the place where I dwell,
At the sign of the Whip and the Eg-shell,
near Pancake ally on Salisbury Plain,
There shall they find remedy using this well
or else never to recover their mayden-head again.
Printed at London for H.G.


