Londons Ordinary, OR Every Man in his humor.
To a pleasant new tune.


THrough the Royal Exchange as I walked,
where Gallants in Satin did shine:
At midst of the day, they parted away
at several places to dine.
The Gentry went to the Kings head,
the Nobles into the Crown:
The Knights went to the golden Fleece,
and the Plowman to the Clown.
The Clergy will dine at the Miter,
the Vitners at three Tons:
The Usurers to the Devil will go,
and the Friars unto the Nuns.
The Ladies will dine at the Feathers,
the Globe no Captain will scorn:
The Huntsmant will go to the Greyhound below,
and some Townsmen to the Horn.
The Plummer will dine at the Fountain,
the Cooks at the holy Lamb:
The Dr^^kards at noone, to the Man in the Moon,
(...) ^^uckolds to the Ram.
The Rorers will dine at the Lion,
the Watermen at the old Swan:
And Bawdes will to the Negro go,
and Whores to the naked Man.
The Keepers will to the white Heart,
the Mariners unto the Ship:
The Beggars they must take their war,
to the Egshell and the Whip.
The Fa^riers will to the Horse,
the Blackesmiths unto the Lock:
The Butchers unto the Bull will go,
and the Carmen to Bridewell Docke.
The Fishmongers unto the Dolphin,
the Bakers to the Cheat Loaf:
The Turners unto the Ladle will go,
where they may merrily qu^ffe.
The Tailors will dine at the Sheeres,
the Shoomakers will to the Boot:
The Welshmen they will take their way
and dine at the sign of the Goat.
The second part,
to the same tune.


THe Hosiers will dine at the Leg,
the Drapers at the sign of the Brush:
The Fletchers to Robin-hood will go,
and the Spend-thrift to Beggars Bush.
The Pewterers to the quart Pot,
the ^oopers will dine at the Hoope*
The Cobler^ to the Last will go,
and the Barge-men to the Scoope.
The Carpenters will dine to the Axe,
the Colliers will dine at the Sack,
Your Fruterer hee^ to the Cherry Tree,
good fellows no liquor will lack.
The Goldsmiths to the three Cups,
for money they hold it as dross:
Your Puritan to the Pewter Can,
and your Papists to the Cross.
The Weauers will dine at the Shuttle,
the Glouers will unto the Glove:
The ^aydens all to the Mayden-head,
and true Lovers unto the Dove.
The Saddlers will dine at the Saddle,
the Painters will to the green Dragon:
The Dutchman will go to the sign of the Froe,
where each man madry ink his Flagon.
The Chandlers will dine at the Scales,
the Salters at the sign of the Bag:
The Porters take pain at the Labor in vain,
and the Horse-courser to the while Nag.
Thus every man in his humor,
from North unto the South:
But he that has money in his purse,
may dine at the sign of the Mouth.
The Swaggerers will dine at the Fencers,
but those that have lest their wits:
With Bedlam Tom, let there be their home.
and the Drum the Drummers best fits.
The Cheter will dine at the Checquer,
the Pick-pokets in a blind Alehouse:
Till taken and tried* up Holborne they ride,
and make their ends at the Gallowse.
Printed at London for John Wright dwelling near the Old Baily.


