TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF Commons assembled in Parliament.
An Abstract of the general grieuances of the poor Freemen and Iourney-men
Printers oppressed, and kept in servile bondage all their lives by the
unlawful ordinances of the Master and Wardens of the Company, which they
fortify only by a Warrant dormant.
With their most Humble Petition,
FFOM the beginning of Printing his Majesty's progenitors by their prerogative
Royal did privilege such persons as they pleased soly to Print some peculiar
books, leaving the rest in general to the Printers.

And for this Art of Printing was the key that opened the door of knowledge
and learning (which is the honor and support of all States and Kingdoms) his
Majesty's progenitors were pleased to incorporate a selected number, and to
indow them with a large Charter and many great privileges which was graciously
intended for the general good of the whole company, but by the innouations
brought in by the Masters and their ordinances, the benefit is converted to
them in particular, and the petitioners utterly ruined thereby.

The laws of the kingdom authorize all persons, that have served an
Apprentiship according to the statute, lawfully to set up and use that trade to
which they have served. But the petitioners are deprived of that benefit (which
all honest and loyal subjects enjoy) by ordinances of the Masters of their
company. And made perpetual bondmen to serve some few of the rich all their
lives upon such condissions, and for such hire, and at such times, as the
Masters think fit: for their trade of Printing (but as servants) they must not
use, so as they take all possibiltie of Advancement (be they never so exquisite
in their quality) from the petitioners, and make them incapable of maintenance
for them their wives and posterities.

The Masters obtained a decree 28. Eliz. prohibiting the petitioners to set up
any press or presses wherewith to print upon pain of six months
imprisonment without Bail or mainprise, and his presses and other instruments
to be defaced.

The decree was obtained under color of granting the petitioners diverse books
in privilege to be printed for their benefit, and diners ordinances for the
petitioners continual and full employments, and other orders profitable for
them. But the decree obtained, they observed none of their contracts: those
being instituted without penalty. But all that tended to the petitioners
prejudice, and their Masters particular profits, were enjoined under great and
grievous punishments.

Whereas his Majesty was graciously pleased to grant in privilege the
printing of diverse books unto the petitioners the poor Printers (they by
their ordinances have disposed them wholly to their own particular benefit,
the petitioners having no share or benefit of his Majesty's most gracious and
free bounty, intended chiefly to the poor petitioners. And with the profit
of his Majesty's gift, they have purchased and drawn into their hands diverse
other privileged books, converting them likewise to their own ends.

In like manner under a false pretense of relieuing the poor, they have
obtained almost al into their hands, what either his Majesty: or his
progenitors ever granted in privilege, of which the Petitioners and poor sort
of Printers expecting benefit, reap indemnity and prejudice, and his Majesty's
Subjects in general are abused by their exactions.

For they keeping multiplicity of Apprentisies, (who after their Apprentiships,
like the Petitioners, become for ever more servile then before) Print Books
most by their Apprentises, whereby the Petitioners have not half employment
sufficient to work as servants; But the Petitioners are in worse case, then
when the privileges were in strangers hands, which had no prentises. Besides
the Masters of the Company have raised the prizes of Books, Print in worse
Paper, and with dimne and bad Letters.

The Stationers to whom these privileges were never intended by his Majesty's
most Gracious Gift, or the Grant of his Progenitors, are the chief Ingrossers
of these Privileged Coppies, with some few Printers. And further, the
Stationers by an agreement among themselves will retale no new Copies, unless
they be of their own. For be it never so Religious, Learned, or profitable, if
it be a Printers, either by purchase, or by free gift, they will not sell the
same: but the Printer must loose his labor, his Paper and expense, if he will
not sell them at their rate: by which means the Stationer has all the profit
both by Printing and Booke-selling.

If the Petitioners infringe any part of the former Decree, or any of their
own Ordinances, or but seem to question their right in the benefits
Graciously given them by his Majesty, or complain of their unconscionable and
lawless proceedings, they by virtue of a Warrant Dormant, presently break the
Petitioners houses, imprison their bodies, seize their goods, and deface their
Presses and Printing Instruments, without legal proceeding or euiction by
information. And by this means dispose of all things amongst themselves, so a
few are raised to great and infinite estates, and all the Petitioners thereby
made absolute beggars.

Reasons why the Petitioners should be relieved in this high and most
Honorable Court.
The Decree and their Ordinances bar them all relief in any Court of
Justice, or any other Court of Equity, but this only.

The Decree and their Ordinances are absolutely contrary to the Laws of this
Kingdom, and against the Laws of God and Nations.

The Masters have in nothing performed their Contracts made at the obtaining
the Decree.

The Petitioners are deprived of that freedom that all other loyal subjects
enjoy, and they ought to have.

His Majesty's bounty extended to charitable uses, but is converted to their
private ends and benefits.

The Petitioners most humble request is:
That the Decree may be dissolved.

That the Petitioners may enjoy that liberty and privilege that every honest
and loyal subject ought to enjoy.

That they may have equal share of what his Majesty Graciously gave for their
charitable uses.

And such other privileges distributed amongst the whole Company as of right
belongs, wrongfully by them now usurped.

The Petitioners shall beseech the Judge of all Judges, to Crown you all with
eternal Honor.

