A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF ROYAL MONARCHY, AS OF THE BEST COMMON WEAL: VVherin
the subject may behold the Sacred Majesty of the Princes most Royal Estate.

Written by CHARLES MERBVRY Gentleman in duetifull Reverence of her Majesty's
most Princely Highness.

Whereunto is added by the same Genesis A Collection of Italian Proverbs, In
benefit of such as are studious of that language.

ANCHORA SPEI.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Blackefrieres, by
Ludgate. 1581.

ALLA PRVDENTISSma ET VIRTVOSISSma SIGNORA, LA SERENISSma REINA ELISABETTA,
Reina felicissma d'Inghilterra etc.
CARLO MERBVRY humil vassallo, and minimo seruo desidera lunga vita, and
perpetua felicita.
SI COME il viandante riguarda al Sole, il nauigante alla tramontana, and la
calamita al Polo: cosi (Serenissma Maesta) hauend'io a solcar con la mia debil
barca nell'alto mare delle Republiche, and de glistati; ho preso ardire d'alzar
gl'occhi alla diuina, and chiara stella del suo felicissmo Regno; indrizzando
il corso del mio viaggio, and gouernandolo tutto, secondo lo splendour, and la
chiarezza di quello. Pero con ogni humilta supplico sua Sacra Maesta, che
(qua^tunque la mia Nauicella non habbia a pena toccate le prime spo^de di quel
profondo pelago) si degni pure con benigna front riguardarla; sgombra^do con
la serenita de'i suoi reali occhi l'indegnita di quella, and del infelice
nocchiere: Il quale priega diuotamente Iddio, che sua Maesta Serenissima,
(Stella, Sole, Honor, and Gloria della natione Inghilese) splenda lungamente,
and ci scaldi sempre con i suoi viui, and chiarissimi raggi.

TO THE READER.
I Had thought, when shortly after my coming from beyond the Seas, I first
entered into this boldness of vvriting (provoked thereunto for not loosing
altogether the remembrance of those fevv studies which I had used in my late
trauelles: enforced also by the vacantnesse of my time (as then attending in
Court upon her Majesty's service:) and not a little encouraged by the virtuous
and learned company of my good friend master Henry Vnton, with whom I had
both in the languages and in other good letters, vvherin he is rarely endued,
daily conference:) I had thought I say (when moved upon these good occasions
I first took pen in hand) to have only, by calling some things to my
remembrance and by imparting them after unto some fevv of my private Friends,
the better established thereby my own understanding, and somevvhat also
enriched and confirmed theirs: little or nothing at all thinking that any such
idle exercises of mine should ever come unto the open sight, and light of the
world. Wherefore calling to mind how I had othervvhiles bestovved some time
in Oxford (under the government of my learned Tutor master Doctor Humfry) in
the studies of humanity: and remembering also how I had lately taken some
little pains in seeing of Cities, and Countries, and observing their customs,
and sundry sorts of Government: I thought good to take such a kind of
enterprise in hand, as might best minister unto me occasion to put those
things in use and practice, which I had before time seen, and learned. Being
minded therefore to reduce such my intent and purpose in Imitation of
Aristotle's Humane Philosophy into three several parts, all tending unto the
just consideration of a best and a most perfect common weal (The fittest
field me thought vvherin to run at large my pretended course:) I began
first with a moral treatice; vvherin after the manner of the said Aristotle
in his Ethickes, I shevved what is the last End of a best Common weal,
applying unto the same all such perfection of virtue, and humane felicity,
with all the complementes and ornaments of external good things belonging
thereunto, as he did in his Moralles unto his Summum, and civil bonum. A
treaty, allthough not altogether to be despised (as none such of that matter
being to my knowledge written in this our English tongue:) yet because I
desired not as then to bring my name in question unto the world (having only
shevved such my endeavor unto some fevv private friends of mine) I laid the
same a side, and proceeded unto the second part of my Institution, concerning
the best form and facion of a perfect Commonvveale. VVherin, not follovving my
former Guide in his books of Polletickes, but relying rather upon the riper
judgment of later vvriters, and adding somevvhat also of my own small
experience, gathered of my late studies, and travails: I took just occasion
to prefer Monarchy above all other kinds of Common weals, and under the
Royal mantell of the same to discover a perfect shape of the best, and most
happy state of government. This Treatice both for the worthiness of the
matter, and for the good end, and duetifull intent of the same, as also for
some other private causes of my own; I thought good to prefer unto a fevv
honorable and worshipful of my special Favorers and freindes; nothing at
all desiring that the same should any otherwise be seen or laid open unto
the variable speeches, and censures of the world. But being further encouraged
since by some, whose judgment I ought not to despice, and requested also by
others, whom I would be loath any thing to deny, I have now taken this
boldness to publish, and impart it unto my Country: hoping, that though the
handling thereof be but rude, and simple, yet forasmuch as the matter tends
unto the honor, and duetifull reverence of our most gracious Maistrisse (her
Majesty's Highness) you will be as well content to read it, as I am vvilling
to recommend it unto you. I have added also for the benefit of such young
gentlemen, as are studious of the Italian tongue, a Collection of Proverbs,
and sentences, the which I gathered in diverse places of Italy, and out of
sundry approved authors: some part vvherof also I borrowed of my freinde
master Henry Vnton; unto whom, if you reap any commodity thereof, I pray
you, that what thanks you would bestovv upon me, you will imparte them unto
him. Fare you well.

C. MEBVRY.

HENRY VNTON, to the virtuous Reader.
IOVGHT not, can not, and therefore will not omit (provoked by the worthiness
of the matter, compelled by the fast friendship of the Author (whom I have
long, and much loved,) and encouraged by my own private knowledge of the
Gentleman's Intent, and travails) to publish my private good liking, Judgment,
and commendation of this book: As, a testimonial of my thankful good will
unto him: A Seal of our unfeigned friendship unto others: and lastly, a
perfect discharge, and satisfaction for my self. Which duly considered I
have burst out into these few rude lines, not to The End I am able to purchasle
praise unto The Author, (Because the less can not authorize the greater) but
that I may gain commendation to my self, only for show of a thankful, and
well willing mind. Seeing therefore of necessity I must needs speak
somewhat, this is my conceived opinion: that, in this book you shall feed
your understanding with a most delicate and (...) food, containing in it a
sweet joyce, and rare Quintessence of the best framed Monarchy: whereby the
poor of understanding in matters of state may be enriched, and the rich of
understanding somewhat therein the better confirmed: and all sorts of men with
an admiration of her Majesty's most Royal person, and perfect government not
a little ravished: whereunto The Authors whole intent only directs it self.
And albeit his Diseourse be but small in quantity, yet it exceeds in
quality. For that his writing is not obscure, but clear: not forced, but
free: not roughe or harshe, but smoothe, and pleasant: not out of order, but
well united, methodicall, brief, fullfraited with vatietie of matter, and
nothing at all affected: briefly it is not painted with any glorious colors,
but naked, (like the truth,) and in all points it is like unto him self: who
coueteth rather to be in this his Country as a tree in a garden to bear
fruit, th^n as a tree to make a show and shadow only. Imploye therefore (I
beseech you) your leisure, to read with a purged judgment this his rare
Enterprice, and by your good, and just commendation, rather seek to spur
others to tread these his good steps: then by your discommendation to clippe
their wings, which else of them selves would make the like slight. Which if
you do, (as if you pay your selves with reason you must needs doc,) you may
encourage both him and many others to be your Creditors hereafter for the like,
or greater Enterprises, Fare you well.

A DISCOURSE OF MONARCHY AS OF THE BEST COMmon wealth: tending unto the
duitifull consideration or rather admiration of a Royal Princes most high,
and happy Estate.
AS there is nothing more comfortable unto all living creatures, then to see
the light, and shining of the gladsome Sun: So is there nothing more joyful
unto all good subjects, then to behold the Glory, and Majesty of their
sovereign Prince. If the Sun intercepted with clouds, and vapors, or by
some other interposition prevented, sends not forth his lightsome beams: The
whole face of the Earth is covered (as we see it is in the night season) with
sadness, and black, and loathsome darkness. Birds keep in their bushes,
snakes in their holes, men hide them selves in their houses. In like manner if
the Princes Power be in any point impared, or the brightness of his Royal
Majesty any whitte eclipsed: the subject straight does feel the smarte, and
want thereof. The Trauailer is less esteemed abroad: the Courtier less regarded
at home: the Marchante less priuileged in a far country: the Noble man
less honored in his own. For as the Moon, the Stars, and all inferior
lights do fetch their light from that great light (the life, and light of
the world:) Even so the prosperous estate of the subjects, is derived from
the prosperity of the Prince: their honor from his honor: their estimation
from his estimation. So long as the Roman Empire flourished, and retained his
light, and brightness, a Senator of ROME was thought any kings compagnion: a
Citizen, or soldier of ROME might have travailed over all the world without
paying one penny of tax, or towle. And since the Dignity of The Empire was
translated into Germany: the Germans also in most places have like privileges.
At BOLOGNA (a famous University of the Popes in Lombardie) they are not
subject unto th'Inquisition: At FLORENCE, SIENNA, PISA, (chief cities of
Tuscane) they have free liberty to carry their weapons, and in many places
they pay no Impostes. So the Spagniard, because his Prince is of great Power,
and pretends many Titles: he chalengeth also many Preheminences. If he may
have his will, he will sit uppermost at the table wheresoever he comes: and
though he have neither money in his purse, nor good clothes on his back: yet
because his master is king of Spain, he will be SIGNOR DI CASTILIA: and starve
rather, then work in any manner of way with his hands to get him a living. For
truly I do not remember that I have seen any Spagniard, (and yet I have seen
a great many both at MILAN, NAPLES, MESSINA, SYRACVSA, MALTA) ever to exercise
out of his country any manual occupation. But I have found him, either in
the Galleys a soldier, or in the Cities in manner of a Gentleman: whereas
The Italian having lost the light, and dignity of his nation: (the Roman
Empire) is content on the Seas sometimes to play the Mariner, and other whiles
in the Cities to sit dressing of silk: So the Fleminge because his country
seems of late years to be over hadowed with a kind of darkness, (as
wanting the foresaid brightness of Royal Majesty) he, as a man half in
disgrace, hueth abroad with less reputation and for the most part upon some
bare, and handycrafte occupation.

Wherefore it is no small comfort unto an English Gentleman, finding him
self in a far country, when he may boldly show his face, and his forehead
unto any foreign Nation: sit side by side with the proudest Spagniard: cheek by
cheek with the stoutest Germane: set foot to foot with the forewardest
Frenchma^: knowing that his most Royal Prince (her Majesty's highness) is no
whitte subject, nor inferior unto any of theirs. But that she may also (if
she plaise) challenge the superiority both over some of them, and over many
other kings, and Princes more. As master DEE has very learnedly of late (in
certain tables by him collected out of sundry ancient, and approuued writers)
showed unto her Majesty, that she may justly call her self LADY, and EMPERES
of all the North Islands.

The which kinds of titles, and dignities, although they be not altogether to
be neglected, (For they may in convenient time minister just occasion unto the
Prince to enlarge his dominions) yet because they are but as Lanternes without
light, or lights without warmth, as flowers without fruit, and blossoms
without substance, or certainty: they are neither so highly to be regarded,
nor so tenderly to be cherished), as those Royalties, and dignities, which I
intend (where occasion shall be offered) to commend unto the excellency of
ROYAL MONARCHY, as necessary unto the framing, and fashioning of a best, and
a most perfect common weal: The skope, and mark whereunto tends the special
purpose of this present discourse. For, as in a moral Treatice I have done my
endeavor to show what is the principal, and last end of the best common
weal: So do I desire in this civil discourse to declare, what is the best
form, and fashion of the same. And thirdly (when time shall serve) to speak
of the discipline, and manner of gouuernement wherewith she may best direct her
self unto the obteining of the said her last end and perfection.

Discourses (I confess) more fit for them that are continually conuersante in
the skoole of good learning, or for such, as tredde the pathe of public
affairs, then for him that follows no such profession: Yet seeing that I
proceed 7. The manner of proceeding of the Author.
not therein by way of rules and precepts: As CICERO, ARISTOTLE, and PLATO did
in their commonweals, ( Che non vanno si alte l'ale mie,) but by the way of
reasoning, and of discourse, not presuming to teach any (thinking my self
skante worthy to learn of those unto whose excellent hands these lines may
happily come) but meaning only to put the learned reader in mind of that,
which he already knows; and if by chance there shall be any thing new
therein, and not in this our native language before time written, humbly to
recommend the same unto his courteous correction: I hope, my modeste meaning
will help to excuse the boldness of my enterprise, and the courtesy of the
reader will vouchsafe to regard more the good will, and th'indeuour: then the
simple skill, and youngnesse of the writer.

But for to come unto our present Institution: I will first (because there are
diverse kinds of The order observed by the author.
commonweals, and diverse opinions thereof according unto the diversity of
men's affections:) before I speak of the manner, and form of the best common
weal: show in general, what a common weal is: how many special kinds of
commonweals there are: and wherein they differ one from an other. A common
weal therefore is, An order of government What a common weal is.
observed in a city, or in a country, as touching the Magistrates that bear
rule therein: especially concerning that Magistrate, which has highest
authority, and is the principal. The supreme, or principal Magistrate we
mean him, who rules all universally: from whom is derived, and upon whom
depends the power, and authority of all inferior offices, and orders: As in
a popular Estate, the people: In a kingdom, the Prince. Of commonweals some
How many kinds of commonweals there are.
are good, and just, which tend only unto th'aduauncement of the public
profit. Others are ill, and wicked, tending altogether unto their own private
commodity, and not unto the benefit of their country. Of good commonweals
there be three kinds. The first is, whereas a number of good men, and men of
reasonable wealth, do jointly bear rule together, What is Respublica.
procuring by all good means they can, the weal of their country: the which
is called by the general name of common weal: (in Latin Respublica) such as
was used in SPAR^^^ and is now in GENOA, and in LVCCA.

An other is, when the gouernemente of the whole is committed unto the hands
of a few What is (...).
of the best, and choiseste persons, such as endeavor to imploye the same unto
the benefitte of those, which are under them: The which in the Greek tongue,
is called (...): An Estate of the best, or a government of the states: whereof
the common weal of VENICE is at What is Monarchy.
this day the only Phoenix. The third is that which we call a kingdom, the
greeks (...): whereas one only rules, and has soueranitie: directing such
his government (next unto the glory of God,) unto the prosperous, and happy
estate of his subjects. Examples whereof, though in these days of ours there
seem to be many: (all nations of the world almost, having received this kind
of government) yet we need not seek any farther then our own native
country for a most lively, and perfect pattern of the same. And these be the
three good commonweals, devised for the maintenance of mankind, established
for th'aduancement of justice; and generally received, and embraced for the
prosperity of cities, and countries.

Now there are as many ill commonweals, clean contrary unto these, being in
deed nothing else, but the corruptions, and destructio^s, into the which the
good commonweals do fall: when they do alter from the manner, and form
wherein they were first instituted. The What is Democratic.
first is, when the multitude of the common people, and of the baser sort, (as
of handycraftes men, and such other) have the maneging of public affairs:
using, or rather abusing such their authority unto th'oppressing of the
nobilitic, and aduauncing of the co^monaltie: favoring always those, that are
of poorest, and meanest condition at their own foolish fancy, without all
order, or discretion. This corrupt, and confufe kind of gouernemente is
called in Greek (...), A state popular: such as was in ROME: when the Tribunes
prevailed against the Consulls: and as was in FLORENCE after th'expulsing of
PIERRO DE'MEDICI. The second is, where a few of the What is Oligarchie.
richest, and of the mightiest, because of their great power, and possessions
do carry all the swaye, seeking only their own profit, and not the
furtherance of the common weal. The which is called in Greek (...): such as
was in FLORENCE in the year 1494: when CHARLES the eighte of France ouerranne
Italy subduyng NAPLES: and as was in SIENA in time of the PETRVCCII: and in
GENOA in time of the ADORNI, and FREGOSI. The What is Tyranny.
third is called TYRANNY, whereas one only rules at his own lust, and
pleasure, and all for his own advantage: without having any regard unto the
good, or ill estate of his subjects. As DIONYSIVS did in SIRACVSA: NERO,
COMMODVS, CARRACALLA did in ROME: The great Signori does in Turkey: and as
king VORTIGERNE in the year 447. did here in England: who for to maintain
his Tyranny called in the Saxons, and they to stablish their new power:
oppressed the Brittons: dryuing them into a corner of the llande, brenning, and
spoiling their country: whereas WILLIAM the Conqueror (a Prince of more
Justice) forbad (at his first arrival here) his soldiers to hurt, or spoil
any Englishman: saying that it should be a great sin, and folly for him to
spoil that people: which ere many days after were like to be his subjects.
VVherby we may see, that all good commonweals have: always an especial
care, and tenderness over the subjects, as good fathers have over their
children: And the corrupted, and usurped gouernmentes (like unto unnatural
mothers) have no regard, but of their own lusts, and licenciousnesse.

But to speak more particularly of the differences between good and ill commonweals: We find that a common weal commonly so called, (and taken in good
part) is content with a mean estate, neither envying others, because she
wants not her self, neither enuyed of any, because she does not possess any
great abundance of wealth. (I mean in private men's hands:) she is obediente
unto the laws, not insolent in her magistrates: she is not of so vile, and
base mind: as to suffer her self to be choked with bribes, or corrupted with
covetousness. But the Signorie of The difference between Respublica, and
Democratia.
the mechanical people, (called DEMOCRATIA) is always in confusion: she
enuyeth the rich, and malliceth the mighty, seeking how to betraye the
nobility: she is of so base, and vile condition: as she can not apply her
self unto any kind of good government: she is ignorant of all things: and
yet she thinks to know every thing: In few words she is no better then an
universal confusion, a horrible monster of many heddes without reason, and a
tempestuous Sea tossed with boisterous winds in every place and at every
season. Between the government of the best, and that of the mightiest, there
is this difference. Those of the best have no other end prefixed unto them,
but virtue and honesty: They refuse no traualle, or pains The difference
between Aristocratie, and Oligarchie.
for the benefit of such, as are committed unto their charge: they love and
cherish the poor people, procuring to make them live in good, and plentiful
estate, defending them also from being injured of mightier, and richer then
they: and above all things they seek to train up their citizens, and
subjects: as they would do their own proper children, under a continual
discipline of virtue, and good education. These of the mightiest, study only
how to pull from their subjects all the wealth unto them selves: by laying
intolerable taxes, and tributes upon them: All profits, honors, pleasures,
and commodities they think to be due unto them only: All charges, labors,
troubles, and dangers postinge over upon the people, whom nevertheless they
hate deadly: inuenting by all means how to intrappe them, and that with all
kind of insolency. Between a good King, and The difference between Monarchis,
and Tyranny.
a Tyrante there is this difference. The one is courteous, merciful, endewed
with all virtue: the other is hautie, and cruel, defiled with all vice. The
one embraces equity, and justice: the other treads both Gods law, and man's
law under his feet. The one has his mind, and all his care upon the health,
and wealth of his subjects: the other estemeth his own pleasure more then
their profit, his own wealth, more then their good wills. The good King
takes pleasure to be freely advertised, and wisely reprehended when he does
amiss: the Tyrante can abide nothing worse, then a grave, free spoken, and a
virtuous man. The good King punishes public injuries, and pardons those
which are done unto him self: the Tyrante reuengeth most cruelly his own
injuries, neglecting those, which are done unto others. The good King has an
especial regard unto the honor, and good name of chaste matrones: the
Tyranttriumpheth in abusing, and shaming of them. The good King deliteth to be
seen, and other whiles hard of his subjects: the Tyrant Hides himself from
them, as from his enemies. The good King loves his people and is beloved of
them again: the Tyrant neither loves them, that are like unto himself
fearing lest they being as wicked as he, will be ready to betray him for every
light cause, and he hates, and pursues all those that have any valor, or
virtue in them: as men, whom he knows to be by nature contrary, and enemies
unto his tyranny. Again the one charge his people as little as he can, and
but upon public honorable and necessary occasions: the other gnaweth the
bones, and sucketh out the very blood, and marowe of them with unlawful taxes,
towles, and confiscations: The one makes choice of the best, and most
sufficient persons about him to imploye in the public affairs: the other
imployeth none but ruffianes, and cutthrotes: such as he may best serve his
own turn withal: The one uses the assured faith and forces of his own
subjects, in time of war against his enemies: the other calls in forreinc
nations whom he can not safely trust: (as LONOVIKO SFORZA duke of MIDANE did)
to war against his own contreymen: The one has no guard, nor garrison but
of his own natural people: the other but of strangers: The one lives in
assured hope, merry, void of suspicion, always enjoying the sweet reward
of his upright conscience: the other has the point of a sword hanging over
his head: always languishing in continual fear: The one looks for
everlasting joy: the other can hardly escape everlasting pain: The one is
honored in his life time, and wished for after his death: the other is hated in
his life time, and torn in pieces, after he is dead: so that living, and
dying he is in a continual hell of all misery. Wherefore as the government
of a Tyrant is of all other the most odious, and of Which is the best common
weal.
the three ill commonweals the worst: So is a Lawefull kingdom of the three
good the best, the happiest, and that which I desire to prefer in this my
Treatice before all other: Not led thereunto only by bond of duty, as
subject, and servant unto so worthy a Prince: Nor moved by affection only, as
borne in so quiet, and prosperous estate of country: But moved, led, and
drawn by force of good reason, grounded upon the natural excellenoie, and
excellent properties thereof: as it shall at large appear: after that I have
first showed of what especial kind and quality this best common weal of
kindome is.

Sundry kinds of Monarchies.
For there are diverse kinds of kingdoms, according unto the diversity of
countries, and of their laws, and customs: though all good, and lawful, yet
not all of like excellency: though all pertakers of soueranitie, yet not all
in equal proportion: though of like nature, and essence, Kingdoms by Gift.
yet differing accide^tally. For some kingdoms go by gift, as IVBA was by
OCTAVIUS, made of a slave: king of NVMIDIA (now called Barbary:) and as the
kingdoms of NAPLES, and SICILE were given first unto CHARLES Earl of Prouence
in the year 1266, and after unto. LEWIS the first Duke of Anioue brother unto
the french king CHARLES the fifth, (surnamed the wise:) and as some have
written that WILLIAM the Conqueror by the gift of his Nephew king EDWARD
son of king EGELRED pretended, and attained unto the Kingdoms by Testamente.
Crown of England. Others are left by will of testament, as CHARLES Nephew,
and heir unto RENALD Duke of Anioue bequethed all his estates, and dominions
unto the french Kingdoms by Customs.
king LEWIS the leuenth. Some descend by the virtue of a Law, as the Realm
of France in practice of late descentes does by the Law which they call
SALICKE. Others go by adoption, as E^EVS king of ATHENES adopted Kingdoms by
Adoption.
THESEUS: MICIPSA king of the Numidians adopted IVGVRTHA: SCIPIO the elder
adopted the son of PAVLVS AEMILIVS: CAESAR the dictator, his Nephew: AUGUSTUS
The Emperor, adopted TIBERIUS: CLAUDIUS, NERO: NERVA, TRAIAN: TRAIAN, ADRIAN,
who after adopted ANTONIUS (surnamed the Pityfull:) and so were AELIVS VERVS,
and MARCUS AURELIUS also adopted unto The Empire. Likewise of late years ANNE,
and JANE Queens of NAPLES, and SICILLE adopted LEWIS, and RENALTE Dukes of
Anioue; and in the year 1408. MARGARIT Queen of Demnarke, and Swethlande
adopted HENRY Duke of Pomerane for their heirs, and successors in all their
dominitions. So in king HENRY the fifth of England byside the interest of his
auncesters, and his own interest unto the Crown of France was added an
adoption by his father in law the french king CHARLES the sixte. Some
kingdoms are Kingdoms by Lotte.
translated from one to an other by lotte, or P^ouince of fortune: as it
happened unto DARIUS one of the seven Lords of PERSIA, who was made king,
because his horse first neyed. Kingdoms by Policy.
Some estates are gotten by Policy, as in old time CECROPES, HIERON, GELON,
PISISTRATVS got theirs: and as of later years COSMVS of MEDICES added the
state of SIENNA unto his Dukedom of FLORENCE. Kingdoms by Conquest.
A number of kingdoms also are gotten by conqueste: As FERDINAND of ARAGON the
first king of Spain got the kingdoms of NAPLES, NAVARRA, SICILE: and after
him his daughters son CHARLES the fifte, got the kingdom of THVNES, the
dukedom of MILAN, the Soueranitie of Artois, and Flanders. Kingdoms by
Election.
Others go by Election, as the kingdom of POLONIA does. And of this kind
there are diverse sorts: For some are chosen kings for their Nobleness of
birthe: As CAMPSON king of Caramania, was by the Mammelucs chosen for their
SOVLDANE: the Vycountes of ANGLERIE were for their noble birth made Lords of
MILANE: Some for their Justice, as NVMA POMPILIVS was by the Romans: Some for
their old age, as the ancient ARABIANS did choose always the eldest: Some
for their great possessions, and mighty power AS HARAVLDE (son to GOODWINNE
Earl of Kente) was after the death of king EDWARD (surnamed the Saint
because of the good, and wholesome laws, which he in this our country
instituted) chosen the last SAXON king in England: Some for their strenght of
body: as MAXIMINVS: Others for their beauty, as HELIOGABALVS: Others for their
greatness, and tallnesse of stature, As they were wont to do in AETHIOPIA.
All which are kinds of kingdoms, and they may be good, and lawful, according
as they are well and lawfully used: But they are not of that excellency which
is required in our best kingdom. For there is yet an other kind far more
excellent, then any of them, more commendable, more sure, less subject to
corruption, more capable of perfection. Which is when a Which is the best
kind of Kingdom.
kingdom descends by right of Succession unto the next of the blood royal.
In the which point we are content to swerve from him, whom hitherto in the way
of Philosophy we have most followed: who was of opinion that kings were
rather to be chosen, calling them people Barbarous, which did take their kings
by way of Succession: preferring therefore the Carthaginians That Succession is
to be preferred before Election.
before the Lacedaemonians, because these received their kings by Succession,
those by Election. But perhaps ARISTOTLE would have differed herein from him
self: if he had lived a little longer for to have seen how the MONARCHY of
Macedone (having continued five hundredth years from the father unto the son
in the right Line of HERCULES) was after for want of Royal and Lineall
Succession brought unto utter confusion. Or if he had lived in these days of
ours, to have seen how kingdoms go now, how they flourish, how amply they
diste^de them selves, he would (doubtless) have changed his opinion, and never
have called Barbarous so many goodly countries, and so diverse sundry sorts of
nations: both of ASIA (as the Persians, Medians, Parthenians, Turks,
Tartarres, Arabians:) of AFRICA (the Aethiopians, Barbarians, Numidians:) of
EVROPE, (England, Scotland, France, Spain, Naples, Sicile,) preferring before
all th'afore said rich and flourishing Estates a few cold countries of
Polonia, Demnarke, and Swethland: because these have their kings by Election,
those by Succession. But he never needed for to have lived so long for this
matter. For if he would but have looked back with an indifferent eye into his
own country of Greece (the which he commended to be so civil) he should have
found, that th'Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Sicyonians, Corinthians, Thebanes,
Epirotes, Macedonians, for the space of six hundredth years never had any
other government, but of kings, and those by the right, and lawful way of
Succession: until such time, as ambition, pride, and private Interest blinded
their understanding, and made them change their kingdoms into DEMOCRATIES, and
ARISTOCRATIES missterming the same by the false name of liberty. The like may
be said of the ancient Toscanes, and of the old Latins, who many hundredth
years before the building of ROME had their kings, and governors descending
lineally one unto an other. As we read that AENEAS by the right of his wife
succeeded unto LATINVS: TIBERIUS (of whom the river of Teuer or Tyber which
runs by ROME was so named) unto AENEAS: and so forth until the kingdom
came to ROMULUS by the way of his mother RHEA (daughter to NVMITOR. and Nece
to AMVLIVS kings of the Latins.) Whereby we may gather that in those days
neither Election was used, nor yet any exception made of kind or Gender. But
some man will say. O how happy is that country, where the estates of the
people do make choice of a just, and righteous Prince, who fears God above
all things, honoreth virtue, oppresses vice, gives reward unto the good,
and punishment unto the wicked, that hates flatterers, keeps his faith, and
his promise, banisheth out of his Court the Inuentours of new exactions,
reuengeth the injuries that are done unto others, and forgiueth those that are
done unto him self. These are fair speeches, and they seem to carry with them
great good apparences. Sed lates anguis in herba, they show not id manticae
quod in tergo est. But as we are wont to carry always two sachelles about us,
one before, to put other men's faults in, and an other behind, wherein to hide
our own: So they make no mention of the dangers, and discommodities which are
incident unto such kind of Elections. As what What Inco^ueniences do proceed
from Elections.
a monsterous Inconvenience is that when Sede vacant, after the Prince is
dead, and before a new can be chosen, the whole state remains in a very
ANARCHIE, without king, or any kind of government, like a ship without a
Pilote in hazard to be cast away with every wind: Then may you see all
lewdness, and licentiousness set at liberty: Thieves rob by the high way
side without punishment, Murderers commit their treasons without controllment.
For the first thing that is done Sede vacant is to break open the prisons,
kill the iaylors, revenge injuries, oppress the poor with all insolent, and
unjust means. As we read that the MAMMELVCS were wont to do sacking, and
spoiling the poor people of EGYPT whilst their SOVLDANE was a choosing. And
this Impunitie of vice for the most part lasts until such time, as the
ELECTORS do fall to agreement: which happens not some times in a year or
twain, otherwhiles not in ten. The Empire of Germany lay void 18. years
together after the death of The Emperor WILLIAM Earl of Holande: The Sea of
ROME after the death of CLEMENT the fifte remained two years, and a half
without any Pope: after NICHOLAS the third three years: after Pope JOHN five
years: and sometimes the Sea has been vacant ten years together. In all
the which time a Roman could not stir out of his doors without danger: a
stranger could not travail on the high ways without peril of his life. And
at this day there are so many FVORVSCITI upon the borders, as that no man will
ride between ROME, and NAPLES without the PROCACCIO, and 40. or 50. horse in
his company: VVheras in every other part of ITALY that I have been in (and I
have been in the most part,) a man may ride safly with his purse in the palm
of his hand. But you will say, that there may be therefore in time of
vacation, A governor appointed to administer Justice, and to punish vice: So
shall all this tempestuous Sea be quieted, and all those mischiefs remedied. I
grant well: but yet with a greater How dangerous a governor is, Sede vacant.
mischief. For if the government be committed unto one only with absolute
power, and authority to rule, and command until the Prince be elected: let
me ask you, who shall let such a one, as has the law in his own hands to
make him self if he list of a governor a king: as GOSTAVVS father unto JOHN
king of Swethlande did. If he have Legions of soldiers at his commandment,
who shall let him from making him self of a Consul for a time, a Dictator for
ever: as JULIUS CAESAR did. Again if the government be laid during
th'Election upon sundry persons, as it is now used in POLONIA, and as it was
wont to be some times in ROME: The danger is no less, lest the mightiest of
them, that have such power lay not hands upon the Fortresses, and strongest
holds of the Country: As POMPEIO COLONNA, and ANTONIO SAVELLA did, who in the
like case seized upon the CAMPIDOLLE, crying unto the people of ROME, Liberty,
Liberty. So we see that the wounds are well nighe incurable, which such
countries receive at the death of their Princes: The pains are no less, and
the dangers as great, or greater, which they sustain in choosing of their new
kings. As what a world of trouble was that Troubles and dangers incidente
unto Elections.
of late years in the kingdom of POLONIA about th'Election, when the
Pollackes were feign to send into France (so many miles, thorough so many
countries) for the Duke of Anioue (now HENRY the third of France) to be their
king: and what success all their pains, and travails had who knows it not?
Did not the Duke so soon, as his brother CHARLES dyed, and that a greater
kingdom fell unto him, leave them, and return into his own country: (as
right and reason would, that a man should be more careful of his own Nation,
then of strangers.) And the like did LODOVIKE king of Hungary before him, who
being chosen, and crowned king of Polonia, returned straight after into his
own country: leaving a Lieftenante behind him to govern the Polonians
withal. A thing odious unto men of valor, and grievous unto all free people:
when they can not see the face, and countenance of their Sovereign Prince: but
must be controlled with the pride, and ouerlayed with the couetuousnesse of
inferior Magistrates. The which burden how unwillingly it is borne MILAN,
NAPLES, SIENA, SICILE, and FLANDERS to their cost, and pain have known.

But let us imagine that a Prince, having two kingdoms, one by succession, an
other by Election, and being loathe to leave either of them, will make what
shifte he can to be personally residente upon them both: (the which he can
hardly do, except they be very near adjoining one to the other:) who
doubts then, but that he will make (if he can) one kingdom of them both, or
of both kingdoms one MONARCHY. AS CHARLES the fifth, would have done with the
countries of Germany, having brought his son PHILIPPE, purposely into those
parts, for to have made him king of the Germans, if the french king HENRY
the first had not by aiding of them, distourned him from that his pretended and
commenced course. But though The Emperor was of that his purpose so
disapointed, and could not be suffered to unite the countries of Germany unto
his other kingdoms: yet it is well known, that he lost not all the benefitte
of his Election, nor all his labor, and time in vain, which he bestowed in
those parts. But so long as he lived, and sat in the seat of The Empire, their
are many that can yet remember, how he made his Harvest of them, and rept what
commodities he could of the said countries, drawing forth of them from time to
time, both men, money, and Munition to serve his other private purposes
withal. As in his Italian wars against the French king FRANCES the first he
had at one time under the conducte of CHARLES of BORBONE his Lieftenant 18.
thousand at the lest of the Dutch Nation: By means of whom, and of a few
Spagniardes more, he drove the French men out of all their possessions in
Lombardie, he impatroned him self of the Dukedom of MILANE: he impropriated
to his one uses the Cities of PARMA, and PIACENZA: he altered for his own
advantage the states of FLORENCE, SIENA, and of GENOVA: he sacked ROME: and in
brief, by means of the Germans he subdued and brought all Italy under his
yoke. In like manner when he went to ALGIERS (An enterprise which could no kind
of way benefit the German Nation, no nor yet any whit the Estate of
Christendom, but tending altogether unto the benefit, and advancement of his
own countries of Spain) he used not only the bodies, but the goods, and
substance also of the Germans: causing them by way of a Counsel or Diette
(which he called purposely to the same end) to contribute unto the Glorious in
the setting forth thereof, though not in the fequelle, and success of the same.
charges of that his glorious voyage. He was therefore a Prince, if you regard
the greatness of his mind, the hautinesse of his Enterprises, the number of
his victories, the hugeness of his possessions, his valor, his wisdom, and
his temperance, he was (I say) a Prince most worthy, of that fame, and great
name, which he carried in the mouth, and th'opinio^ of the world. But if you
look into his doings, and whereto they tended, you shall find, (and I have
heard an honorable personage that knew him well, and most of his proceedinges,
affirm the same) that he was the lest beneficial Emperor unto the common
weal of Christendom, and the most hard, and heavy Prince unto the states of
Germany, of a great many others, that went before him, and of any that as yet
are come after him. For it appears that he directed all his actions unto the
stablishing, and stengthning of those Estates only, which he knew should
necessarily descend unto his lawful and lyneall heirs after him, little or
nothing regarding the succession of them, which were to be elected at the will
and pleasure of others. Wherefore as he fetched both men* and money out of
Germany, for to serve his other tournes withal abroad: so took he from
thence also (A thing which I my self have hard much lamented by the Germans)
the best part of all their Munition: As out of VVITTEMBOVRGE (a city of the
Duke of SAXON) he took two hundredth and twenty pieces of great Ordinance: a
hundredth out of GOTTA: from the LANGRAVE also he had 200. pieces: and out of
STRAVSBOVRGH, he took all the best, that they had: Sending thereof 50. pieces
unto NAPLES, other 50. to MILANE, and 400. into FLANDRES: he did the like also
with many other their Dutche Commodities, transporting them, either into
SPAIN, or into his countries of AVSTRICH, for to enlarge, and make rich his
own house and posterity withal. And this is a thing common unto all elected
Princes (that have Estate but for term of Life) carelessly to consume the
Treasores of the country, dissipating the public demaines, and converting
them into private menshandes, either of their own favorites, or of their
kinsefolkes. How countries are impouerished by Princes elected.
As of the Cities, and Provinces belonging unto the Sea of ROME, the Popes have
made away almost the one half for the advancement of their own private
houses. Pope SIXTVS the fourth of that Name, after the death of GVIDIBALDO DE
MONTEFELTRO Duke of VRBYNE, procured the dukedom unto his kinseman de ROVERE.
The which dukedom (not long after) Pope LEO the tenth, translated from
FRANCESCO MARIA DE ROVERE unto his Nephew LORENZO DE' MEDICI. Pope ALEXANDER
the sixte gave REGIO, and MODENA (two good Towns in Italy) in dowry with his
daughter unto ALFONSO Duke of FERRARA. CLEMENT the seventh, advanced his Nephew
ALEXANDRO unto the Dukedom of Florence. And PAVLVS tertius the Roman exalted
his house of FARNESE unto the Dukedom of PARMA, and PIACENZA: All which
Estates were either conveyed out of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, or by the
means, and charge thereof procured. As GVICCIARDINE in his story of the wars
of ITALY reports that the forenamed LEO the tenth, what with warring against
the duke of VRBYNE, and with mainteining the costlinesse of his sister
MAGDALENA, and his own pride, and prodigality, he left the Church worse by
40. thousand Dueates a year, then he found it: besides the jewels, and
ornaments of the pontifical treasor, which he engaged. In the like manner all
Temporal Princes (I mean such as are elected) when they see that they can not
leave their estates unto their Children, they seek by sale, or by gift to
make the best commodity of them during their own lives. As RODVLPHVS
The Emperor for a sum of money exempted all the Cities of TOSCANE out of the
subjection of The Empire. And ROBERT OF BAVIER gave three Imperial cities at
one time unto his son FREDERIKE, he gave also the Liberties unto NVRENBOVRGE.
As OTHO the third did unto ISNE. LODOWIKE of BAVIER did the like unto the city
of EGRE. HENRY the first soulde what he could, whereby The Empire was brought
so low, as that CHARLES duke of Burgony was able to make war against the
whole body of the same. If then an Italian will not stick to weaken the
Popedom, (the pride and strength of his Nation:) nor a German to deminish
the power of The Empire, (a Dignity which the Germans pretend to be dew, and
proper unto them only:) Much less may we think that a Hungarian will observe
any more respect in Polonia, being chosen unto that kingdom: or a Spagniarde
use any more courtesy in Italy, being elected unto the Popedom: But rather it
is to be thought that they, seeing them selves called by this unorderly way of
Election unto new gouernementes, will seek for the better stablishing of the
same, to alter in what they can the state, and course of the countries,
whereunto they are so called: tourning their laws, into theirs: their customs,
into theirs: their Religion, into their own Religion. For commonly we see that
all men are of that nature to think always their own religion best, their
own customs comme^dablest, their own laws soundest: desiring to bring and
induce al others unto the same laws, customs, and religion that they them
selves are of. The Turk would have all his people to acknowledge MAHOMET: The
king of Spain all his subjects to hold with the POPE: The Greeks thought
all other nations barbarous in respect of them selves. The Italians likewise
in these days are not ashamed to call all Oltramontani (us that are on this
side the Alps) barbari, as though none knew what Civility mente but they. The
Venetians will say, when they hear a man speak in a language which they
understand not, Mo! parlate Christiano, as though no language were good or
christianlike but theirs. So, WILLIAM the Conqueror sought to surpresse, and
extinguish our English speech, commanding all our laws to be written in his
own language, as it appears also by the terms of our pastimes (of hawking,
hunting, karding, dycing, Tennis, and such like,) which for the most part do
yet remain in the NORMANE tongue. Wherefore it is evident that all elected
Princes, which come out of foreign Countries (in the manner as we here mean
(to the end to rule, and reign only, and not for love, alliance, or
freindship sake) will in what lies in them, both for their greater glory, and
for the better strength of their Estates, seek to change the Religion, laws,
customs, and language of the places whereunto they are so elected. But you will
say, that your meaning is not to fetch your Prince so far of, but to have him
nearer home even of the same country, whereof he is to reign: because you will
be sure that he shall neither change customs, not bring in any language. You
say well, but let me ask then: who shall have the choosing of him there at
home in his own country? If the common people choose him, you may look for
nothing else, but factions, seditions ( Tot capita, tot sententiae) so many
men, so many kings. If he be chosen by the Soldiers, as the Emperors were
otherwhiles of ROME, then shall he not be allowed of by the Senators: if
elected by the Senators: then can he not be received of the Soldiers. Which
inconveniences being of later years better wayed of by the wiser, It was
thought expedient, that the Election of The Empire should be reduced unto a
certain number of seven Princes (who, because the Pope as then GREGORY the
fifth, was a SAXON borne were all appointed of the German nation: Namely the
duke of SAXON, the Count PALLATINE, the Marchese of BRANDINBOVRGE, the three
Bishops of MAGANZA, COLLENE, and TREVERIE, and the seventh (to way down the
balances) the king of BOEMIA.) And yet for all that the Electours were never
so few: the factions, and civil discordes Difficulties and dissentions, in the
choosing of Princes.
that ensued were never a whit the less. LEWIS of BAVIER, and ALBERTE of
AVSTRIKE were both chosen Emperors at one time: whereupon they continued 18.
years in wars one against the other. In like manner the College of the
Cardinals have been (as is before said) sometimes two, sometimes three
years together in choosing of one Pope: And at an other time they have chosen
three at a clappe, and often times two together. Wherefore they are now feign
to shut them selves into the CONCLAVE of Saint Peter's Pallaice: there to
remain until the two thirdes of them do fall to agreement. As it is also more
straightly observed at MALTA (now called VALETTA) in the choosing of the great
Master of the order of Saint JOHN. For there the 24. Electours (appointed by
the KNIGHTS of the great Cross) are walled into a strong place, where within
a certain time limited unto them they must without all delay, choose one that
is not of their number. So we see, that the difficulties, A number of Popes,
and Emperor; murdered about their Election.
and dissentions which proceed from such Elections are infinite: The Murders
also and massacres that do ensue of them are no less frequent both amongst
th'Ecclesiasticall Prelates, and temporal Princes. Of Popes there have been at
the least 22. beheaded about their Election (as the Registers of the VATTICANE
do certify) besides a number of Cardinals, and of common people that for
the like cause have gone the same way with them. We read that in the
Primative Church there were 600. Romans slain at one time about the choosing
of DAMASVS, and VRSINVS. Of temporal Princes there have been within these 360.
years (since The Empire fell into the subjection of the Lords Electours)
eight, or nine EMPEROVRS slain and poisoned. Of 15. SOVLDANES that have been
chosen kings of EGYPT seven of them dyed with the sword. Of Roman Emperors
after the death of AUGUSTUS there were seven all in a row murdered, and three
of them in one year. It would grieve me to rehearse, and weary you to hear
all the piteous examples, which might be recited in this behalf: whereof both
English, Latin, and Italian histories are every where full. These few may
suffice to show what slaughters, Murders, Massacres have been committed about
The benefit of Succession.
the choosing of Princes. Neither could there any order be found, either for
the sauftie of a king, or for the quietness of a kingdom, until such time,
as a lawful son, or son made by Adoption, succeeded unto his father without
Kingdoms assured by means of Succession.
any further Election. As TIBERIUS, TITUS, TRAIAN, ADRIAN, ANTONIUS PIUS,
MARCUS AURELIUS, who all succeeded prosperously one unto the other in the Roman
Empire. The Germans also (for all their great Titles of Election) are feign
at the last to fly unto this refuge and to fetch their sauftie, and
quietness from Succession: Suffering the house of AVSTRIKE these hundredth, and
three skore years solely, and successively to possess The Empire. As after
SIGISMONDE, FREDERIKE, then MAXIMILIAN, then CHARLES the fifth, then
FERDINANDE, then MAXIMILIAN the second, and so unto RADVLPHE who now reigns.
In POLONIA likewise, BOHEMIA, HONGARIE and DENMARK, where the states stand so
much upon their Privileges, they are glad, and feign (of later years) for the
avoiding of civil wars, and other of the aforesaid inconveniences to
acknowledge the benefit of this Succession: choosing for the most part him that
is next of the blood Royal, and next of kin unto the predecessed king. So
precious a thing it is, as they that hate it, are constrained to seek it: And
they that have it, are glad to hold it. SPAIN, NAPLES, CICILLE, NAVARRA,
SCOTLAND, and FRANCE also (whose Law SALIKE for ought, that I can see is
nothing else but a limited, or nice kind of Succession*) have not for these
many years known any other kind of government. But of all nations there is
none that more amply How Succession is tendered in England.
has enjoyed it, and which does more willingly retain it then our own.
Seeing therefore that Lineall Succession is so sure a foundation, as all good
kingdoms both do, and may boldly build thereon: And contrarily ELECTION so
weak a sand or rather so dangerous a Sea, as it is able to sink the tallest
ship of City, or Country that saileth therein: it is good reason that in
this our discourse of ROYAL MONARCHY (as we desire to frame the same the
best, and the most perfect common weal) we embrace the one, as a sure
ground, and shun the other as a most dangerous sand, preferring Succession
before Election, and consequently before all the other forenamed kinds of
kingdoms: the which all are either kinds of Election, or else they are of
less importance, and such as are not to be esteemed for their own worthynesse,
but for some Necessity sake. As where Succession fails, that there is none
left of the blood Royal mall, nor femall to inheritte the Crown, then men
are feign to go to drawing of Lottes, to Neyinge of horses, to choosing the
Noblest, the wisest, the Eldest, the Mightiest, the Richest. But the best, and
most Royal Prince is not to receive his Scepter by any such hap, or hazard
of fortune (as DARIUS did his:) Nor to come to his kingdom by the uncertainty
of voices (as all chosen Princes do:) Nor yet by Gift, by Custom, by
Policy, or by Conquest (as it has been said that king IVBA, Duke COSIMVS,
and many other Princes did come to theirs:) But he is to come unto his Crown,
and kingdom first, and principally by the grace of GOD, and secondarily by the
way of lawful, and Lineall SVCCESSION.

It follows that we speak of the manner of estate of this most ROYAL
MONARCHY: and best kind of kingdom: ( Come sta how, and in what case it
stands, as touching the Power, and authority appertaining thereunto.) For it
is not sufficient that so ROYAL a Prince be descended Lineally, and lawfully
into his kingdom: But he must also possess, and exercise such ROYAL, and
princely Power therein, as is most fit for his worthynesse, and for his
subjects happiness: Neither in so extreme manner, as to make A god of him
self (as ALEXANDER the great would have done,) and slaves of his vassalles (as
the Great TVRKE at this day does:) Neither yet in so slender sort, as to have
the sword carried after him (as the Duke of VENICE has,) and to be but a little
better, then a sipher, or shadow of a Prince.

What power appertains unto a Royal Prince.
He is for to have therefore (by the grace, and Permission of Almighty God)
that Power, which the Greeks call (...): the Latins MAIESTATEM: Th'Italians
SIGNORIA: The Frenchmen SOVVERAINETE: That is, Power full and perpetual over
all his subjects in general, and over every one in particular. Not to rule
for a year only, as the Consulles of ROME did: Nor for two years, as the
Dukes of GENOVA do: Nor for three, as the VICEROYES of NAPLES: or for nine, or
ten years, as the great Archon of ATHENES did: Not to be DICTATOVR for a day
only, as MAMERCVS A Royal Prince is to rule without limitatio^ of time.
was: Nor for eight days, as SERVILIVS PRISCVS: or for fifteen, as
CINCINNATVS: No nor yet for fifteen years, as SILLA had gotten it granted
unto him by a Law to be Dictatour foureskore years (although he reigned but
four:) and then after the term of years expired, to render up his
government unto an other, perhaps unto a stranger, perhaps unto his
enemy: But his Power shall last (by Gods grace) perpetually: first during his
own life in him self, and then after his death in his sons, and successors.

Neither is he countable of such his government, A Royal Prince is not
Countable unto Any.
(saving to God, and his Conscience) else not unto any other: in such forte, As
LEGATES, LIEFTENANTES, PRESIDENTES, and REGENTS are, who though they have
authority sometimes during their lives, yet are they to render accoumpte unto
those which gave them the same. The DOGES of VENICE, if they govern not well,
are deposed by the SIGNORIE of the gentlemen: as TEODATVS, and GALLA of
MALOMOCCO were banished, and had their eyes put out, because they ruled to
Lordly. the Gouerners of BOLOGNA LA GRASSA, when they go out of their office,
are bound to render accoumpte unto two SYNDICI: The Dictators of ROME were
forced by the TRYBVNES to render reason unto the People. The Regentes of
SCOTLAND, the Lords Protectors of ENGLAND, although they rule never so highly
during the minority of their Princes: Yet we see that after they are out of
their Offices, they are constrained to answer unto many oppositions. There
was never greater, and more absolute Power granted unto any subject, then was
by CHARLES the ninth, unto his brother HENRY Duke of ANIOVE, when he made him
his Lieftenant General, and perpetual over all his dominions: And yet was
there in the end of his letters patentes this Clause apposed Tant qu'il nous
plaira, to signify that the Dukes authority was both countable, and reuocable
at the will and pleasure of the king the giver. Our Prince A Royal Prince is
not to depend upon any.
therefore is not to receive his power from any (except from God the giver of
all Power:) For if he receive it from any other higher Prince, then is he not
the Principal, and supreme Magistrate, but there is an other higher, and
greater then he. For as honor depends more of the giver, then of the
receiver: So likewise that Power is greatest, from whence the others are
derived. But our Prince, who is the Image of God on Earth, and as it were Un
minor essempio of his almighty Power, is not to acknowledge any greater then
him self: nor any authority greater then his own. Wherefore as he is A
Royal Prince is not subject unto any of his own Country.
not to receive his Power from any: so is he neither to be subject unto any
higher Power, either at home, or abroad: Though some do maintain that a
Prince ought to be subject unto the states and Pears of his Realm: as the
kings of LACEDEMON were to the EPHORI, An Opinion (if it be not well tempered,
and conveniently limited) most prejudicial unto the estate of a MONARCHY:
perverting, and converting the same into a mere ARISTOCRATIE: Much less is he
subject in any thing unto the Multitude of the common people: who as they have
more authority are for the most part more insolente, and more disposed unto
rebellion. Wherefore in all well ordained kingdoms these have no other then a
voice SVPPLICATIVE, those a voice DELIBERATIVE, and the Prince only a voice
DEFINITIVE.

But some will ask, if this great MONARCHE of ours shall not be subject unto
the Laws, Customs, and Privileges of the Country where he governs: unto
the oath which he takes at his entrance: unto such couenantes, and promises as
he makes unto his people. Unto whom we answer that our Prince is subject
unto laws both civil, and common, How a Prince is subject unto the Laws.
to customs, privileges, couenantes, and all kind of promises, So far forth
as they are agreeable unto the law of God: Otherwise we think that he is not
bound to observe them. Wherein we neither diminishe the liberty of the
subject, supposing all laws to be good, or ought to be good: Neither do we
enlarge to much the Power of the Prince, as to make him lawless, subject
neither to God his law, nor man's law. As some flaterers persuade the POPES,
and EMPEROVRS that they are above all laws, and may use the bodies, and lives
of their subjects at their lust and pleasure, taking from them their lands,
goods, and liberties without right, or reason: a thing expressly contrary
unto the word of God (Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house etc.) and a
doctrine most pernicious unto Princes, who puffed up with such opinions should
take their course unto a Tyrannical kind of puissance, making their
covetousness confiscation, their love Adultery, their hatred Murder: and as
the lightening goes before the thunder, so they depraved with such corrupted
Councellers should make the accusation to go before the fault, and the
condemnation before the trial. From the which kinds of liberty, or rather
licentiousness our ROYAL Prince shall be as far of, as he is free from all
kind of subjection both domestical, and foreign. For it is not An absolut
Prince is not subject unto any stranger.
enough for so worthy a king to be obeyed of his own people at home, but he
must be also well esteemed of strangers abroad: not only beloved of his
freindes, but honored of his neighbors, and feared of his enemies. Wherefore,
as we have said already that he is not subject, or inferior unto any of his
own Nation: So is he neither to acknowledge any greater then him self
abroad. King EVMENES, though he was but a poor Prince, and had but one only
Castle of PERGAMON under his power: yet when he came to capitulating with
ANTIGONVS the great king of ASIA, he would not yield one jot unto him in
prerogative of honor: saying that, so long as he had his sword by his side,
he knew no man greater then him self: and yet by his leave he fetched his fire
from the Romans, who maintained him in all his quarrelles both against
ANTIGONVS, and against PHILLIPPE king A Royal Prince needs no Protection.
of MACEDONES. But our ROYAL Prince is not to shrewd him self under the
shadow of an other, as EVMENES did under the Romans: Nor to shield him self
under any buckelar of Protection, as FERRARA does under FRANCE: BOLOGNA under
the POPE: FLORENCE and LVCCA under the king of A Royal Prince is not
tributarie unto any.
SPAIGNE. Neither shall he pay tribute unto any foreign Prince, as the Common
weal of CARTHAGE, after it was subdued by SCIPIO AFRICANVS, did unto the
people of ROME. Neither yet any annual pension is he to pay, as some great
Princes of Christendom have done unto the great Turk: The Commonweals of
VENICE, GENOVA, RAGVSA for the countries they have confining upon him do yet
the like. And as not long since LEWIS th'leuenth of FRANCE paid 50. thousand
crowns a year unto king HENRY the eight (of noble memory) for to have peace
with him, and with our Nation. Much less shall he be Liege Vassal unto any,
as the kings of SCOTLAND were wont to be unto the kings of ENGLAND: The
Dukes of BRITANNIE unto the kings of FRANCE. Neither shall he The most Royal
Prince holds not in Fee or in Fealty of any.
hold in Fee, or Fealty of any, as most of the Cities in ITALY do of
The Empire, and the kingdoms of NAPLES, and SICILLE do of the Pope: The
Knights of MALTA of the king of SPAIN: these giving yearly a Faulcon, those
a white amblinge Geldinge, some one thing, some an other. Which all are
certain kinds of subiections, and spyces of Servitude, carrying with them a
number of rightes, duties, honors, and reuerences, unworthy of the dignity
of a ROYAL Prince. Who must be as the Gramarians say a Noune Substantive
able to stand of him self, without the help, or aid of an other, without
paying Tributes, doing Homages, swearing Fealties, and Inconveniences proceeding
from Subiectio^s.
Loyalties unto any foreign Prince. COSMVS Duke of FLORENCE (of late
remembrance) might not be made king of TOSKANE, although Pope PIUS the fourth,
had a good will to make him, Because he held his Cities, and Tounes of the
Empire. Wherefore the Emperor hearing of his suit: said Italia non habet
Regem, nisi Casarem. The French king FRANCES the first of that name, for to
let CHARLES the fifth, as then Archeduke of AUSTRIA from being chosen Emperor,
showed unto the Electours, how that the Imperial Majesty should be to much
imbased, if they made of his vassal their chief, and Souueraigne. Which made
the said CHARLES having after taken FRANCES prisoner (at the famous battle
fought in the Park of PAVIA) that he would never condescende unto his
deliverance, until he was first exempted by FRANCES from all kind of
Services, and Subiections which he owed unto the Crown of FRANCE for the
Countries he held of ARTOYS and FLANDERS. It seems so base a thing unto the
Majesty of a ROYAL Prince, to become the Liege man of an other: to swear
Faith, and Loyalty unto an other: joining his hands within the hands of an
other: to fall down on Services annexed unto the foresaid Subiectio^s.
his knees as TIRIDATES king of ARMENIA did before NERO: to kiss the
Thresholde of the door, as PRVSIAS king of BITHINIA did when he entered into
the Senate house of ROME: to call him self the Servant of an other, as
ASDRVBALL called him self the FACTOR, and PROCVRATOR of the people of ROME:
These (I say) and such like Indignities proceeding from Protections, Tributes,
Fealties, Loyalties, and the other kinds of the forenamed Subiections, are so
much abhorring unto the Soueraignitie of a ROYAL, and absolute Prince, as he
will choose rather to part from whole Countries, then to incur, and endure
such indignities. Wherefore quarells were made against the kings of England
(her MAJESTY'S most ROYAL predecessors) touching the Dukedomes of GVYENNE,
and NORMANDY, The Earldome of POITOV, and MVTTRELL, and many other goodly
Possessions, which they held in FRANCE, because they vouchesaued not to be
bound to do Honors, and Homages for the same. But no marvel though great
kings can not abide Subiections when the Prince of ORANGE (this man's father)
refused of the French king LEWIS th'eleuenth ten times so much, as his
Principallitie was worth, because he would not be subject to Services, and
Vassallties. CALISTENES also the Nephew of ARISTOTLE, being but a private man,
chose rather to dye, then he would (according to the manner of the Persians)
fall down prostrate and adore ALEXANDER, as a God above the estate of man. And
I have hard how an Imbassadour for the VENETIANS at CONSTANTINOPLE, when he
was to have audience of the Great TVRKE, unto whom he could not have access,
but thorough a little low place made of purpose, because men should come
stoping, and kneeling unto him: The VENETIAN Imbassadour, (supposing in him
self the reverend Hienesse of that estate,) creeped thorough the hole with his
back forewardes. A thing, which the GRAN SIGNOR can in no manner of way abide
to see a man's tail toward him.

But for to return unto our most ROYAL Prince, we will conclude that he is
not to do Homage, or Honor unto any, not to pay Tribute, or Pension unto
any, not to be subject either at home, or abroad unto any, not to hold in
Fealty, or in Loyalty, by Protection, or by Commission, nor for a short time
or season: But to rule really, fully, and perpetually, Conclusion of the
Treatice.
according as we have in a general manner hitherto discoursed. I could wish
to speak more particularly of the ROYALTIES, and prerogatives belonging unto
the Majesty of a Sovereign Prince: as of his power, and authority in
allowing, and disallowing of matters propounded to be Laws: in proclaming of
wars, and concluding of Peace: in choosing, and refusing of Magistrates: in
coining and rating of money: in erecting of Fortresses: in granting Pardons,
Licenses, Liberties, and Privileges: etc. But because they are matters of more
weight, and therefore do require good aduisement, and better authority: I
think good to suspende them until a more convenient time, or else to commend
them unto those, that are of more approved Judgment, and better warranted to
deal with them. In the mean while I hope, that these few lines of ours
concerning the manner, and form of the best Common weal, shall not seem
altogether impertinent to show the Excellency and Dignity, the Power, and
Majesty of ROYAL MONARCHY. Whereby all good subjects seeing the greatness
which God has endued Princes withal, to be as it were his LIEFTENANTES to
govern us here upon Earth, may respect, and reverence them with all
humility: Serve, and obaye them with all Loyalty: hear, and speak of them
with all honor.

PROVERBI VVLGARI, RACCOLTI IN DIVERSI LVOGHI D'ITALIA, ET LA maggior part
dalle proprie bocche de gl'Italiani stessi.

PER Carlo Merbury Gentil'huomo Inglilese.

ILQVALE NE FA PRESENT DI COSI FATTA SVA INDVSTRIA a gl'amici, and patroni
suoi honorati, della lingua Italiana studiosi.

A I NOBILI, ET ILLVSTRI SIGNORI DI CORTE, ET ALtri gentil'huomini honorati,
della lingua Italiana intendenti.
IO non so (Signori Illustri) che luogo habbia trouato ne' vostri cortesi
concetti quel mio precedente discorso: se riguardando all'altezza del suo
suggetto, voi desiderate in me maggior isperienza, e piu gagliardo giudicio: o
se considerando la fine, and l'intentione di quello, vi contentiate della mia
debita, quantunque debole industria. La mia isperienza io confesso veramente
esser picciolissima, si come di persona poco prattica nelle cose de gli stati:
and quanto al mio giudicio, non mean attribuisco punto; conoscendomi giouane di
poche lettere, and di men che mezzano ingegno. Ma pure, poi ch'io mi son
ingegnato d'ingagliardire, and quella, and questo, and tutte l'altre forze mie
col desiderio di mostrar la mia debita diuotione verso il felicissimo stato
della nostra Serenissima Principessa: Io spero, che voi Signori di Corte (I
quali viuete nella viua and continua contemplatione di quella sua Maesta, in
honor and riuerenza di cui tendono quelli pensieri, and and discorsi miei)
spero dico, and quasi m'assicuro, che voi vi contentarete di fauorir a cosi
fatta mia impresa: non mirando gia tanto alla dignita di quella (troppo alta
per l'ale mie,) ne alla sua difficulta (troppo pesante per le spalle mie,) ma
alla diligenza, studio, industria, and al buon animo mio: di che se ben altro
effetto non ne segue, ne altro vtile non risulta al lettore (and pure non tengo
lo trattato sia con modestia detto, affatto inutile,) ch'vna nuda
significatione della mia viua voglia: non e pero, che la buona mente no^ sia da
Dio attesa, and da voi tenuta in conto. Vi si presenta ancora vn' altro parto
della mia industria, il quale poi che non e mio figliuolo natural, ma
adottiuo, and d'altre lingue che della mia leccato, (se ben uon d'altra mano,
che dalla mia raccolto, vestito, and produtto in questa luce) piu arditamente
velo raccommando: assicurandoui, che se vi degnate d'vsarlo, and d'adoperarlo,
egli vi fara di molti, and molti segnalati seruitij. Egli vi mostrera creanze
and vsanze forestiere: vi dara ammaestramenti al viuer vtili, auertimenti al
conuersar conueneuoli: se v'occorre vsar ragionamento famigliare, egli vi sara
a canto: se pur v'accade entrar in qualche discorso grave, egli sara la anche
present, sempre ministrandoui qualche bell motto, o qualche bell detto per
confirmar le vostre ragioni. Per conto poi di quella lingua, della quale voi
(Signori, and gentil'huomini giouani, al cui seruitio l'ho spetialmente
indrizzato) vi delettate; non vi posso dire, quanto honoreuol aiuto (se lo
trattenete been) vene potra auuenire. Voi sapete, ch' in ogni lingua non c' e
piu bella gratia, che l'vsar, and nel parlare, and nel scriuere, di bei, and
spessi Prouerbi: I quali, si per le scelte, and purgate parole, che vi si
trouano; si per le belle metafore, and allegory delle quali per lo piu si
compongono, per l'acutezza che vi si scuopre, recondita and non cosi nota, come
quella fauella che s'vsa ordinariamente parlando; come ancora perch sono quasi
voci divine riceuuti, and per commun consenso da tutti approuati: par che
portino seco (non so come) vna certa authorita, dignita, and Maesta a quel che
si scriue, and si dice. Di cosi fatti Prouerbi questo vostro Italico seruitore
vi fornira a pieno nella sua lingua volgare, prestandouene tanti, and tanti,
che se degnate a mandarne solamente la minore, o la migliore part alla vostra
memoria (si come il suo primo patron altre volte n' ha mandato la maggiore,
and non se n'e pentito, anzisen' e seruito pur assai,) Vedrete, che vi
correranno per ogni verso leggiadri and vaghi Prouerbi, sentenze illustri and
celebrate, belle parole and purgate, motti Toscani, modi Italiani: in maniera
che di si fatta so^^e in breue spatio vi s'auanzera la lingua, si purgeranno le
parole, vi si crescera la creanza, s' arricchera il giudicio, and tutti insieme
si realmente in voi s'incorporeranno, che parera ch' in un subito voi vi siate
trasferiti in Italia, and d'Italia ritornati senza passar o mare, o monti. A me
veramente Signori essendo in Italia, mi e riuscito tanto da valent' huomo
questo vostro seruitore (che piu non lo chiamo mio, ma vostro hauendolo
raccommandato a voi) and mi son tanto ben seruito and sodisfatto dell'opera
sua, che s' io ho may fatto qualche progresso nella lingua Toscana, lo debbo
certo in gran part riconoscere da lui. Le cose sue sono brieui a ricordare:
facili ad intendere, (si l'ho facilitate io ancora, dove m' e parso bisogno:)
argute and piaceuoli per dilettare: sono vary, raccolte non in Siena, o in
Fiorenza solo, ma in diuersi and diuersi altri luoghi d'Italia: sono anche Rare
per non esser gia tanto d'ogni scrittore frequentate, quanto solamente per le
bocche de gl'huomini in commu^ parlar vsate; non gia tutte fuor da libri
cauate, ma la maggior part dalle proprie mani de gli Italiani stessi riceuute.
Videbbono anche questi Prouerbi esser via piu grati, perch hauendo essi fatti
molti viaggi meco, and corsi per mare and per terra molti pericoli; par che
siano stati da qualche gratia diuina a posta riserbati, per farne present a i
vostri honorati studi; a i quali mill volte li raccommando, basciandoui le
mani.

T.V.



(...) VARIA COLLETTIONE DI PROVERBI VVLGARI, SENTENZE ILLVSTRI, DETTI BREVI,
ET VAGHI MOTTI, che s'vsano nella lingua Italiana, copiosissima, and
felicissima in cosi fat cose, massime nel Prouerbiare.
L'HVOMO propone, and Dio dispone.
Quel ch' e disposto in Cielo, bisognache sia.
Accasca in un punto quel, che non accasca in cent' anni.
Bisogna quando altri e An anuylo.
incudine, soffrire: quando A hammer.
martello, percuotere.
Egl'e mal boccone, quel ch' affoga.
Beato colui, chi puo far beato altrui.
La necessita non ha leg.
Chi ser^e, and tace, assai dimanda.
Che premio al ben seruire, pur viene al fin, se ben tarda a venire.
Il mal non sta sempre, dove si pone.
Sono caduto dalla Frying Pan.
padella (come dice il vulgo) nelle Burning coals.
brage, cio e da mal in peggio.
Facilmente si truoua il bastone per dar al cane.
Bisogna legar l'asino, dove vuole il parrone.
Le disgratie non vadano may scompagniate.
I sogni non son very, and i disegni non riescono.
Chi mal pensa, mal dispensa.
Chicerca * Trouble.
briga, aa troua a sua posta.
Pero non cercar quel che non ti tocca.
Chi potendo stare, cade tra via, s'ei rompe il collo, suo danno.
Il mondo e tondo, and dopo la notte vien il giorno: and ogni tempo vien, a chi
lo puo aspettare.
Piu sa il matto in casa sua, ch' il sauio in quella d'altri.
Il ben non fumai tardi.
Chi nasce matto, non guarisce may.
Chi di gallina nasce conuien che * Scrape.
razzoli.
Chi si contenta, good.
Chi si loda, * Beraieth, or defiles him self.
s'imbroda.
Tutto quello che riluce, non e oro.
Che profitta, rauedersi dopo il fatto, o tardare a pentirsi al'* Pillow, or
bolsterre.
capezzale.
Se s'auesse a fare la cosa due volte, ciaseuno sarebbe sauio.
Chi ha tempo non aspetti tempo, ma pigli' il been, quando viene.
Ch' il mondo e fatto a scale, chi le scende, chi le sale: and l'hore non
tornano a dietro.
In vna vernata sola gli alberi mutano faccia, and il giudicar il present per
il passato non e sempre sieuro.
Meglio e rauedersi vna volta, che non may.
Pero chi non ha ceruello habbia gambe: si suol dire, quando un s'e scordato
d'vna cosa, and gli bisogna tornar in dietro.
Il peggior di tutti i peccati, e l'ostinatione.
Gl'e un gittar il * The handle.
manico dietro alla palla.
I gattucci hanno aperti gli occhi.
Al * Shroutyde.
carnouale si conosce chi ha la gallina grassa.
Io conosco i miei polli al raspiare.
Al * To baye like an Ass.
ragghiare si vedra, che non e Leone.
Chi piu ha, piu s'imbratta.
Chi Asino e, and ceruio esser si creed, al saltar di fossa se n'auede.
Non e ben sempre dir il tutto, anzi dicono, e meglio mangiar quel, ch' altri
ha, che dir quel, che altri sa.
In bocca serrata non entro may moscha.
Pero si dice tien la lingua fra i denti.
La lingua non ha osso, ma fa rompere il dosso.
Le suni legano i buoi, and le parole gli huomini.
Chi troppo parla, spesso falla.
Si dice ancora che chi troppo parla e tenuto matto,
Et chi non parla diuien muto affatto.
E sauiezza parlar poco, and ascoltar assai.
Un par d'orecchie seccano cento lingue.
La lingua corre, dove il dente duole.
Chi non parla, Dio non l'ode.
Et pero di il fatto tuo, and lascia fare al diauolo.
Il vitio di contradire e proprio de gli insensati. Prouerbio antico.

Costui vuol toccare il cielo con un dito, cioe, e glorioso.
Acader va, chi troppo in alto sale.
Non vanno si alte l'ale mie.
Si lascia taluolta la carne per l'ombra.
* As we say, Self do, self have.
Qual Astno da in parete, tal riceue.
Chi dorme co' cani, si leua con le Flease.
pulci.
* To play, or touch wantonly.
Stuzzicare il * A waspes neste.
vespaio, e cosa pericolosa.
Chi schernisce il * A lame man.
Zoppo, de esser diritto.
Tutte le cose vbidiscono al danaio.
Io veggo, che secondo il prouerbio. Volete star lontan da Gioue and dal
Folgore: cio e suor d'ogni pericolo al sicuro.
A' i molini, and all done sempre manca qualche cosa: cio e all done troppo
curiose.
I panni rifanno le * Stakes, or posts.
stanghe.
Vesti un bastone, and parra un barrone.
Puo sostenere il Toro, chi haura gia portato il vitello.
Chi non s'arrischia, non guadagna.
Chi vuol del pesce, bisognache s'imbratti, and s'immolli le brache.
Egl'e difficilissimo andar a veder macinare, senza imbiancarsi di farina.
Non vien un male, che non vien per been.
Prou. Sanese.
Chi pecora si fa, il lupo selo mangia.
Che si perde multo per esser stolto.
Alla pruoua si * Is fleade.
scortica l'asino: and molte cose son meglia crederle, che prouarle.
Bisognatal volta pena patire, per bella parere.
Se io ho delle corna in seno, non me le vaglio metter in capo.
Perch e mala cosa esser cattiuo, ma egl'e peggior l'esser conosciuto.
E buona cosa esser lodato, ma e meglior il meritarlo.
Chi ha poca vergogna, tutt'il mondo e suo.
Il can, che vuol mordere non * Barketh.
abbaia.
Et dove bisognano i fatti, le parole sono d'auanzo.
Dal detto al fatto v'e vn' gran tratto.
Chi non fa, men falla.
Mira la * Moate.
bruscha d'altri, and non vede la sua traue.
Chi ha bocca vuol mangiare.
La commodita fa l'huomo ladro.
All'arca aperta il giusto pecca.
Ogni * Cricket.
grillo grilla a se.
Ogni gallo * Scrapeth.
ruspa a se.
Et ogni un tira l'aoqua al suo molino.
Prou. Sanese.
La girlauda ancor che costi un quatrino, la non sta been in capo ad ogni vno.
Quel e tuo nimico, chi e del tuo officio.
Fra Corsali, and Corsali non si perde che barili voti.
Fra barcaiuolo, and marinaio non si quadagna se non cose da ferro vecchio.
Non fu may un si tristo, che si no^ trouasse un perggior di lui.
Perch ogni diritto ba il suo rouerscio.
E mal sordo, quel che non vuol vdire.
Fallo celato e mezzo perdonato.
Cagna frettolosa fa i cagnuoli ciechi.
Non si se may nulla been in fretta, se non il fuggir la peste.
D'Eforo sete diuenuto Teopompo, de' quali quello haueua bisogno di sprone
questo di freno.
Chi guarda ad ogni penna, non fa may letto.
Fa d'vna moscha, un Elefante.
Tree done fanno un mercato, cio e done parlatrice.
Egli e un sparger le perle fra i porci.
Si amo in Casa Talpa, and fuori Argo: cio e veggiamo molto di lontano, and
nulla d'appresso.
Mescolar zucche con lantern: come a dire parole Lombarde con Toscane.
Troppo veramente s'arischia, chi del proprio giudicio s' assicura.
Et e volgar detto, che al ben s'appiglia, chiben si consiglia.
Dimmi con cui tu vai, and sapro quel che fai.
Vi sono di quelli, che secondo il prouerbio hanno il mele in bocca e' il A
Raiser at his Girdle.
rasato a cintola.
A can mansueto il lupo par feroce, and la virtu va a terra senza la confidenza.
Si dice ch' il nobil ama, e'l villan teme.
Del rio seruo peggior part e la lingua.
Tanti nimici habbiamo, quanti seruitori: vero e, se non sono fideli.
G'i par sempre di mangiar il cascio nella trapola: cio e a chi sta in prigione.
Ha consumato piu olio, che vino: si dice d'vn huomo studioso.
La verita e nel vino.
La fiamma e poco lontana dal fumo.
Amor vuol feed, and feed vuole fermezza.
Aqua lontana non spegne fuoco vicino: s'intende d'vn rimedio tardo.
Grasso ventre non genera sottil ingegno.
E mala cosa lisciar il pelo al seruitore: cio e lodarlo, o adulardo.
punge il villan, chi l'vnge: vnge, ch' il punge.
Tale e la cagnuola, quale e la Signora.
Quale e il padre tal sono i figliuoli.
Qual e il Rettore, tal sono i popoli.
Il pesce commincia a putir dal capo: cio e I vitij de' seruitori hanno ad
esser ascritti al patron.
Buon cauallo, o mal cauallo vuol sperone.
Dal mattino si conosce il buon giorno.
Si suole dire, che chi ha cauallo bianco, and bella moglie, non e may senza
doglie.
Non e bestia piu pazza di quella del popolo, ne acqua piu grossa di quella del
A certain kind of past boiled, and made as it were in fritters to be eaten.
macheroni.
Dio mi guardi da due cose: l'vna da' segnati da Dio, l'altra dall 'acque
quiet.
Dio mi guardi da host nuouo, and puttana vecchia.
Ogni un conta della fiera, come egli ando con essa.
Talhor per un brutto viso, si perde vna buona compagnia.
Porco pigro non mangio may pera mezza.
Cinqu' hoar dorme il viandante: set il studiante: and vndeci ogni forfante.
I dispetti, and irispetti guastano il mondo.
Tanto e il been che non gioua, quanto il mal che non nuoce.
Chi non vuol ballare, non vadi al ballo, perch poi che altri e dentro,
bisogna ballare.
Contra due non la potrebbe Orlando.
Chi la vorra solo dunque contra due Orlandi?
Vien l'asino di montagna, and caccia il caual di stalla.
Al tutto e Blind.
orbo, chi non vede il sole.
La paura guarda la vigna.
Siedi, and gambetta, and vedrai tua vendetta.
Quel imboccarsi per man d'altri, e un non sattolarsi may.
Chi ti fa piu carezze, che non suole, o t'ha ingannato, o ingannar ti vuole:
altri dicono, o ingannar, o tradir ti vuole.
Le galline si pigliano con belle belle, non con scioia, scioia.
Tal mano si bascia, che si vorrebbe veder Cut of.
mozza.
Non e ingannato, se non chi si fida.
Ogni bell giuoco, rincresce.
Ben spesso si piglia della volpe.
Non e miglior Rimedio che tener lungi dal A Goat.
becco l'herba, and far dicostar le serve dal marito.
Egli e meglio esser Martire, che confessore.
Picctola pioggia fa cessar gran vento: s'intende delle lagrime di done.
Il spensierato fa come il Magnano, che salta tanto con le Budgettes.
bolge, come senza le bolge.
Onde dice il volgo: Il saper nulla, e vna dolce vita.
Per far buon giudicio del vino, bisogna dar prima color a gli occhi, dapoi
l'odore al naso, and finalmente il sapore alla bocca.
Non si vuol tagliar il fuoco col ferro: cio e non contendere co' contentiosi.
Ha la fame piu grande, che il ventre.
Da ventre pieno esce miglior consiglio: cio e piu fidele, and manco astuto.
E meglio esser sol, che mal accompagnato.
La compagnia nel male suole allegierir il male.
Io non vorrei esser solo in paradiso.
Le pietre, che vanno rotolando, non piglian rugine.
Il seruitore de o seruir, come seruo, o fuggir come ceruo.
Ha talmente dalla crapula ingrossato l'intelletto, che non conosce (secondo il
Prouerbio) la traggea dalla Hail, or ice.
Gragnuola: and gl'e giuditioso, come l'asmo che giudico piu Soaue il canto del
cucco, che quello del A nightingall.
Rosignuolo.
Quando la Patrona sollegia, la sante dannegis.
Non sipuo insieme bear, and to whistle.
fischiare,
Chi non fa quel che deue, quel che aspetta non riceue.
Et altri dicono: Chi non sa quel che debbe, gli interuien quel che non creed.
Quando il Marito saterra, la moglie facarne: s'intende della moglie cattiua,
and disleale.
Va circando il pelo nel'ouo.
La lettera non s'arrossisce, ne sivergogna.
La verita si puo piegare, ma rompere non gia may.
Chi e facile a credere, sitrona ingannato spesso.
Sigrida poche volte al lupo, che non sia in paese.
Il villano vien sempre col disegno fatto.
Tal ti guarda la cappa, che non ti vede la borsa.
Non e peccato al mondo simanifesto, che non si venga a manifestare.
Pero diceua la fornaia, se non vuoi, che si sappia, non lo fare, and se vuoi
tenerlo secreto, non lo dire.
Chi non sa tacere, non sa godere.
Chi ha intrigato ista oosa, la slrighi: chi ha mangiato i new beans.
baccelli, spazzi i gusci.
Chi va all nozze, and non e inuitato, spesso se ne torna suergognato.
Chi scriue a chi non risponde, o l'e matto, o l'ha di bisogno.
Di promise non goaere, and di minaccie non temere.
Amor, and Signoria non voglion compagnia.
Chi biasima vuol comprare.
Mangiati a tuo modo, ma vestiti a modo d'altri.
Chiunque ad altrui inganni tesse, in se stesso non pocomal ordisce.
Odi, vedi, and tac^, se vuoi viuere in pace.
Carne facarne, vino sa sangue: pan mantiene.
Dio mi guardi dalle mattutine di Parigi, and l^ vespri di Sicilia.
Bologna la grassa, Padoua la passa, ma Venetia la guasta.
Chi vuole del fresco, non vadi a cercarlo.
Tien coperta la testa nel giorno manco che puoi, and nella notte quanto che
vuoi.
Conti spessi fanno amicitie lunghe.
Chi fa la sua vendetta, oltre che offend,
Chi offeso l'ha, da molti si defend.
Chi piu spend, manco spend.
Spesso vna molestia ne leua molte.
Il fuoco arde la Straw.
paglia facilmente.
Cosa, che voglia cadere, fa prima cenno.
In un buon seruitore ci vuole il muso di Porco, la schiens d'Asino, and le
gambe di Ceruo.
Spesse volte il giorno d'oggi aggiugne qualche cosa a quello d'hieri.
Chi simarita in sretta, se ne pente adagio.
Pigliar vnadonna brutta, e mal di stomacho,
Pigliarla bella e mal di testa.
Questoe come To stompe.
pestoiar acqua nel Mortar.
Mortaio, o gittar le Beans.
Faue al muro, and come perdere l'acqua, el'sapone.
Chi hauendo tempo, aspetta tempo, tempo perde.
Con il tempo, and con la paglia si maturano le nespole.
Il piu delle volte auiene, che la maggior part vince la migliore.
I vecchi, che sch^^zano con le done fanno carezze alla morte.
A buono Intendimento non bisogna molte parole.
La scusa non richiesta, presuppone errore.
D'vn errore sempre ne nascono altri maggiori.
La fuga si fa tarda, per troppo spronare.
Vien la vernata, che ne va l'agnel prima, che la capra.
Chi fa i fatti suoi, non s'imbrata le mani.
Chi non sa fare i fatti suoi, peggio fa quei d'altri.
Quel ch' e del patto, non e d'inganno.
Imonti firmi stanno, ma gl'huomini a rincontrarsi si vanno.
La facilita non impedisce l'elegantia.
Chi lascia la via vecchia per la nuoua, spesso ingannato si truoua.
Caual donato non si guarda in bocca.
Ne femina, ne tela non pigliar alla candela: s'intende delle done che si
lisciano.
Assai sa, chi non sa, se tacer sa.
Se non con la pelle del Leone, con la pelle della volpe.
La conscienza e mill testimonij.
La marauiglia e figliuola della ignoranza.
Un huomo val cento, and cento non val vno.
Chi semina virtu, raccoglie fama.
L'vna mano laua l'altra, and ambedue lauano il viso.
Bocca larga: borsa stretta.
Mentre che v' e acqua, bisogna molinare, and mentre e caldo, battere.
Ciascuno Molino resta di molinare mancando l'acqua.
Chi comporta un ingiuria vecchia inuita altrui a fargli vn' altra nuoua.
Prouerbio Bolognese.
Putto in vin, and donna in Latin, non fecer may buon fin.
Frasepolto Tesoro, and occulta sapienza, non si conosce alcuna differenza.
Seruo d'altrui si fa, chi dice il suo secreto, a chi no'l sa.
L'adulatore e simile al beccaio, che grata il porco con la mano, per dargli
poi della mazza su'l capo.
Chi vuol entrare, piccy l'vscio.
Il diauolo non e si brutto, come si depinge.
Il diauolo sa, perch e vecchio.
A cane, che lecca cenere, e mal fidarli la farina.
Al can che fiuta farina, si puo ben fidar cenere.
Quel sarebbe come porre il Lupo per A sheepehearde.
pecoraio, and andar alla gatta per lardo.
Ne Christo ancora si pote guardare da man di traditore.
Legalo been, and lascialo andare.
Piscia chiaro, and fa le fiche al medico.
Io leuai la lepre, and vn' altro la prese.
Al'arbore che cade, ogniun grida taglia taglia, and al can che fugge dagli
dagli.
Ogn' un corre a far legna al arbore, ch' il vento in terra getta.
Dio mi guardi da furia di populo, da cattiua giustitia, and da man di
traditori.
Non e in tutto sauio, chi non sa bisognando esser pazzo.
La gatta ha pelata la coda.
Chi altri tribola, se non posa.
Andarono per sonare, and furono sonati: come i piffari di Prouerbio Lucchese.
Lucca.
Chi tutto vuole, tutto perde.
Chi ben siede, mal pensa.
Tal biasima altrui, che tira a' suoi colombi.
Accennaua a coppe and daua bastoni.
Non e peggior male, che quel della morte: ne peggior minestra, che quella che
sa del fumo.
L'amore, and la toss non si ponno celare.
Non si serra may vna porta, che non si apra vn' altra.
Loda, and comforta, and non t'obligare.
Sempre de' cattiui partiti, piglia il migliore.
Pero si dice in Italia che per art, and inganno siviue il mezzo anno: per
inganno and art si viue l'altra part.
Alla buona di rata pensaui su.
Non sono tutti huomini, quelli che pisciano al muro.
Bisogna gustar il mele con la punta delle dita: cio e vsar vna cosa non per
cibo ordinario, ma come per ristoratiuo.
L'aquila non piglia le mosche.
L'infelici figliuoli lodano i padri: volendo dire ch' essi stessi son d'ogni
lode indegni.
Questo non sarebbe altro, che voler torre il folgore a Gioue: o entrare in
altrui possessione.
L'ingannar se stesso e la piu facil cosa di tutte l'altre.
I secondi pensieri son sempre migliori.
Chi falla la seconda, tocca un cauallo.
Par un Toscano di Monferrato: Si dice d'vno ch' e troppo curioso nel parlare.
L'agnello humile succia le mamelle della propria madre, and l'altre ancora.
Da mal Coruo, mal ouo.
Le done s'hanno a sposare prima con l'orecchie, che con gli occhi.
Voi volete dire, ch' io imbocco (secondo il Prouerbio) col with an empty spone
cucchiaio voto: cio e mostro di voler fare, and non fare.
E meglio pascer febre, che pascer debolezza: volendo dire, che l'infermita,
che vengono da repletione sono meno pericolose, che quelle, che procedono da
estenuatione.
Il vino non ha * The Rudder of a boat.
timone.
L'e un voler estinguer il fuoco con l'oglio,
Picciol vento accende fuoco, ma un grande l'estingue.
M' hauete renduto pan per Caakes.
foccacia.
Piu dolci sono le ferite del amico, ch' i baci del inimico.
Le cose malamente acquistate, malamente se ne vanno.
Un belmorir tutta la vita honora.
Freno indorato non migliora il cauallo.
Se l'occhio non mira, il cuor non sospira.
Che quanto piace al mondo e breue sogno.
Chi porta il torchio indietro ha per costume, a se far ombra, achi lo segue
lume.
Non shirzar che doglia, non motteggiar del vero.
Gli huomini da been sono si pochi, che si posson numerare col'Naso.
Lodando il buono, e poi sempre migliore,
Riprendi il tristo, ogn' hora ne vien peggiore.
Chi dice tutto quel ch' egli sa, fa tutto quel ch' egli puo, and mangia cio
ch' egli ha, non gli resta piu niente.
Con l'ombra della virtu si depinge il vitio,
Et s^tto il conio della bonta si spend la malitia.
Egl'e formica di sorbo, che non esce per to knock.
bussare.
Bisogna esser tagliato a buona Luna.
Ogni cosa ha principio.
Muro bianco carta da matti.
Per via s'acconciano le Some.
Egli scorticarebbe il pedocchio per hauer la pelle.
Quanto vno ha piu roba, tanto piu ne vorrebbe hauere.
Ha fatto piu che Carlo in Francia: cio e cose incredibili.
Tristo e colui ch' aspetta la merce d'altrui.
L'auaro inanzi ch' egli sco^desseil Tesoro, perse se medesimo. Sent.

Tanto good l'auaro hauendo nulla, quanto hauendo ogni cosa.
I danari non statiano l'auaro, ma gli fanno hauere piu sete di quelli.
L'huomo virtuoso ama piu d'essere, che d'esser tenuto.
La spada de' tristi non taglia, ma il credito de' buoni amazza l'huomo.
Chi si becca il ceruello in un modo, chi in un altro.
S'io trouassi l'inimico a dormire, non gli torcerei un pelo.
Un pazzo ne fa cento.
Il serluitor isciocco suol esser spesse volte nel rubare astuto.
I bnoni costumi si debbono honorare non meno ch' i capei canuti.
L'amore Bemyreth.
infanga il giouane, and il vecch^o Drouneth.
annega.
Non desideri may nissuno d'esser il primo a portar cattiua nouella.
Quel che tu vuoi donare vna volta, non lo prometter due.
Non sa donare chi tarda a dare.
La leg poche volte resist al Oro.
Il martell d'argento Breaks in pieces.
spezza le port di ferro.
A far been le facende, bisogna ben pensare, meglio consigliare, ottimamente
deliberare, and perfettamente fare.
Il pouero s'affattica incercar quello che gli manca, il ricco in conseruar
quello ch' egl'ha, and il virtuoso nel domandar quel'che gli bisogna.
Ei fu buon A green goose.
Papero, and cattiua ocha: cio e fumiglior massaio in giouentu, che in
vecchiezza, meglio comportana la pouerta che la ricchezza.
Virtu e, fuggir il vitio.
Chi non fa le pazzie in giouentu le fa poi in vecchiezza.
L'oro s'esperimenta col fuoca, con il martello si p^uoua l'argento, and con
l'adoperare siconoscono gl'huomini.
La piu cattiua Ruota del carro e quella che that kreakes
cigoli.
Chi cerca i fatti d'altri non puo esser buono.
Sent.
Ogni ignorante e cattiuo.
L'arbor buono fa buon frutto.
Tanto va la gatta al Lardo, che vi la scia la Pawe.
zampa.
La padella dice al Cawderne.
Paiuolo, fatti in la che tu mi tingi: si puo vsar questo Prouerbio, per ^assar
i maledicenti.
Ama e serai amato.
Sent. di Platone.
Amore e il vero prezzo con che si compra l'Amore.
Ogn' un s'il becca: si dice propriamente de' poeti.
Tutto Steel.
l'acciaio ch' egli ha adosso non potrebbe fare vna punta d'vn ago.
Non si puo trar la Frogge.
ranocchia dal Mire.
Pantano.
Chi laua il capo al Asino perde il Lec.
ranno, el'sapone.
Tal merito ha, chi ingrato serve.
Di buon seem mal frutto.
Il sapere ha un piede in terra and vno in Nane, Perch Signoreggia l'acqua and
la terra.
Tu hai fatto d'vna lanza un Spindle.
fuso. cio e pensando d'esser Gigante nel sapere, ti sei mostrato un Pigmeo.
Impacciati co' fanti,
Et lascta stare i Santi.
Tu sei fatto come la A chestnut.
Castagna,
Bella di fuori, and dentro e la A magott.
magagna.
Si vuol andar col pie del piombo.
Non ti conosco, se non ti maneggio.
Duro con duro non fece may buon Muro.
Non si puo distendersi, che quanto e lungo il Sheet.
linzuolo.
Chi ha moglie ha pena and doglie: s'intende della cattiua.
Egli ha tolto un A hawks bell.
sonaglio per un Byle.
anguinaia.
Chi non puo battere il cauallo, batte la sella.
Io leuai la lepre vn' altro laprese.
Chi fa la roba non la good.
Nido fatto A bird called a Pie.
gazza morta.
Detto diCicerone.
L'huomo honora il luogo, and non il luogo l'huomo.
Le parole son femine, and i fatti son maschi.
Predica il Vangelo ad altri, and egli non creed nulla.
Costui seen va alla Carlona: cio e alla libera.
Fa come il A popiniaye
Papagallo, che non leua may il piede, se non ha prima appiccato il Bill.
becco: cio e non scriue ne serve se non sia prima premiato.
Ando aggirando un pezzo, come moscha senza capo.
Fa come le capre che saltan tutte dove ne salta vna.
Buone parole, and cattiui fatti ingannano i sauij and i matti.
Ciascun Molino resta di molinare, mancando l'acqua.
Vuol fare d'vn A Thorn.
Pruno un An Orege.
Melarancio.
La campana suona per altri, and non per se.
Fa come la candela: e buono a gli altri and a se medissimo fa danno.
Egli e meglio un tieni tieni, che ce^to piglia piglia.
Il fauio be^ spess^caeua'l A Crabbe.
Grancio dalla A Hole.
buca con la mano d'altri.
Vuol pigliar la Lepre conil carro.
Egli e fauio dopo il fatto.
Sent.
No^ per passar il te^po ma per acquistar te^po si leggono i libri.
Piu tosto si de guardare dell'inuidia del Amico, che dall'insidie del nimico.
Non conosce la pace, and non la stima,
Chi non ha prouato la guerra prima.
Il cane abbaia, dove si pasce.
Ogni cane vuol pisciar al muro.
Ogni tristo cane mena la coda.
Il far il letto al cane e gran fatica.
La fiamma e poco lontana dal fu^no.
Nelle guerre d'Amore chi fugge, vince.
Lo faremo credere ancha a San Thomaso.
Quando l'oro parla, la lingua non ha forza alcuna.
Chi ha Amore in seno, ha sempre le sprone al fianco.
Chi scampa d'vn punto ne scifamille.
Da un lato ho il precipitio, and dall altro i lupi.
Si vuol amar amico col suo difetto.
Dire villania al surdo, and scolparsi sopra la fortuna, sono cose d'huomini
dappoco.
E piu facil cosa tener un carbone ardente, che vna secreta parola in bocca.
Il perder fa mal sangue: Giocar and perder lo sa far ogni vno.
La moscha ha la sua colera, and non e si picciol pelo che non habbia la sua
ombra.
Non bisogna stuzzicare, quando fumail naso del orso.
Ogni mal fresco ageuolmente si leua.
Non e buona madre quella, che fa il figliuolo, and non ha poi latte di poterlo
nutrire.
E meglio perdere dicendo il vero, che vincer con le bugie.
Non puo il vitello, and vuol che porti il bue.
Costui vuol abbracciar l'ombra, and pigliar il ve^to con le reti.
Fa come il gallo, che canta been, ma crespa male: cio e ha buone parole ma
cattiui fatti.
Colui va in Slippers.
zoccoli per l'asciuto: cio e si da fastidio senza cagione.
Chi ben dona, caro vende, se villan non e ch'il prende.
L'huomo e dio al huomo, and Lupo.
Non bisogna per gli vccelli restar di seminare il grano.
Ogni Every soul coyfe.
scuffia lorda serve per la notte.
Non si creed al bugiardo, anco che giuri.
Ben si creed al verace, anchor che menta.
Piu scende, chi piu sale.
A sciascuno passo nasce un pensier nuouo.
Il serpente tra fiori, and herb giace.
E tempo a cenare a i ricchi quando vogliono, and a i poueri quando possono.
La gola non ha orecchie.
La Salimanda uon e offesa dal fuoto.
Il medico e grasso, e'l religioso e magro.
Io chi sono di cera al fuoco torno.
L'aquila non genera colombe.
Un tacer a tempo auanza ogni bell parlare.
Si vuol saper con i piu, and parlar can i manco.
Merita ogni biasimo quel giouane che vuol parlar come vecchio, Sent.
and quella donna che vuol parlare come huomo.
In giouenil fallire e men vergogna: dice il Poeta.
Tree sort di person odiose al mondo. vz. Il pouero superbo: Il ricco
bugiardo: E'l vecchio stolto.
L'esser canuto e segno di tempo, ma non di sapere.
Dove e manco cuore, quiui e piu lingua.
Tanto piu manifestasi il peccato,
Quanto piu il peccator e in alto stato.
Chi riceue beneficio per via di prieghi, lo compra caro.
Chi viue per altrui, e morto in se stesso.
Val piu vn' vncia di fortuna, che cento pesi d'industria,
E molto meglio meritar un honor che hauerlo.
Perdonando troppo a chi falla, si fa ingiuria a chi non falla. del Cortegiano.
E peggio non voler far been, che non saperlo fare.
La misura del hauere debb' esser il corpo del huomo: si come Sent.
il piede e la misura della scarpa.
La pace non armata e debole.
La diffidenza e la radice di sapienza.
Il magistrato fa manifesto il valor di chi l'essercita. del Guicciardini.
Chi si contenta, good.
Chi fa la casa in piazza un dice ch' ella e alta, and l'altro ch' ella e bassa.
La verita si puo piegare, ma rompere non giamai.
Senza oro and argento non s'entra dentro.
Irasenza forza e cosa vana.
Ad amor palese rare volte e co^ceduto felice fine. del Bocca.
Tra felici, and infelici nel mezzo della lor vita non v e differenza alcuna.
Donna basciata, and mezzo guadagnata.
Sola la miseria e senza inuidia nelle cose presenti.
Per vna percossa non cadde may arbore.
Le puttane sono come il carbone, che, o coee, o tinge.
Chi vuol esser ricco ageuolmente, hor sia pouero di desiderij. disse Cleante.
Non e piu tempo a dar Haie.
fieno a Geese.
oche.
La vita fugge, and non s'arresta vn' hora. Et la morte vien dietro a gran
giornate.
La vita il fine, e'l di loda la sera.
Trotto d'Asino dura poco.
Un fior non fa Primauera.
Chi dona al indegno, due volte perde.
Non e bell quel ch' e bello,
Ma bello e quel che piace.
Chi da tosto da due* volte.
Al Bugiardo non e creduto la verita.
Pensa and poi fa. Da and poi di.
Chi vno ne castiga cento ne minaccia. Detto di Seneca.

Sarebbe troppo per un cauallo, and poco per un carro.
Ogni un chi stamale desidera ruina.
Egli ha fatto il suo de Things pilfered.
ruffola, * raffola.
Dal detto al fatto v' e un gran tratto.
Ogni simile appetisce il suo simile.
Se tu vuoi conoscer vno, fallo parlare.
Ogni Broom o^ beessome.
granata nuona spazza ben la casa.
Io mi sono alleuato la serpe in seno.
La discretione e la madre delle virtu.
Chi non sa fare i fatti suoi, peggio fa quei d'altri.
L'auaro non fa may miglior opera, che quando tirale calze.
Costui mi riesce meglio apane ch' a farina.
Fa come il can pauroso, che tira la coda frale gambe.
Non creed al santo se non fa miracolo.
Egli ha troppo buon vino a sicattiua A Butte, or hoggeshead.
botte.
Se l'e rosa, la fiorira.
Quando la Pera e matura, conuien che la caggia.
Quando il villan e solo sopra il fico,
Non ha parente alcun, ne buon amico.
Chi ba siel in bocca, non puo sputar mele.
E difficilissimo andar a veder macinare, senza imbiancarsi di farina.
Ogni un chiama la gatta gatta.
Il pazzo sa meglio i fatti suoi, ch' il sauio quelli d'altri.
Gli adulatori si lasciano pigliare al boccone come pesce.
Non v'e maggior male che l'ignoranza.
La gola, il sonno, and l'otiose piume,
Hanno del mondo ogni virtu sbandita.
E bruttissima cosa tollerar un huomo malitioso che ponga la bocca in cielo.
Sempre dopo la gloria ne vien l'inuidia.
Dio voglia che quel oro non riesca Orpello.
Tutt' il nostro proceder non e altro ch' un aggirarsi intorno, come vna A
Gnatte.
far falla intorno al lume.
Chi cosi vuol, cosi habbia.
Il gallo canta con buona voce, ma non resta a Skrape.
raspar con le vnghie.
Par ch' egli habbia questa ventura di cascar in piedi come le gatte.
Si va per piu strade a Roma.
Si tend un A Snare.
laccio all lepri, vna A fowlinge Net.
ragna a gli Vccelli, vna Rete a pesci, and a gli huomini si tendono l'Insidie.
Chi non puo pigliar vccelli, mangi la An Owl.
ciuetta.
Non si va alla fama sott' il coltrone, ne co'l dormire su la coltrice, and chi
dorme in questo modo lascia di se un fumo in aria, and vna schiuma nell'acqua.
O been o male tutt' e faua.
Chi no^ sa adulare no^ sa conuersare: ma si dice meglio che.
L'adulatore e amico nel conuersare con parole and inimico nel animo co' fatti.
Vi corre ancor un altro Prouerbio piu volgare che lodeuole che.
Chi non sa dissimulare non sa viuere.
La fortuna non sa sedere: Colui e degno d'ogni male, che della sua fortuna si
vergogna. Dicono gli ignoranti ventura Dio, poco senno basta: Et vorrei buona
Fortuna, la sapienza chi la vuol la tolga: Chi non ha ventura non vadi a
pescare.
Tanto e del auaro quel che possiede, quanto quel che non possiede.
Sempre pioue, quando io fo bucato.
Come io vo in Chiesa, mi cade il Campanile in capo. Detto d'Homero diuentato
Prouerbio.

Amico fin al Altar.
Anche gli stolti conoscono la cosa poi ch' ella e fatta.
Gli huomini grandi hanno a morire in piedi. Prouerbi tratti dalle History.

Il Romano vince sedendo.
Egli ha fatto il figliuol Prodigo. Prouerbi cauati da' sacri libri.

Egli e venuto senza la vest nuptiale.
Non si cognosce Errore, la dove regna Amore. Prouerbi facti pervna Getildo^nna
Sanese.

Chi vuol saluar honor, sdegno in front, and fuoco in cuore.
Dove non e la speranza del been, non e la paura del male.
Il pianger i morti no^ rileua, and la vendetta sfoga l'odio assai.
Se il lagrimar ne medicasse il male,
Et piangendo il dolor finisse,
Per le lagrime ogni un darebbe l'oro.
Chi osserna queste tree cose non haura may contesa aucuna.
Cedere al maggiore, persuadere con modestia al minore, and consentire al
vguale.
Ad amor palese rare volte o non may e conceduto felice fine. Del Boccacio.

Fauciulla a tempo non maritata, spesso si marita suerginata,
Tien la fortuna mentre che tu l'hai, Che si ti esce di man may piu l'haurai.
La Zingara ad altrui la sort dice, Et la sua non conosce l'infelice.
Aspettare, and non venire, seruire and non aggradire, Star in letto and non
dormire, sono tree cose da morire.
Il miser suole dar facil credenza a quel che vuole.
Sempre che l'inimico e piu possente,
Piu chi perde accettabile ha la scusa.
Ambasciator pena non porta.
Del Ariosto.
L'huomo ne per star, ne per fuggire, Al suo fisso destin puo contradire.
Perch' il porro ha il capo bianco, la coda e verde.
Le cose quantunque molto piacciono, hauendone soperchia copia rincrescono.
Ogn' un corre a far legna,
Del Ariosto.
Al arbore, ch' il vento in terra getta.
Del Cortegiano.
La facilita non impedisce l'elegantia.
La compagnia nel male suol allegierir il male.
I giouani hanno copia di tempo, i vecchi n'han carestia.
Ama, and sarai amato.
Di Platone.
L'amar altrui e il vero prezzo con che sicompra Amore.
I diauoli non sono si negri come si dipingono.
L'arbore che di continuo si trapianta non famai frutto.
Vfficio pregato e mezzo pagato.
Di nouello ogni cosa e bella.
Milano la grande, Venetia la ricca, Genoua la superba, Fiorenza la bella,
Napoli la gentile.
Prouerbio Napolitano.
Balsant di quatro, o vendre, o barratre: Balsant di tree caual di Re: Balsant
d'vno, non dar annissuno,
Di tree cose il Fiorentino ne fa vna frulla, A Dio, mi raccommando, vuoi tu
nulla.
Del Petrarcha.
Piaga antiueduta assai men duole.
E meglio hauer un buon porco, ch' vna bella tosa.
Non stuzzicar il can che dorme.
Dall'vnghie si conosce il Leone.
Chi muore in campo, muore in letto d'honore.
Non si ponno coglier le rose senza punger le mani.
Motti brieui ch'hanno del Prouerbio.
Costui ha del sale in zucca: cio e egl'e molto ingenioso.
Donna The forename used to be given to a Nun.
monna Zucca al vento: cio e di poco ceruello.
Piaccia a Dio che la mia Zucca mandi fuori il suo seem.
Io caualco alla A light horse man.
stradiotta, pochi arnesi mi fanno.
Ha tanti libri di lettere in capo ch' un Asino ne sarebbe carico.
La tua opera andera in monte.
Ma vegniamo a meza lama: Gli debt vna buona Knoke.
picchiata: Salto di Stake.
Palo in A bough of a tree.
frasca.
Gli ho dato con la sferza un buon cauallo.
Ho serbato un colpo maestro.
I poueri Great heddes.
capessoni han fatto il pane.
Egl'ha posto il tetto. Succia su quello.
Dice le cose si alte che non si puo pigliar la The sight.
mira.
De gli incorrigibili si de mandar le radice al sole.
Se voi vi lasciate l'ossa, vostro danno: La malitia ha fat profondissime
radici: So che tu l'hai hau^ta buona a capello: Gli ignoranti sono pur
cresciuti senza To water
inaffarli.
Come ha tocco dne volte in capo di messer Eccellente, egli gomfia, come vna A
Toado.
botta. Si vantaua d'amazzar l'aria: Star non si puo a petto con lui: Dar la
stretta ad vno.
Hebbe nome mezzo forfante, mezzo mariuolo, il rest poi era tutto poltrone.
Un certo mercantuzzo di stringhe: Un Asinaccio da bastone: Un bestionacchio
sperticato da venderlo a can come i campi, o a farui present a un lungo
remo: Un Asinaccio pezzo d'huomo: Un bestiuolo da poco ceruello.
Lo dara il Boia bello, and fritto al diauolo: Lo do all forche: Mi ritirai
con questo cocomero nel capo alla villa. S' e cauata la maschera.
Non pensate ch' io vocelli a presenti: Un huomo alquanto di sale. Heueua il
piede in due staff: cio e si poteua o been o male interpretar i fatti o i
detti suoi.
Gl'hauete tolto quello a torto, che non gli potete rendere a ragione, cio e la
vita: Chi cosi vuol, cosi habbia:
Io ti daro tanti, and tanti, ch' io ti cauer^ il Skoffinge, or iestinge.
ruzzo del capo.
Non me ne so ne grado, ne gratia.
Pare che quella cosa cerchi il suo centro.
Poi alla fine sono iti a monte con gli altri.
Gl'e terreno da piantar carotte: Ha l'ali piu grandi ch' il nido: Piu su sta
mona Luna: Da del buon per la pace: Ha la feed Greca, cio e egl'e disleale:
Dorme con gli occhi aperti: A lui si cangio il pelo: Che si de far dunquc?
Stringer le spalle: Dare il * Ouerwaight, or the shaking.
crollo alla bilancia: Colui fu il primo che ruppe il ghiaccio: Gli s' e
portato il cappello rosso, cio e ha hauuto la buona nuoua: Ha unto le mani al
guidice: Ha cattiui vicini: M'ha dato a credere Gloowe worms.
lucciole per lantern: Costui braua a credenza: Ho dato nello scartato: Ha
preso un granchio: ha mangiato vn' osso: voi empiete la valigia come un
zoccolante Without paying any thing.
a scrocco. Dormite al par d'el piumaccio: Ei suda di bell Gennaio: Ha pisciato
in piu neue: Io ho reso l'arme a San Giorgio: Si mess in dozzena con le
stringhe rotte. Sono saui a credenza, and matti a contanti. Di tal moneta
l'hauete pagato, quali erano state le derrate vendute. Tu che non hai ancora
rasciuti gl'occhi. Egli haueua a buona A ringe in a wall.
cauiglia legato l'Asino: A madonna poco fila gli si tringeuano i * The garters.
cintolini. Costei sent del scemo. E terreno da' ferri miei. Star con le Muse
in Parnaso, fare fascio d'ogni herba.
Amioi di proferta assai si truoua
Ancor chi stanno con la borsa aperta,
Quando si vien al fatto della pruoua,
Borsa serrata, amici non si truoua.
Chi da tosto, da due volte.
La gratia presta si radoppia, and la tarda suanisce.
Le gratie non aspettate, soglion esser piu grate.
Ma non si puo sforzare il Popone.
In fine in fine i guai col pane sono buoni, and ogni cosa ha il suo rimedio,
fuor che la morte.
La morte anchora da minor pena, che l'indugio della morte.
E molto meglio tosto morire, che viuendo languire.
La morte di se stessa non e misera, ma la via che conduce alla morte e misera.
E meglio ritornar in dietro, che andar errando inanzi.
Meglio e godersi il poco, ch' il bramar assai contrauaglio.
L'huomo risoluto non depend dalle cose a venire: l'aspetta, si been: and good
(il meglio ch' egli puo) le cose presenti: Del Autore.
Se non contento, almen risoluto. C. M.

T.V.



