To the most Honorable Assembly the Commons House of Parliament,
The humble Petition of the English Brokers lawfully admitted to deal between
Merchants in London.
Most humbly Shewenig,
THat for many ages past, it was the use and custom of the City of London,
that none but freemen of that City being English men borne, and
housesholders, should be admitted to excersise the trade of a Broker between
Merchant and Merchant, whereby great commodity did arise to the Common Wealth
for many years together.

That in these days many strangers borne, and the sons of Aliens, and others
not lawfully admitted, do use and exercise Brocage between Merchants, by
which means many intolerable and insupportable mischeifes do daily happen
unto this Kingdom and State.

The Petitioners further shows that those commodities which in times past did
arise to the Common Wealth, by the admission only of English Brokers, cannot
conveniently be reestablished, nor the mischiefs now daily happening to this
State, by the permission of Strangers Brokers, be prevented or reformed but
only by authority of Parliament.

The Petitioners therefore most humbly pray, that for the reasons hereunto
annexed it may be ordained, that from henceforth no stranger: nor the sons of
any Alien shall exercise Brocage in any wise, in any place of his Highness
Dominions.

The Reasons.
The Commodities arrising to the Common wealth by the admission only of
English Brokers:

First they shall be witnesses of all sales made by strangers of Marchandizes
imported, and shall keep a particular remembrance of what Merchandise, by
whom, unto whom, and for how much the same shall be sold, by which means the
state upon all occasions may be truly informed, of the nature of their
trading, and the difference between their importation, and transportation.

Secondly the debts estate and substance of the straingers may be hereby upon
all necessary occasions discovered, as also how much monyes they put over by
Exchange: and what somes they have at Interest.

Thirdly, the trade of English subjects will be hereby greatly advanced, because
Strangers or Aliens ought not to trade, or deal one with another in this
Kingdom, but are to sell their commodities imported only to his Majesty's
English subjects.

The inconveniences happening to this State by the permission of Strangers and
the sons of Aliens to be Brokers.
First thereby the Strangers is made acquainted with the secrets of our trade
and dealings in this Land, for they have Brokers and Factors of their own
nations, not only in London, but in Exceter, Norwich, Colchester, Canterbury,
Sandwich, and many other places, who bye and sell for them in this Kingdom,
both ingrosse and by retaile, all manner of Clothes and Stuffes, made and
wrought as well by strangers as English, thereby driving a wounderfull home
trade in this realm, to their private enriching, and impouerishment of the
English borne subjects.

Secondly, by permission of Strangers Brokers the estate of the Merchant
Stranger is kept secret, and by reason that no account is taken of their
trading, it is to be suspected that their moneys are made over by Exchange, or
molton into Bullion, and transported in respect, that silver carries a hither
price in foreign parts then in this Kingdom, and that there is such scarsity
thereof in this Land.

Thirdly the strangers Brokers, seekeing the profit of the Merchant strangers
and only how to sell his commodities at the uttermost price, and the Merchant
strangers likewise, wishing the profit only of the strangers Brokers: the
prices of foreign Merchandise are theerby inhaunced the value of the
commodities of this Land: much debased, and the sail of foreign commodities
imported into this Land, by English Merchants greatly neglected and hindered.

By which reason it plainly appears that by the suppression of strangers
Brokers and admission only of the English, the trade of strangers will be
discovered, the dealings of the English kept secret, the natives of this realm
releiued, and the conueying over of monyes by exchange and transportacon of
Bullion the better prevented.


