VIA DEVIA: THE BY-WAY: Mis-leading the weak and unstable into dangerous paths
of Error, by colorable shows of Apocryphal Scriptures, unwritten Traditions,
doubtful Fathers, ambiguous Counsels, and pretended Catholic Church.

Discovered By HVMFREY LYNDE, Knight.

Scriptura Regula credendi certissima tutissimaque est. Bell de Verb. Dei 40 1
cap 2. LONDON, Printed by Aug. M. for ROB. MILBOVRNE, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Grayhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

TO THE INGENVOVS AND Moderat Romanists of this Kingdom; H. L. Wishes the
knowledge of the Safe way, that leads to eternal Happiness.
CHristian is my name, and Catholic is my Surname: the one I challenge from
my Baptism in Christ's Church; the other from my profession of All saving
Tru^th in Gods Word. If you question this my right or claim, I will produce my
Evidence out of ancient and undoubted Records, and join Issue with you upon
the marks of your own Church; Antiquity. Universality. Succession.
and if I prove not the Faith which I profess to be Ancient, and Catholic,
I will neither refuse the name, nor punishment due to Heresy.

As touching the Visibilitie of our Church, I have answered your Jesuits
Challenge by the Title of Via Tuta, the Safe Way: wherein I have appealed to
the best learned of your own side, both for the Antiquity of our Religion,
and the Novelty of your own. If you require further satisfaction in this
point, read and peruse the Articles of our Church, and tell me, without a
preiudicate opinion, if our Church was not Ancient and Visible long before
Luthers days. Our 22. Books of Canonical Scripture, were they not published
and received in all ages before Luther? Our three Creeds, The Apostles, Nicene,
Athanatius Creed.
were they not anciently believed, and generally received in the Church before
Luther? Our Liturgy, and Book of Common Prayer, was it not the same for
substance which was taught and professed in the bosom of the Roman Church
before Luther? Our two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, were they
not instituted by Christ; were they not published and received in all ages
before Luther? These are the Foundations of our Church, and all these in
despite of malice it self, must be acknowledged by our adversaries, that
they are taught by us, and were universally received long before Luthers days.
And as touching the particular tenets of our Church (opposite to your Trent
Creed,) our spiritual receiving of Christ by faith (only,) whereby we are
made truly and really partakers of Christ's body crucified, is agreeable to all
Christian Confessions, and taught by all antiquity before Luther. Our public
Communion of Priest with people, had Antiquity and Universality in the best
and first ages, Bell. de Missa. lib. 2. ca. 9 and 10.
by Bellarmines confession long before Luther. Our Prayer and Service in a
known tongue, was publicly delivered, and anciently taught (by Bellarmines
confession) long before Luther. Bell de verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 16.
Our Communion in both kinds, was instituted by Christ, and continued in the
Primitive Churches (by Bellarmines confession) long before Luther. Idem de
Euch. lib. 4 cap. 24.
Nay more, the Psalms of David, which we sing, (and some of you
blasphemously term Geneua Iigges) were in ancient use amongst the common
people long before Luther. In Bethlem, where Christ was borne, turn whither
thou will (says Hierome) the Husbandman holding his Plough, Hier. in 1. Epist
17. ad Marcel.
continually sings Alleluia: the Mower when he sweateth (and is weary)
refreshes himself with Psalms: the Gardener, as he dresseth his Vine with
his hook, has some piece of David in his mouth. These (I say) are the chief
principles of our Religion: these we hold under the Charter of the great
King; and all these by the testimonies of our adversaries themselves, were
publicly known, and generally practiced long before Luthers days. Do you
look for an outvvard Form of a glorious and Visible Church in obscure ages?
Do you look for A City upon a Hill in the dark night of error and
ignorance? I appeal to your own consciences; to what purpose were the
prophecies of Christ and his Apostles, that the Church should fly into the
wilderness, and lie hid there? that Faith should not be found on the earth:
that the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but shall
be given to (Legends and) fables? that some should give heed to the spirit of
error, and doctrine of Devils? that after a thousand years Satan should be
let loose, and deceive the four quarters of the earth? were all these things
foretold, that it might be fulfilled what was spoken, and are the thousand
years long since expired, and yet shall we think that none of these
prophesies are accomplished?

Admit the man of Sin be not revealed, yet the Mystery of iniquity began
to work in the Apostles time; and the Evangelist tells us, the tares which
the thief fovved in the night, had almost choked the good corn; and lest
there might be some expectation of a great multitude, which should assume the
Title of an eminent and glorious Church, our Savior himself by way of
prevention, calls his Church by the name of A little flock, Luke. 12.32
as if a small number were the ancient Character of the true Church. The
maligna^t Church has many heretics and hypocrites, which indeed make a great
noise for a visible Church, when as those wicked persons (says Austen)
although they seem to be in the Church, August. de Bapt. lib. 6. cap. 3.
yet they appertain not to the true Church. That many are called, is the
Church visible: that few are chosen, is the Church invisible. Neither do we
hereby make two churches, when we consider this Church after a two fold manner.
Bellar. de Eccles. li. 3. cap. 15.
In the Church something is believed, some thing is seen; we see that company
of men which is the Church, but that this company is the true Church, we do not
see it, but believe it: this is Bellarmines confession, this is ours. Again,
look back, and take a brief Survey of the Church in several ages. It began
with two in Paradise; there remained in the flood but eight persons, and in
that number there was an accursed Cham. In Sodom not ten persons, nay scarce
three righteous to be found; there was but one Joshua and Caleb, of many
thousands that entered the land of Canaan: In the fiery trial, but three
children, at the coming of Christ, there was Simeon and Anna, Joseph, and
Mary, Zachary, and Elizabeth, and not many more known to be sincere
professors of Gods Truth, in the Church of Jerusalem. In the College of the
Apostles, there were but twelve, and one was the son of perdition. In the
time of persecution for three hundred years after Christ, Eusebius tells us,
Eusebius lib. 8 cap 2.
the Church was overwhelmed to the ground, and the Pastors of the Churches hid
themselves here and there. In the ages following for 300 years more, the
Arrian heresy so infected the Church, that the ship of the Church was almost
sunk, Hieron. ad Lucif.
says Hierome.) If therefore in the first and best ages the Church was much
darkened and obscured, what splendour and visibility should we expect in these
latter days, wherein the devil is let loose, seeking to deceive if it were
possible the very Elect themselves.

Let it suffice, as God himself first planted his church in Eden with two; so
he has watered it in the Garden of his Spouse, with the increase of many, best
known unto himself, and has promised a continual preservation of it, where
two or three are gathered together in his Name; and according to this Rule,
(which our adversaries cannot deny) we have at this day, a Church in Spain,
in Italy, in the East and West Indies, in every place where the Inquisition
reigns, although the outward face of the Church do not visibly appear.

Your Church of Rome is too too visible in this Kingdom, although you have not
toleration of public Exercise, nor is your Idol of the Mass set up in the
Temple, (which our good God, and gracious King forbid) I speak not this in any
sort to decline the visibility of our Church; for the Church is like the Moon,
which has often waxings and waynings, and we know the Moon at full, and and
the Moon at the waine, is one and the same Moon, although not alike
conspicuous It was a Quaere in the days of Solomon, Who can find a virtuous
woman? August. de Tempore. Sermon 217.
but (says Austen) in that he said, who can find her, showed the difficulty,
not the impossibitie of finding her: and this woman was the Church. He that
made that question, was the wisest among men; and he that expounded his
meaning, knew well how to distinguish the right woman from the counterfeit; yet
both agree in this, that the true Church was not easy to be discerned Saint
John tells us, this woman took her flight into the wilderness, and there she
was fed. If the Apostle had foretold the place as well as her flight, happily
she had been pursued and found of many; but the place was a desert, obscure
and unfrequented, and therefore known to few; and for certain she was found of
some, for otherwise she had not bin fed. In vain (I must confess) had Christ
commanded us to tell the Church, if there had been no Church to hear, and his
precept had bin needless to bid us hear the Church, if there had been no
Church to speak; yet he that warned us to hear the Church, forwarned us, that
after his departure Grievous wolves would enter into the church and speak
perverse things. Acts 20.29.
He that taught his Disciples to observe to do according to all the Scribes
and Pharisees should teach the^, enters this cave at against their false
glosses: Math. 23.3
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. He that said, Blindness in part was
happened to Israel, told us also, that the Church of Rome, if she did not
continue in her goodness, Romans 11.22
she should also be cut off. And it is observable, the same Church of
Jerusalem, which the Prophet David called the City of God, Psalm. 48.19.
was termed an Harlot by the Prophet Isay in his time; and that Temple which
Solomon termed a House of Prayer in his days, 1 Kin. 8.20.
was afterward by Christ called a den of thieves, Math. 21.14
the one showed what the Church was, the other how it was altered, yet both
agree, they were one and the same church.

The Christian church was never brought to a lower ebb, then was the Jewish
Synagogue at the coming of Christ, and yet a man at that time might have seen
Simeon and Zachary, Joseph and Mary, Anna and Elizabeth, the true servants of
Christ standing together with the Sadduces in the same Temple, which might well
be accounted as the house of Saints, in regard of the one; so a den of thieves
in respect of the other. If therefore we have corrected the errors of the
Roman church (as Christ whipped the thieves and money changers out of the
Temple) we do not hereby make a new Church, but renew that house of Prayer,
and restore it to the ancient and true service of Christ. If we had left our
Mother, when we first found her sick, she might have justly taxed us of
disobedience, and want of duty toward her; but when the Priest saw her, and
passed by, when the Leuite looked on her, and forsook her, Luther and Calvin
performed the office of the good Samaritan, they came near unto her, and saw
her, and took care to cure her wounded soul; and from that time her children
became Physicians, to heal, not parents to beget a new Church. To heal a
sore, to purge a sick and diseased body, is not to make a new body, but to
renew it, and restore it to his former health: let me give you but one familiar
example of your own in this latter age. Saint Francis established the Order of
Fra^ciscans, and they according to the meaning of their first Founders, did for
a long time follow the Institution of their first Orders: afterward, when
certain errors and corruptions had crept in among them, they separated
themselves from the rest, and were called the Recollects. Upon this occasion a
suit was co^menced, to decide whether the Recollects, or the other Franciscans
did adhere to the true orders of S. Francis. After examination, and
deliberation had, the Recollects were found to adhere to the ancient
Institutions of their Order, and thereupon Judgment was published on their
behalf, and they were afterward called the Reformed Franciscans. Such is the
state of the Reformed Churches at this day; the true Church was first planted
and established by Christ and his Apostles; continued sound in Head and members
for many ages: afterward when error and superstition had crept in, and gotten
the upper hand, there were certain Recollects, which complained of the
corruptions and errors, which had spru^g up in the Roman church; whereupon
after mature deliberation had of the true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
publication was made in the behalf of the Recollects, that they were found to
adhere to the ancient Institutions of Christ and his Apostles, and from and
after that time they were called the Reformed Churches.

Will you bring a Quo Warranto, and examine for what cause, and by what
authority the Protestants have reformed the errors of your Church? I will tell
you in brief. If for no other cause, yet for this alone, because you are
taught to eat your God, Mariana.
and kill your King, they might justly seek a reformation in doctrine and
manners: but the truth is, 1. John 4.1.
there were false Prophets gone out into the world; and for that cause Christ
gave his commission to try the spirits, whether they were of God; and
accordingly they proceeded to examination of the doctrine of the Scriptures, by
Fathers, and councils, and after publication of witnesses, they received
vvarranty from the ancient Bish. of Rome, and your own famous Council of
Trent, the one commending that doctrine to the Christians of their days, which
we now profess; the other commanding a reformation (in the Roman church) of
such errors in faith and manners as we condemn. I will give you instances in
both.

Your worship of Images, (which you receive as an article of faith) for fear
of Idolatry we have reformed, if you require warranty from the Roman Church,
Gregory Bishop of Rome proclaims it to the Christians of his time: Greg lib.
9. Epist 9.
Let the children of the Church be called together and taught by the
testimonies of holy scriptures, that nothing made with hands may be
worshipped. Your doctrine of Transubstantiation, which you have decreed for an
Article of Faith, we have reformed; if you expect warrantie from the Roman
church, Gelasius Bish. of Rome published and professed our doctrine flat
contrary to the faith of Transubst In the Sacrament is celebrated an image,
Gelas cont. Eutych. and Nestor.
or resemblance of the body and blood of Christ, and there cease not to be
the substance and nature of bread and wine. Your half Communion we have
reformed; if you require warranty from the Roman Church, Julius Bish. of Rome,
speaking of the delivering to the people, a sop dipped in wine, for the whole
Communion, tells us: De Consecrat. Did. cum omne.
In Christ's institution there is recited the delivering of the bread by it
self, and the cup by it self, lest inordinate and perverse devices weaken the
soundness of our faith. These are fundamental points, and agreeable to the
tenets of our Church, and are warra^ted to us by the ancient Bishops of Rome
themselves; and if the Popes doctrine be infallible in points of faith, (which
you teach and profess) without doubt they may be sufficient warranties for
you to allow this Reformation.

I will come nearer unto you, and descend from the ancient Bishops of Rome, to
your late Counsel of Trent, which intended and wished a Reformation in faith
and manners, even of those things which we have reformed: your Prayer and Service
in an unknown tongue, we have restored to the understanding of the hearer; if
you expect warrantie from your own Church, your Council of Trent, (although
they reformed not this doctrine) yet for the better satisfaction and
instruction of the ignorant, lest (say they) the sheep of Christ should
thirst, Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 8.
and the children crave bread, and none should be ready to give it them, it
was decreed, that the Priests and Pastors should frequently expound, and
declare the mystery (of that unknown Service to the people.) Your
superstitious ceremonies of many lights and candles, and your certain number
of Masses, we have reformed. If you expect warranty from your own Church,
Quarunda^ vero Missaru^ et Candelaru^ certu^ numeru^ qui magis a superstitioso
cultu qua^ a vera^ Religione inue^tus est, omnino ab Ecclesia remoueant. Idem
cap. 9.
your Council of Trent confesses, They were first invented rather out of
superstitious devotion, then true religion; and therefore say they, let the^ be
altogether removed from the Church. Your Indulgences, (which are made an
article of Faith) we have reformed; if you expect warranty from your own
Church, you may answer with the Fathers of the Trent Counsel: Quastorum
abusus vt coru^ emendationi spes nulla relicta videatur, etc.
The Popes Officers in collecting money for Indulgences, gave a scandal to all
faithful Christians, which might seem to be without hope of Reformation; and
therefore we have reformed the^. Ab Ecclesiis vero Musicas eas, vbi sieve organo,
sieve cantus lascivu^, aut impurum aliquid miscetur --
Your lascivious and wanton songs which are mingled with your Church Music,
we have reformed; if you expect warrantie from your own church, your own
Counsel complained of it, and wished it might be reformed, and they give the
reason for it: Vt Domus Dei vere domus orationis esse videatur. Idem ibid.
That the House of God may appear to be the house of prayer. Your
Superstition, your Idolatry, your Couetousness, which you confess to have
crept into the Mass, by the error of time, and wickedness of men, we have
reformed; if you require warrantie from your own church, Ordinarii locoru^
Episcopi ea omnia prohibere atque e medio tollere sedulo curent ac teneantur,
quae vel auaritia idoloru^ seruitus, vel superstitio induxit. Ide^ Can. 9.
your Counsel decreed, That the Ordinary should be very careful to remove
all those things, which either covetousness, or worship of idols, or
superstition had brought in. Lastly, your private Mass we have reformed, and
restored to the Communion of Priest and people; if you expect warrantie from
your own Church, Anacletus, and Calixtus, (both Bishops of Rome) decreed; that
after Consecration all present should communicate, Did 1. Episcopus and. 2.
Peracta.
or else be thrust out of the Church. And your late Council of Trent,
although they reformed not this doctrine, yet Optaret quide^ sacrosancta
Synodus; The Counsel could wish, that the people might co^municat with the
Priest; and there they give the reason for it: Because it would be more
fruitful and more profitable. Sess. 22. c. 6.


If therefore we have changed your Sacrifice into a Sacrament; your carnal and
gross eating of Christ, into a spiritual receiving by faith; your half
Communion into the whole Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; your
private Mass, into the public communion of Priest and people: your adoration
of Images, into the true worship of God in spirit and truth; your prayer and
service in an unknown tongue, into the vulgar language to be understood of the
common people; your lascivious and wanton songs, into David's Psalms: we have
don nothing herein, but what the Apostles, what the holy Fathers, what the
ancient Bish. of Rome taught in the first and best ages, and what your grand
Counsel of Trent intended, and wished to be reformed in this latter age. Nay
more, since your Council has made several Decrees for Reformation; The
Council of Trent began An 1545 and ended Ann. 1563. Bell. Chro. pa. 121. 123.
since they can neither plead want of Authority, nor want of time, during the
lives of ^ight Popes, and eighteen years continuance, why they did not proceed,
and put in execution those Decrees. I hope we shall deserve the greater thanks
from your Popes and Cardinals, for rectifying those abuses which they
themselves condemned, and from their own Decrees and fair prete^ces, may
justly arrogate to our selves that honorable Title of Reformed Churches.

Give me leave therefore by way of counter-challenge to your Jesuit, to use the
words of sobernes and truth: Where was your Church and Trent doctrine before
Luther? for I call God and his heavenly Angels to witness, that notwithstanding
you obtrude the invisibility of our church as a stumbling block to the
ignorant, notwithstanding your great brags of an outward face of an eminent,
and glorious Roman Church; yet your Trent faith and doctrine was far from the
knowledge of Christ and his Apostles: nay more, if any Jesuit, or all the
Jesuits alive, can prove your Roman Faith had Antiquity, Universality, and
Succession, in all ages, and that your Trent Articles were plainly, commonly and
continually taught, and received de Fide, as Articles of Faith, before Luther,
let all the Anathema's in your Trent Council fall upon my head. And as touching
the great noise and rumors of your Catholic Church, if you will consider and
weigh it with wisdom and moderation, you shall find, it wholly depends upon
two doubtful and uncertain co^clusions (viz.) The Infallibility of the Pope,
and the Intention of the Priest. These are but two slender threads to uphold
the Universal faith of all Christians; and therefore blame not us, if such
things seem harsh and untunable in our ears, that many millions of souls
should depend upon the Infallibility of one man; and that man by your own
supposall, may draw with him innumerable souls to hell. That man who has
the name and nature of Antichrist in his person; in the one as he is against
Christ and his doctrine; in the other as he claims to be Christ's Vicar, and
sit in his stead, (for the very name of Antichrist imports both. Antichrist
signifies, Against Christ, and to be in the place of Christ.
) That man upon whose forehead, (by the testimonies of learned Authors) the
word Mystery, Dr. James in his Epist. Dedicatory of the Corruption of the
Fathers etc.
the very mark of the Beast was sometimes written. That man who is pointed at
by the Apostle, (...).
to be that Antichrist, by his habitation seated upon seven hills. Revel. 17.
That man, who has the character of the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4
which adua^ceth himself above all that are called Gods; I have said you are
Gods Psalm. 82.6.
(viz) the Kings and Princes of the earth. That man, who has published the
doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim 4.
by forbidding of meats, and Marriage unto Priests. Lastly, that man whose
Infallibility, Conc. Flor. in Decret. Eugenij.
whose Succession, whose Orders, whose Baptism, and Christianity it self,
depends upon the Intention of a silly Priest, Bell de Iustif. li 3.^.8.
of whose Intention none can be assured by your own confessions.

It is not the great sound of a visible Church that must outface the truth;
(for the emptiest vessels make the greatest sound) neither is it the name of
Catholic, (which you wholly appropriate to your selves) sufficient to prove
your Church Catholic: nay more, your pretenses of Scriptures, of Traditions,
of Fathers, of Councels, of an Infallible Church, are but figge-leaues, to
cover the nakedness of your newborn faith: for it shall appear, (by this
small Treatise) that your chiefest scriptures, on which you build your Trent
doctrine, are Apocryphal; your Traditions, which you have equalled to the
Scriptures, are Apostaticall: your Fathers, which you assume for Interpreters
of the Scriptures, are spurious and counterfeit: your Councels, which depend
upon the Infallibility of the Popes judgment, are erroneous and doubtful; and
your pretended Catholic Church, which is made the only rule of Faith, is
neither a whole, nor yet a sound member of the Catholic and Universal Body.
This way therefore which you take, is a cloak and color to darken truth, by
outward shows, and specious pretenses, and therefore Via Deuia, a vvandring
and By-way.

Neither is it your bitterness and inuectiues against a Lay man, shall make me
silent in Gods cause; for I say with Moses, Number. 12.29
Would God all the Lords people could prophecy: and I hope there will never be
wanting a Mildab, and a Medab, to assist Moses and Aaron, that may be able to
vindicate Gods Honor and Truth, and ease our painful Pastors and Ministers,
which most laboriously perform the work of an Evangelist, and convert souls
by preaching, which yours pervert by Controversies of Disputations: I hope, I
say, there will be always some, who will publish to the shame of your Romish
Pastors, the palpable ignorance of the Laity, who with an implicit faith, and
inuolued obedience, resign up their sight and senses to blind guides. Let the
Truth of God and his Church flourish, and no railing accusation of an
Adversary shall deter me from my service to his cause. In the mean time I
will appeal to your own consciences, whether it be Catholic doctrine, or
savor of Christian Charity, which your Jesuits teach, (viz. Haereticos non
magis audiendos esse etiamsi vera et sacris literis co^sentanea dicant aut
doceant qua^ Diobolum. Mald. in Math. 16.6
) That the Reformed Churches are no more to be heard, then the devil himself,
although they speak truth, and agreeable to the Scriptures; nay more, I speak
it with shame and grief, Discept. T^^ol. Sect. 2.
the Pope at this day allows the Talmud of the Jews, and yet prohibites the
Books of Protestants.

Give me leave therefore to speak to you, as sometime S. Austen spoke to the
Donatists: Aug. contr. Pet^l lib. 3. cap. 59.
If you will be wise, and understand the truth, it is well; if otherwise, it
shall not grieve me, that I have taken this pains for you for though your
hearts return not to the peace of the Church, yet my peace shall return to
me in the Church. The cause is Gods, the labor is mine; if you will read it
impartially, and can show me any error clearly, faithfully, and moderately, I
will make a work of Retractations, and profess openly with righteous Job: Job
31.35, 36.
O that mine adversary would write a Book against me, I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me.

H. L.

The Contents.
Sect. 1. THe safest and only infallible way to find out the true Church, is
by the Scriptures. Page 1. Sect. 2. Our Adversaries pretenses, from the
obscurity of Scriptures, and inconveniences of the Lay peoples reading them,
answered. p. 16. Sect. 3. The Scripture, according to the Judgment of the
ancient Fathers, is the sole Judge of Controversies, and Interpreter of it
self. p. 43. Sect. 4. Our Adversaries, howsoever they pretend by taking an
oath, to make the Fathers Interpreters of the Scriptures, yet indeed they make
themselves sole Interpreters of Scriptures and Fathers. p. 58 Sect. 5. The
entire Canon of Scriptures which we profess (without the Apocryphal
additions) is confirmed by pregnant testimonies in all ages, and most of them
acknowledged by the Romanists themselves. p. 86 Sect. 6. Our Adversaries
pretenses from the Authorities of Fathers, and Councels, to prove the
Apocryphal Books Canonical, answered. p. 122 Sect. 7. The Romanists in point
of Traditions, contradict the truth and themselves: grounding most of their
erroneous. Doctrine upon unwritten Traditions, and yet frequently allege the
written Word for them. p. 144 Sect. 8. The most general pretended Traditions
of the Roman Church, were utterly unknown to the Greek Church, and want
Antiquity, Universality, and Succession, the proper marks of true Traditions
in the Roman Church. p. 167 Sect. 9. The Scriptures are a certain, safe and
evident direction to the right way of Salvation, and consequently to ground
Faith upon unwritten Traditions, is an obscure, uncertain and dangerous By
way. p. 245 Sect. 10. Our Adversaries make great boast of the Testimonies of
the ancient Fathers in general, yet when they come to fifting particular
points, either by secret evasion they decline them, or openly reject them. p.
280 Sect. 11. The most substantial points of Roman Faith and Doctrine, as
they are now taught and received in the Church of Rome, were never taught by
the Primitive Church, nor received by the ancient Fathers. p. 307 Sect. 12.
Saint Augustine in particular is much disparaged by the Romanists; and for
instance in many several points of moment, wherein he professedly concurreth
with us, is expressly rejected by them. p. 335 Sect. 13. Saint Gregory,
pretended to be the Founder of the Roman Religion in England, by sending
Austen the Monk, for conversion of this nation, in his undoubted writings,
directly opposes the Romish Faith in the maine points thereof. p. 347 Sect.
14. Councels which are so highly extold, and opposed against us, were neither
called by lawful authority, or to the right ends, as is confessed by the
ingenuous Romanists. p. 370 Sect. 15. Counsels, which our Adversaries pretend,
as a chief Bulwark of their faith, give no support at all to the Romish
Religion, as it is proved by particular objections made against several
Councels in all ages, by the Romanists themselves. p. 386 Sect. 16. The
Council of Trent, which is the maine Pillar, and last resolution of the Roman
faith, is of small or no credit at all, because it was neither lawfully called,
nor free, nor general, nor generally received by the Romanists themselves. p.
420 Sect. 17. In the Roman Church, which our adversaries so highly extol above
the Scriptures, there is neither safety nor certainty, whether they
understand the Essential, or Representative, or the Virtuall, or the
Consistoriall Church. p. 452 Sect. 18. The most common Plea of the Romanists
drawn from the Infallibility, Authority, and Title of the Catholic Church,
is proved to be false, vain, and frivolous. p. 468 Sect. 19. The Church which
our Adversaries so much magnify among themselves, is finally resolved into the
Pope, whom they make both the Husband and the Spouse, the Head and the Body of
the Church. p. 496 Sect. 20. The Church is finally resolved into the Pope, who
wants both Personal and Doctrinall succession, as appears by several
instances, and exceptions, both in matters of Fact, and matters of Faith. p.
513 Sect. 21. The infallibility of the Popes Judgment, which is made the Rule
of Faith, to determine all Controversies, is not yet determined by the learned
Romanistes amongst themselves. p. 545 Sect. 22. The Church upon which the
learned Romanists ground their Faith, is no other then the Pope: and the Church
upon which the unlearned Romanists do rely, is no other then their Parish
Priest. p. 572 Sect. 23. Eminent and perpetual Visibilitie, is no certain
Note of the true Church, but the contrary rather, as it is proved by instances
from Adam to Christ. p. 592 Sect 24. The Latencie and obscurity of the true
Church is p^ooued by pregnant testimonies of such who complained of corruptions
and abuses, and withal decreed a Reformation in all ages, from the time of
Christ and his Apostles, to the days of Luther. p. 610 Sect. 25. The
aforenamed corruptions, and most remarkable declination of the Church of Rome
in the later ages, was foretold by Christ and his Apostles in the first Age. p.
666 Sect. 26. The Conclusion of this Treatise, showing in sundry particulars,
the certainty and safety of the Protestant, and the uncertainty and danger
of the Romish Way. p. 675
VIA DEVIA: THE BY-VVAY.
SECT. I. The safest, and only infallible way to find out the true Church, is
by the Scripture.
WHen the Donatists, in the most flourishing times of Christian Religion,
arrogantly and presumptuously appropriated the Catholic and Universal
Church, to their haereticall and particular faction: St. Austen encountering
them, Quaestio est vbi sit Ecclesia: quid ergo facturi sumus? an inverbis
nostris ea^ qua situri, an in verbis capitis sui Dom. nostri Jesus Christi? Puto
quod in illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, quia veritas est, and nouit
corpus suu^. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 2.
states the point of Controversy in this manner. The question is where the
Church should be, what then shall we do? shall we seek it in our own
words, or in the words of our Lord Jesus? In my judgment we ought rather to
seek the Church in his own words, for that he is the truth, and knows his
own body.

You have heard the question propounded, and answered by the Oracle of that
age. Such is the difference at this day, betwixt the Church of Rome and us; and
I heartily wish, we might join issue with them upon the like terms, and
both agree with one unanimous consent to seek the Church of God in the word of
God; then should we be gathered, as sheep to one sheepfold, and the weak in
faith should be received, not to doubtful disputations, but to the reading of
the Scriptures: and they that now question the Visibilitie of our Church before
Luther, would first examine the infallibility of their own, by the Touchstone
of the Gospel; and the rather, because it is agreed on both sides, that
whatsoever Church professes, that faith and doctrine, which Christ and his
Apostles taught in the first age, the same Church and doctrine has continued
more or less visible in all ages. But to return to the Donatists.

Cant. 1.7.
When Christ in the Canticles, demanded of his Spouse where she rested Meridie,
at Noonday, the Donatists concluded Christ's question with their own answer,
that the Church did rest Meridie, and that was in the South: and from this
ground, excluded all other Churches, but their own in the South of Africa: The
Donatists claim, was seemingly derived from the authority of the Scriptures
(for Donatus, and Austen, heretic and Catholic, both urge the Scriptures;)
but observe the difference; Saint Austen puts the whole issue of his cause upon
the Scripture: the Donatists claimed their doctrine by the public voices of
the Africans, they assumed to themselves the title of the Catholic Church:
they magnified the Councels of their Bishops; they gloried in their frequent,
though fained miracles: these were the principal grounds of their Church,
Remotis ergo omnibus talibus, Ecclesiam sua^ demonstrant si possunt, non in
sermonibus and rumoribus Afrorum, no^ in Conciliis Episcoporu^, no^ in literis
quorum libet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis fallacibus, quia etiam
contra ista verbo Dom. praeparati et cautired diti sumus sed in praescripto
Legis, in Prophetarum praedictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius Pastoris
vocibus, in Euangelistaru^ praedicationibus et laboribus (hoc est) in omnibus
Canonicis Sanctoru^ librorum authoritatibus. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
and upon these they challenged that great Champion: but hear what answer he
makes them. Let the Donatists, if they can, show their Church, not in rumors
and speeches of the men of Africa, not in the Councels of their Bishops, not in
discourses of any Writers whatsoever, not in signs and miracles that may be
forged, for we are forewarned by Gods word, and therefore fore-armed against
those things: but in the prescript of the Law, in the prediction of the
Prophets, in the verses of the Psalms, in the voices of the Shepherd
himself, in the preaching and works of the Evangelists, that is in all the
Canonical authorities of the sacred Scriptures.

If Saint Austen had been living in these days, either he must have retracted
this Protestant doctrine, or he would have been reputed for an heretic; for
all these marks, which were anciently maintained by the Donatists, are
proclaimed by our adversaries to be visible characters of the true Church:
neither did this learned father require more of the Donatist, then the
Catholics of those times were willing to perform on their parts; and
therefore he binds himself to the same conditions which he required of his
adversaries, and withal renders the reason of his demand. Nec nos proptarea
dicimus nobis credere oportere ad in Ecclesia Christi sumus quia ipsam qua^
tenemus, commendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alii
innumerabilis nostra communionis Episcopi, aut quia nostrorum Collegarum
Conciliis praedicata est aut quia per totum orbem in locis sanctis qua
frequentat nostra communi^tant^ mirabilia fiunt. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
Quia nec nos propterea dicimus, etc. Because we our selves do not say we
must therefore be believed, for that we are in the Church of Christ, or else
for that Optatus and Ambrose, and infinite other Bishops of our Communion, have
commended the Church which we hold, or because our Church has bin published
in the Counsels of our Colleagues, or because in all places of the world where
our Communion is frequented, there are so many miracles wrought. This was the
doctrine of Saint Austen, and the ancient Fathers, and this is ours; they
required no more of the Donatists, but to lay apart all pretended titles, and
rely only upon the word of God, we offer to the Romanists, no less then to
accept the same conditions upon trial of that title, and rely only upon that
word.

I must confess, I think a more speedy way might have been found to have
given an answer to the Controversies of that age: for Saint Austen might have
poynted at the Church in the West, which was then as conspicuous as the Sun at
Noone day; he might have answered them, it was a City upon a hill, which was
visible to all. He might have produced the Apostle for a witness, that her
faith was published throughout the whole world: he might have confuted them
with sacred Counsels, and Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and confirmed his
truth with the death of constant Martyrs, which sealed their doctrine with
their blood in the testimony of the true faith. Certainly, all these proofs
were pregnant in his time, and he might easily have produced them in behalf of
his Church (as our adversaries in these days do for theirs:) but he left
these brags to these latter times, and sends them to the Law, to the
Testimonies, to the word of Christ, that speaks better things then was
possible for man to utter; Ne in Ecclesia errares, ne quis tibi diceret
Christus est qui non est Christus, aut Ecclesia est quae non est Ecclesia, audi
vocem Pastoris -- ostendit Ecclesiam ne quis te fallat in nomine Ecclesiae.
Aug. Psalm. 69.
and to that end (says he) thou might not err in the Church, and lest any
man should say this is Christ, who is not Christ, or this is the Church which
is not the Church, hear the voice of the Shepherd, he has showed thee the
Church, that the name of the Church may not deceive thee. The sum and
substance therefore of St. Austens doctrine was this, that neither Bishops, nor
Councels, nor Miracles, nor rumors of the Catholic name, do demonstrate the
Church of God to be Catholic (for all these are common to heretics, as well
as Catholics;) but the holy Scriptures which bear the testimony of Jesus,
they only carry the infallible marks of his truth, In Scripturis didicimus
Christum, in Scripturis didicimus ecclesiam. Aug. ep. 166
and in them (faith he) we have known Christ, in them we have known the
Church.

Neither was this the opinion of Saint Austen only; for Saint Hierom tells us,
that in his days the Church was not gone out of her limits of the holy
Scriptures, Non est egressa de finibus suis, id est de Scripturis sanctis.
Hier. lib. 1. c. 1. in Mich.
and from thence the timber and materials must be taken, with which the house
of wisdom is to be built. And Saint Chrysostom as a wise Master Builder in
this house, gave this Caveat to the worke-men in after ages; Chrysostom. in opere
imperfecto. Hom. 49.
It can no way be known which is the true Church (nisi tantummodo per
Scripturas) but only by the Scriptures; Non enim per alios dispositionem
salutis nostra cognouimus, quam per ees per quos euangelium peruenit ad nos
quod quide^ tu^c praeconiauerunt, postea vero per Dei voluntate^ in scripturis
nobis tradiderunt fundamentum et Columna^ fidei nostrae futurum. I^en. advers.
haeres. l. 3. c. 1.
otherwise if they had regard to other things, they should be offended and
perish, and not understand which is the true Church. And lastly, the learned
Father Irenaeus assures us; Non per alios, etc. by no other have we known the
way of our salvation, but by them, by whom the Gospel came to us, which verily
they then preached, and afterward by the will of God delivered the same to us
in the Scriptures, to be the Foundation, and Pillar of our Faith.

Tell me then in this latter age and time of Controversy, wherein it is
commonly voyced in our ears, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, this is
the true Church, and that is the true Church; how shall the religious man,
which loves truth, and seeks comfort, resolve himself? to which Church
shall he safely join himself, when perhaps he wants the learning, perhaps the
leisure to look backward for 1600 years, and rightly examine the doctrine of
both Churches? If he seek the Protestant Church, behold she being poor, and
despised for want of continued eminency, is become a stumbling block to the
ignorant. If he look on the Roman Church, behold, Reu. 17.2, etc.
She is arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious
stones, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine
of her fornications, and they that follow her, wonder with great admiration.
And without doubt the Popes triple Crowns, the golden crosses, the Legend of
Saints, the multitude of professed Orders, their pomp in Processions, their
rich clothing of Images, their pretended power of their Priesthood, the great
rumor of their Catholic cause, their Iubilies, and Pardons, their Merits and
Miracles do so dazzle the eyes of the ignorant and common people, that they
think there is no Church true and visible but the Roman Church: and certainly
the case thus standing, we have no better plea for our Church, Vtrum nos
schismatici sumus an vos, nec ego, nec tu sed Christus interrogetur vt indicet
ecclesiam suam. Aug. cont. lit Pet lib. 2. c. 85.
then the holy Father Saint Austen, sometimes made to Petilian the Donatian
heretic; Whether of us be Schismatiques, we or you, ask you not me, I will
not ask you; let Christ be asked, that he may show us his own Church.

SECT. II. Our adversaries pretenses from the obscurity of Scriptures, and
inconveniences of the Lay peoples reading them, answered.
I Speak not this, as if the Romanists of these times did wholly wave the
Scriptures: for if we may credit Doctor Sanders; There are most plain
Scriptures in all points for the Catholic Faith, Rock of the Church cap 8.
p. 193
and none at all against the same. And their own Bristow would make the world
believe, Brist. Mot. 48.
from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Apocalypse, there is no text
that makes for us against them, but all for them. If these men have spoken the
truth, let them bear witness of the truth, only let me tell you, the
Rhemists in their Annotations upon the Gospel, profess in the name of their
Church, that, if we should, Rhem. Annot. in 1. Cor. 1.5.
when we came to years of discretion, be set to pick our Faith out of the
Scriptures, there would be a mad work, and many Faiths among us. And their
fellow Ecchius proclaims to all the world, Ecch. Euchirid c. 4.
that the Lutherans are dolts, which will have nothing believed, but that which
is express Scripture: for all things are not delivered manifestly in the
Scriptures, but very many are left to the determination of the Church. Haeresin
esse si quis dicit necessarium esse vt Scripturae in vulgares linguas
co^uertantur. Sand. visib. Monar. haeres. 191.
And their Proselyte Sanders, who pretends such evident testimonies of the
Scriptures in behalf of his Church, accounts it no better then heresy to
translate them. And Peresius his fellow Jesuit, complains; It is the Devils
invention to permit the people to read them. Diaboli inuentum esse vt populus
Biblia legere permitteretur. Peers. de Tra. part. 1. assert 3.
And it is the general vote of the best learned Romanists, The reading of the
Bible makes more heretical Lutherans, then Roman Catholics. If therefore the
Scriptures are such pregnant and plain testimonies in behalf of the Roman
Faith (as some Romanists pretend) why do they condemn the translating of them?
why do they not permit the people to read them? and if all places of Scripture
make for them, and none for us, how comes it to pass, that by reading them,
many Papists by their own confession become Protestants?

It is the blasphemous assertion of Albertus Pigghius; No^ vt scriptu illa
praeessent fidei et Religioni nostrae, sed potius vt subessent. Pig Hierar.
lib. 1. c. 2.
that the Apostles have written certain things, but not to that end their
writings should rule our faith, but rather that they should be under, and ruled
by our faith and Religion. And hereupon he quarrels with all those that
submit their knowledge to the authority of the Gospel: Si dixeris haec
referri oportere ad iudicium Scripturarum co^munis te sensus ignaru^ esse
comprobat, sunt enim scriptura muti Iudices. Pigh. cont. 3. de Eccles.
If thou shall teach (says he) that those things must be put to the Judgment
of the Scriptures, thou show thy self to be void of common reason: for the
Scriptures are dumb Judges, and cannot speak. Neither is this the opinion of
some private spirits, which of late have declined the authority of the
Scriptures: but if we look beyond Luther, we shall find that almost 300
years before his days, the Romanists did endeavor by all means to extinguish
the light of the Gospel.

About the year 1255, there was a great contention betwixt the University of
Paris, and the Order of Franciscan Friars, in which dissension the Friar
Mendicants published a book called Euangelium aeternum, Mat. Paris. in Hist.
An. 1256.
the eternal Gospel: in this Book it was declared, that the Gospel of
Christ was not the everlasting Gospel; that it was to cease and determine as
the old Law did at the coming of Christ, that the Gospel of Christ should
from that time continue but 50 years, and that their new Gospel did contain
as much or more, then the whole Bible, that theirs was the Gospel of Christ,
and the eternal Gospel. Neither was this wicked blasphemy published by one
man, but by a whole Order of Monks and Friars. Neither were they vpstart
opinions (like mushromes grown up in a night) but they were set afoot fifty
five years before that time. This and much more of the like doctrine is to be
read in Matthew Paris, B. Usher de Eccles. success and statu cap 9. p. 278
and more particularly in that excellent Treatise of the Succession and state
of Christian Churches.

Thus the Romish Priests of the former and latter ages, agree like Pilate and
Herod, both to the condemnation of Christ and his Word; and as Herod (says
Ambrose) burnt the Scriptures, Ambr. in Luc. lib 3.
lest by means of such ancient Records, some doubt might afterward be made of
his posterity; In like manner our late Romanistes have silenced the Scriptures,
lest by such ancient Evidences their new Articles of Faith should be
discovered; and had it not been for fear or shame, I am verily persuaded,
they had fulfilled in a sense to litterall the words of the Apostle: The fire
shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. Now can any man imagine why
these men should be so angry with Christ and his Apostles? Can they say the
Scriptures are subject to errors, and need an Index Expurgatorius? No, they
dare not, they will not say so; but they say, Lind. lib. 2. Strom. c. 2. etc.
they are dead characters, a killing letter without life, a matter of
contention, a wood of thieves, a shop of heretics, imperfect, doubtful, fall
of perplexities, not to be permitted to the common people: Laicis lectione^
scripturarum permittere esset sanctu^ dare canibus and Margaritas ante porcos
proiicere.

Hos. de express verbo Dei.


for this were all one (says Hosius) as to give that which is holy unto
dogs, and cast pearls before swine. Nay more, Cardinal Bellarmine assures
us, that the people will not only reap no benefit, but detriment, by reading
them: for they would easily take occasion to err both in manners and doctrine.
Populus non solum non caperet fructum ex Scripturis, sed etia^ caperet
detrimentum. Bell. de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 15. Bell. ibid.
And for confirmation of his assertion among other proofs he gives this
instance: If an ignorant layman should read of the adultery of David, of the
incest of Thamar, of the lies of Judith, and many such like things contained in
the Scriptures, either it would cause him to imitate their examples, or he
would think them to be lying inventions, or being not able to resolve them,
would be in danger to believe nothing at all. These and the like examples
(which in truth concern the lives and manners of men, not the doctrine,) are
registered by the will and mercy of that good God, to prevent despair in
others, who may unhappily fall into the like sins; and yet that no man might
presume to commit the like sins, by their examples; he who reads of the
adultery of David, shall read likewise of the punishment allotted to his
sins: and he that reads the particular examples of Thamar and Judith, shall
find such severe and fearful judgments in general denounced against those
sins, that he shall have little cause or comfort to follow their examples in
such particulars; but from hence rather we may observe the sincerity of the
Penmen of the holy Ghost, who impartially set down the vices of the best men,
and greatest Patriarchs, as well as their virtues: and by this declaration of
the sins of the regenerate, and best servants of Christ, we are taught to
humble our selves, and to fly to our Savior for mercy and grace, that every
tongue may confess to thee, O God, Thou only art holy: And certainly from
hence (I mean from these and the like examples,) Saint Austen, Saint Hierom,
and the ancient Fathers, confuted the Pelagian Heretics, who with Bellarmine
and his associates maintained the perfection of righteousness in this life.
But admit these and many such like places were hard to be understood in
Scriptures, Est fluuius planus et altus, in quo agnus ambulet, et elephas
natet. Greg. ad Leand. praef. Ioh. cap. 4.
yet there is milk for babes, as well as stronger meat for stronger men there
is depth (says Gregory) for the Elephant to swim, and shallow fords for the
lamb to wade in. He that gave a heart and wisdom to the Apostles to preach
that heavenly word, opened the heart of Lydia, (a poor ignorant woman) to
understand it: and for that purpose (says Chrysostom) the Spirit of God has
so ordered and disposed the Scriptures, Chrysostom. in Conc. 3. de Lazaro.
that Publicanes, and Fishers, and Tent-makers, and Shepherds, Apostles and
unlearned men, should be saved by those books: and to that end no ignorant
man should pretend obscurity for his excuse, it is ordained that the labourer
and servant, the widow woman, and the most unlearned man, by hearing them,
should reap some benefit. Nay more (says he) to whom are the Scriptures
obscure, who is there that hears the words, Blessed are the meek, Blessed are
the merciful, Blessed are the pure in heart, and the like, that shall need an
Expositor? Besides the words, the Miracles, the Histories, they are known and
evident to all: and lastly he concludes, that the difficulty and obscurity of
the Scriptures, (which the Romanists pretend at this day) Is but a veil and
pretext to cloak idleness. Praetextus est et causatio pigritiaeque
velamentu^. Chrysostom. Nos libe^^er f^emur tu^c te^poris Laicos in Scripturarum
lectione fuisse versatos. Azor. Tom. 1. Moral. li. 8 cap 26 Ita prouidit dulcis
paternemine^ esse tam rude^ et imperitum, quin si humiliter legate multa illie
vtilia veraque intelligat, neminem tam doctu^ quin illic multo plura ignoret
qua^ sciat. A^ of l. 2 de Christo Revel. c. ^.
This doctrine was so frequent and general among the Ancients in the Primitive
church, that Azorius the Jesuit is enforced to confess, We willingly grant,
that in those days the lay people were conversant in the reading of the
Scriptures. And if we look upon the lay persons of their times, Acosta his
fellow Jesuit ingenuously professes, that Our gracious God has so provided
in holy Writ, that there is none so rude and ignorant, but by reading the
Scriptures in humility, may understand many things both profitable and true, as
likewise there is none so learned, but he may still be ignorant of more then
he knows: nay more (says he) I have seen some men utterly unlearned, Vidi
viros prorsus illiteratos, etc. Idem. cap. 5.
and scarce knowing Latin, have gathered out of the Scriptures such profound
knowledge, that I have wondered at them. But the spiritual man judges all
things. Here is a free confession, and a fair evidence from two learned
Jesuits: the one testifies that the scriptures were usually read by the Lay
people in the Primitive Church; the other witnesses of his own knowledge,
that an ignorant man has received great benefit, and likewise that great
profit may redound to the people by reading them in these days.

But put the case a Lay man should not understand those things which are
contained in the Scriptures: notwithstanding (ex ipsa Lectione) out of the very
reading of them, there will arise great holiness and sanctity of life. Admit
many things are hard to be understood in the Scriptures, (which never any
Protestant denied) yet says Hierome, Hiero. in Epist. ad Paulinum.
there is the Book of Genesis, most plain for every man's understanding;
therein you may see the creation of the World, the beginning of Mankind, the
confusion of Languages plainly described: and as touching the book of Job,
there you may learn a pattern for Patience, and there you may see the
Resurrection plainly deciphered: Magna vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas
eloquioru^ Dei quia exereet sensum vt fatigatione ditatetur, etc. Greg. lib. 1.
Hom. 6. in Ezekiel.
nay more, The obscurity of the Scripture is very profitable (says Gregory)
for it does exercise the senses, whereby one may understand that which
otherwise he would be ignorant of: for if the sacred Scriptures were easy and
familiar in all places, they would be neglected: which obscure places, by study
and industry being known, and understood, do comfort and revive the Reader, by
how much the more they are with industry and difficulty sought and understood.

But that which is obseruable, these men, who so much complain of the
obscurity of the Scriptures, do both wittingly and willingly endeavor in
their Translations, to make them abstruse, and hard to be understood, by their
strange and uncouth phrases: look upon their old Testament in their Doway
Translation, instead of Foreskin, Gene. 17. Exodus 12. 2. King. 15. 1 Chronicles. 6.
they have put Praepuce; for Passover, Phase; for unleavened bread, Azyms; for
high places, excelces; for the Holy of Holiest, Sancta Sanctorum. Again, look
upon their Rhemist Testament, and there you shall observe these strange words,
Depositum, Rhem. Test. in M. Fulks Preface to the Reader.
Exinanited, Parasceue, Didragmes, Neophyte, and the like, which shows, that
albeit the Scripture of it self were never so plain and perspicuous to every
man's understanding, yet there need an expositor: for these inkehorne terms,
whereas in truth, although those words were most agreeable to the Hebrew,
Greek, or Latin, yet ought they rather to give the most significant and
plain terms (the true sense of Scripture always premised) that stands best
for the capacity and understanding of the Reader.

It is not then the pretended obscurity of the Scriptures, which gives a just
cause of restraint to the lay people, for not reading of them: ( for this is
but a color and a vain pretext of them, says Chrysostom) the truth is,
they fear, lest by reading of them, their Trent doctrine, and new Articles of
Faith should be discovered: for it would trouble the best learned Priest, to
show his disciples, in what place of Scripture they are commanded to worship
Images, to call upon dead Saints, to pray in an unknown tongue, to forbid the
Scriptures to the Laity, to deny Marriage to Priests, to adore the relics of
Saints; by what Scriptute his Holiness has power to depose Kings, to free
souls out of Purgatory, to gather into the Treasury of the Church, the
superabundant satisfaction of Saints? It is a crime worthy of the Inquisition
with them to have a Bible; but for the ignorant lay man to make such inquiry
after Scriptures, for that doctrine which was not conceived in the Scripture,
is a sin worthy of death.

Look upon the Tenets of their own Church, and take but their own
confessions. The Church of Rome does represent God the Father, by the image of
an old man: yet Vasques the Jesuit confesses: Vasq. lib. 2. de Adorat. c. 3.
disp. 4. n. 74.
The Scripture says plainly, God did forbid the Jews to represent Him by an
Image. The Church of Rome does ordinarily make vows to Saints: Cum
scriberentur Scripturae sanctae nondu^ caeperat vsus voue^di sanctis. Bell.
lib. de cultu Sanct. cap. 5.
yet Cardinal Bellarmine professes: When the Scriptures were written, it was
not the use to vow to Saints. The Church of Rome has defined, and declared
Indulgences for an article of faith; yet their Syluester Prierias, tells us:
Indulgentiae authoritate Scripturae non innotuere nobis, sed etc. Prier. cont.
Luther. pro Indulg.
They are not made known to us by the authority of Scriptures: The Church of
Rome teaches, that the words of Christ, This is my body, do effect
Transubstantiation, yet Cardinal Caietan confesses; In 3 part. Tho. super quae
75. art. 1. vt Joseph Ang. Flores Theol. quae. in 4. sent q. 4.
Non apparet ex Evangelio: It does not appear that those words are properly to
be understood by force of Scriptures: but which is more to be lamented, these
men are so far from building their Church upon the Scriptures, that, as it
were in despite of Christ's precept, they decree their half Communion for an
article of Faith, with a Non obstante. Notwithstanding, Christ did institute in
both kinds: Conc. Co^st Sess. 13.
And their Council of Trent acknowledges that the Apostle called
concupiscence sin: Hanc concupisce^tiam quam aliquando Apostolus peccatu^
appellat, sancta Synodus acclarat, etc. Conc. Trid. Sess. 5.
but withal commands the contrary belief, with a curse to them that teach the
Apostles doctrine; in so much as their own Posseuinus confesses in sober
sadness: Apostolus concupis^e^tiam peccatum vocat, at non licet nolis ita
loqui. P^st. Appar. Sac. Ver Patr. antiqui.
The Apostle calls concupiscence sin, but (says he) it is not lawful for us
so to do. This is so truly known and understood of those who have a
dispensation to read the Scriptures, that Petrus Suitor, a Carthusian Monk,
amongst other inconveniences for which he would have the people debarred from
reading of them, alleges this, Cum multa palam tradantur obserua^da quae
sacris in literis express non habe^tur, nonne Idiotae haec animaduertentes
faci^e murmurabunt? -- None et facile retrahentur ab obseruatione Institutionu^
Ecclesiasticaru^ quando eas in lege Christi animaduerterint non continers?
Suitor de Translat. Bib. cap. 22.
in special for one; Whereas many things are openly taught to be observed,
which are not to be expressly had in the whole Scriptures, the simple people
observing these things, will quickly murmr and complain, that so great
burdens should be imposed upon them, whereby the liberty of the Gospel is so
greatly impaired, and they also will be easily drawn away from the
observation of the ordinance of the Church, when they shall observe that they
are not contained in the Law of Christ. It is not then the obscurity of the
Scriptures; but a fear by their own confessions of some strange discovery
that would be made by reading of them, and in that fear they rather intimate a
plainness and easiness in the understanding them: for otherwise what need
they fear the peoples reading them, if they were so full of obscurity (as
they pretend) that they could not understand them.

As therefore we deny not that there is difficulty and obscurity in the
Scriptures, In iis quae aperie in scripturis posita sunt, inueniuntur illa
omnia quae co^tinent fide^ moresque viuendi. Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
so we profess likewise, that there are plain and evident testimonies, which
illustrate those difficult and obscure places, and that in those plain and
evident places al things cocerning faith and good manners are contained: This
was Saint Austens doctrine, this is ours; let us therefore follow that sweet
counsel, which that holy and ancient Father, by way of prevention, gave the
Christians of his time. We are brethren, why do we strive? Aug in Psa. 21.
expos. 2.
Our Father dyed not vntestate, he made a Testament and so dyed. Men do
strive about the goods of the dead, till the Testament be brought forth, then
that is brought, they yield to have it opened and read: the Judge does hearken,
the Counselors be silent, the crier bids peace, all the people are
attentive, that the words of the dead may be read and heard. He lies void of
life, and feeling in his grave, and his words prevail, Christ does sit in
heaven, and is his Testament gainsaid? Open it, let us read, we are brethren,
why do we strive? Let our minds be pacified, our Father has not left us
without a Testament, he that made the Testament, is living for ever. He does
hear our words, he does know his own words, let us read why do we strive?

SECT. III. The Scripture, according to the Judgment of the ancient Fathers, is
the sole Judge of Controversies, and Interpreter of it self.
BVsaeus the Jesuit, knowing that the Scriptures were not such evident
testimonies of the Roman faith, Si non potes effugere vel disputatione^, vel
collatione^ de rebus fidei cu^ haeretico (cui tame^ de doctrina inferiorem non
esse existimas) primu^ ab eo percu^ctare vnde argumenta suav lit depromere
co^tra fide^ Catholicam, si respondeat vt solent ex scripturis diuinis, oppone
illi, null la^vel incerta^ ex Scripturis sperari victoria, nisi prius constet
very sint possessores scripturae illi an nos? and vbi sit vera fides et
potestas expone^di scripturas. Busaeus in Panatio Tit. Haeres.
as his fellows pretended; by way of prevention gives this caveat to his
disciples; If you cannot avoid disputation with an heretic, touching points
of faith; although you find you are able to match him, yet first demand of
him, from whence he will derive his arguments against the Catholic faith; if
he answer, as commonly they do, Out of the sacred Scriptures: tell him, there
is no victory, at least but uncertain, to be hoped for from them, unless it
may appear who has best right to the Scriptures, and to whom belongs
authority to expound them. By this Jesuits confession, the points in
controversy, are sub judice in question, to which side the right of Scriptures
do belong, and to whom authority to expound them; and sooth to say, the
controversies of this age, are now brought to this narrow issue, that our
adversaries are well content, to try their cause by Scriptures, if the
Reformed Churches would grant them but this one poor request, That they may
be sole Judges and Interpreters of the Scripture.

A request no doubt, which in most men's understanding, will seem unreasonable,
that Christ and his Apostles should be judged by man, or that a man should be
Plaintiff, and Judge in his own cause. It was the constant profession of
Saint Austen; August lib. Confess. 13. c. 23.
Men spiritual, whether they rule or be ruled, judge according to the Spirit,
but they judge not of the spiritual knowledge, which shines in the firmament
(of the Scriptures,) for it is not lawful for any man to judge over so high
authority: for be the man never so spiritual, yet must he be a doer, not a
Judge of the Law. And in the conclusion of the Chapter, he gives his special
reason for it: There a man is said to be Judge, where he has power and
authority to correct. He therefore who shall first dare to correct the
scripture, let that man by S Austens rule assume authority to judge them: and
as touching that Tenet, that a man should be Plaintiff, and Judge in his own
cause, it was a doctrine so different from the Primitive Church, that in the
midst of heresies; I say, in the first and best ages, wherein Saint Austen and
Epiphanius mention above fourscore heresies; even then when the Fathers had
greatest reason to stand upon the privilege of their Church, they never made
answer (like the Romanists) You must hear the Church, and our Church is that
Catholic Church that is the sole Judge of controversies, and according to our
Interpretation (whose right it is to judge of the Scriptures) it is so and so;
but on the contrary, they made the Scriptures sole Judges of their cause, and
withal professed, the Text of Scripture was the truest Gloss in expounding of
it self.

I speak not this, as if our reueren'd Divines did make the Scriptures sole
Judges of our cause, excluding the testimony of the Church: for we have a
church as well as they, we have churchmen as well versd in Scriptures, and
Fathers as themselves: neither do we deny the authority of the Fathers,
which jointly agree in points of faith, for the right expounding of the
Scriptures; only we say, the Author of the Word who best knew his own
meaning, was best able to expound himself: and in this manner the ancient
Fathers, as they grounded their Church upon the Scriptures, so likewise they
referred back the meaning of the Scriptures unto the Author of them, as if
he that was Judge of all men, should be judged of none, and such we know is
the wisdom and goodness of God, Eavero quae in mysteriis occultat, nec ipsa
eloquio superbo erigit quo non audeat accedere men's cardiuscula et in erudita,
quasi pauper ad diuitem, sed inuitat omnes humili sermon, quos no^ solu^
manifesta pascat sed etia^ secreta exerceat veritate hoc in promptis quoth
^^reconditis habens. Aug. Ep. 3.
that he has oftentimes hid these things from the wise and learned, which
he has revealed unto babes and sucklings; and, as for those things which it
hides in miseries (says Austen) it lifts them up, not with stately speech,
whereby an unlearned mind should not presume to approach as a poor man to a
rich, but with a lowly speech inuiteth all men, that it might not only feed
them with manifest, but also exercise with obscure truth, having that in
manifest, that it has in obscure places: and as concerning obscure places, the
same holy Father tells us, Illi vero qui ea quae in diuinislibris obscura sunt
intueri nequiuerint, arbitrentur se digitum quide^ meu^ ineuers posse sydera
vero quibus demo^strandis intenditur videre no posse et illi ergo et isto me
reprohe^dere desinant et lumen oculorum diuinitus sibi praeberi depreceantur.
Aug. de doct. Chris. l. 1. Prolog.
that, if they cannot see the things which are obscure and dark in the
Scriptures, the fault is in themselves, not in the precepts, as if I should
point with my finger at a star, which they would gladly see, and their
eyesight were so weak, that although they did see my finger, yet they could
not see the star, at which I point: let them cease to blame me, and let them
pray to God, that he will give them eyesight. And in his four Books of
Christian Doctrine, where he purposely treats of expounding the Scriptures,
he plainly proves, that the meaning of the Word, is learned out of the Word,
and the obscure places are expounded by the manifest: and herein he touches
the freehold of the Roman Church: Magnifice et salubriter spiritus sanctus ita
Scripturas sanctas modisi auit vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret,
obscurioribus autem fastidia detergeret. Nihil enim fere de illis
obscuritatibus eruitur, qd^^on planissime dictu^ alibi reperitur. Aug. de doct.
Chris. lib. 2. ^a. 6.
for (says he) In this great plenty of Scriptures, we are fed with plain
things, and exercised with obscure, those drive away hunger, these contempt,
the holy Ghost having tempred them so of purpose: and then he concludes with
the Tenet of our church; There is scarce any thing drawn out of these obscure
places, which has not been spoken, (quod non planissime) most plainly some
other where. Neither was this the opinion of this learned Father only, but it
was the confession of S Ambrose, Multa obscuritas in Scripturis propheticis,
^^d si^^ anu ^^^a^ me^^^ ^a^^ (...) a scr^ tu^aru^, ^^a^ ^e^ qua sunt occulta
diligenter examines, paulatim incipies ratione^ colligere dictoru^ et operietur
tibi, Non ab alio sed a verbo Dei. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8.
There is much obscurity in the Scriptures, but withal, if thou knock at the
door with the hand of thy understanding, thou shall gather by little and
little the reason of that which is there spoken, and the door shall be opened
unto thee, (non ab alio, sed a verbo Dei) and that by no other but by the Word
of God it self. And with these Doctors of the Latin Church, agrees the Greek
Fathers. Behold (says Basil) and hear the Scripture expounding it self,
Basil. Hexa^. Hom. 4.
Yea (says he) what things be or seem to be covertly spoken in some places
of holy Scripture, Quae ambigua sunt and tecte dicta esse in quibusda^ diuinae
scripturae locis, videntu^, ab aliis locis manifestis declara^tur. Ide^.
quaest. co^p. Expl. quaest. 267.

Ad ipsu^ diuina Script. scopu^ incedamus quaeseipsam interpretatur, qua^uis
sacra Scriptura cum nos tale quidda^ docere vult, seipsa^ exponit et auditore^
errare non sinit. Chrysostom Ho^. 13. in Genesis Chrysostom. in 1. These. Ho^ 7. Siquide^
empturus veste^, qua^uis artis Textoriae imperitus sis, haec verba non dicis.
Nescio emere illudunt mihi, sed facis omnia vt discas -- fac illa quae facienda
et recta ratione quaere a Deo et ille tibi omnino reue^abit. Ide^ Homil. 33. in
Act.


the same are expounded by other plain places elsewhere. And (says
Chrysostom) Let us follow the scope of the holy Scripture in interpreting of
it self, when it teaches some hard thing, it expounds it self, and
suffers not the hearer to err. Let us not fear therefore (says he) to put
our selves with full sail into the sea of Scriptures, because we shall be
sure to find the Word of God for our Pilot. And lastly, as it were forestalling
that Popish opinion; (that the Scriptures are obscure, and therefore not to be
read by the vulgar people) he elegantly incites a Gentile to the reading of
the Scripture, by a familiar and common reason; When thou buyest a garment,
though thou have no skill in weauing, yet thou say not, I cannot buy it,
they will deceive me: but thou do use all means to learn how to know it:
do therefore those things which are to be done, seek all those things of
God, and he altogether will reaueale it unto thee: So that if any doubt or
difference happened in the Primitive church amongst the true believing
Christians, they referred the determination of it to the Inquest of Christ and
his 12 Apostles, and they only were made the sole Judges of the question. And
that we might know this Protestant doctrine continued for many ages in the
Church, Pope Clement the first almost six hundred years since, professed it
for the Catholic doctrine of his time, Integra and firma regula veritatis ex
Scripturis. Did. 37. cap 14.
that a man must take the sense of truth from the Scripture it self, seeing
that every man may have the full and firm rule of faith and truth in the
Scriptures. If we descend from the Pope to the great Council of Basil, it was
the general vote of many B. and Cardinals, and confirmed likewise by the Pope
himself. The Divine Law, (or holy Scripture) the practice of Christ, of his
Apostles, Lex diuina, praxu Christi, Apostolica, et Ecclesia primitina vna cum
Co^ciliis Doctoribusque fundantibus se veraciter in eade^, pro verissimo et
indifferente Iudice in hoc Basiliensi Consilia admittatur Conc. Basil. Sess. 4.
and the Primitive Church, together with Councels and Doctors, grounding
themselves truly upon the Scriptures, shall be admitted, for the most true
and indifferent Judge in the Council of Basil. The resolution of the ancient
Father Optatus, in the question betwixt the Catholics and the heretics,
whether one should be twice baptized, may serve for a proof, and a full
conclusion of the premises; You say it is lawful, we say it is not lawful,
(between yours it is lawful, and ours it is not lawful) the peoples souls
do doubt and waver, De coelo quaerendus est Index, sed vt quid pulsamus ad
coelum, cum habemus in Euangelio Testamentum. Opt. lib. 5. contr. Parmen. Donat.
let none believe you nor us, we are all contending parties, Judges must be
sought for: if Christians, they cannot be given on both sides, (for truth is
hindered by affections.) A Judge without must be sought for; if a Paynim, he
cannot know the Christian mysteries; if a Jew, he is an enemy to Christian
Baptism: no judgment therefore of this matter can be found on earth, a Judge
in heaven must be sought for. But why knock we at heaven, when we have the
Testament of Christ in the Gospel. And thus I have briefly showed you the
deputed Judges, and Interpreters of the Scripture in the Primitive Church: now
let us observe by what Rule the Scriptures are expounded in the Roman Church.

SECT. IIII. Our adversaries, howsoever they pretend by taking an oath to make
the Fathers Interpreters of the Scriptures, yet indeed they make themselves
sole Interpreters of Scriptures and Fathers.
Bulla Pij quarti Art. 2.
IT is an Article of the Romame Creed, published by Pope Pius the fourth, and by
the oath their Foreman has taken, all Priests and I suites are sworn, Not to
receive or interpret the Scriptures, but according to the vnifo^me consent of
Fathers. It is a large and fair promise, and delivered upon oath: and for my
part, if the church of Rome can make good the uniform consent of Fathers, for
all their twelve new Articles of Faith, (which has been often promised, but
never as yet by any one performed,) I shall willingly listen to their
interpretation, and prefer it before any private, or latter Exposition.

It was the profession of our late King of famous memory, Apolog. for the oath
of Alleag. pa. 36.
What ever the Fathers of the first four hundred years did with one vnanime
consent agree upon, to be believed as a necessary point of salvation, I will
believe it also, or at leastwise will be humbly silent, not taking upon me
to condemn the same.

I speak not this, as if we should decline the practice of the ancient Church
in expounding Scripture by Scripture, Council. Trid. Sess. 1.
but to demonstrate to the world, that our adversaries in this point of their
faith, have neither followed the ancient Church, nor the Decree of their Trent
Council; whereby it shall appear, that either this Article was newly created,
or the former Popes and Councels have disagreed from the latter.

Cardinal Caietan was so far from subscribing to the Popes Creed in this
point, that on the contrary he gives this Praemonition to the Reader of the
Scriptures; Not to loathe the new sense of the holy Scriptures for this, Nullus
itaque detestetur nouu^ sacra scripturae se^sum, ex hoc quoth dissonat a priscis
Doctoribus, sed fcrutetur perspicacius textu^ ac cotextu^ Scripturae, and si
quadrare inuenerit, laudet Deu^, qui no^ alligauit expositionem Scripturaru^
sacrarum priscoru^ Doctorum sensibus Caiet. in Genes 1.
that it dissenteth from the ancient Doctors, but to search more exactly the
Text and coherence of the Scriptures; and if he find it agree, to praise God,
that has not tied the exposition of the Scriptures, to the sense of the
ancient Doctors. This Protestant doctrine is far different from the Tenet of
the Roman Church, insomuch that Bishop Canus his fellow Romanist was much
troubled, that a prime Cardinal should oppose an Article of the Roman Creed:
one while he charge him, that acutius multo quam foelicius: he expounded the
Scriptures in some places more wittily then happily: an other while he would so
seem to excuse him, that he might be convinced by this or the like argument,
To follow the Fathers in all, Canus ibid.
were to condemn our own wits, and deprive our selves of the means to find
out the truth. What arguments might prevail with the Cardinal, I cannot
tell, but sure I am, his doctrine disagreed from the Article of the Roman
faith. And Doctor Payna Andradius, a principal Pillar of the Trent Council,
rebukes Canus for his rash reproouing of Caictan, and defends his Tenet with
the same doctrine. Andra. def. fid Tricen lib 2.
He teaches, that when the Fathers seek the literal sense of the
Scriptures, they do not always find them, but give diverse senses, one unlike
to an other. He professes; We may forsake their senses all, and bring a new
unlike to theirs. He adds further; that experience forces us to confess,
unless we will be unthankful to most excellent wits, that very many things
in Moses and the Prophets, are in this our age expounded more exactly, through
the diligence of learned men, then ever they were before: And thereupon he
concludes, that the holy Ghost (the only and faithful Interpreter of the
Scriptures) would have many things to be known to us, which our Ancestors
knew not, and has wrought by means unknown to us, known to him, that the
Fathers noted good and godly mysteries out of very many places of the
Scriptures, whereof the right and natural sense has been found out by
posterity. And thus Canus against Cajetan, and Andradius against Canus, and
Cajetan and Andradius both against the Trent Article, allow the Exposition of
Scripture by Scripture, and sometimes against the streme of Fathers. I proceed
to the examination of more witnesses, and I call Cardinal Bellarmine to
testify the same doctrine, that neither he, nor his associates, do hold
themselves tied by their new Article of faith, to the Exposition of the
Fathers; It is one thing (says he) to interpret the Law as a Doctor, Aliud
est interpretari legem more Doctoris, a liud more Iudicis etc. Bell. de verbo
Dei. lib. 3. cap. 10.
an other thing as a Judge: of the one is required Learning, of the other
Authority: the opinion of the Doctors is to be followed according to reason;
but the Judges opinion is to be followed of necessity. Saint Austen, and the
Fathers in their Expositions, supplied the places of Doctors, Scripta Patru^
no^ sunt Regulae, nec habent authoritatem obligandi. Idem ibid.
which we may follow as we see cause, the Pope and Council supply the places
of Judges, with a Commission from God, and therefore they must be observed and
followed of necessity.

Thus we have seen three several Judges and Expositors of the Scriptures.
First the ancient Fathers made the Scriptures the only Judges, and true
Interpreters of themselves, next the Trent Doctors, decreed the ancient Fathers
for Interpreters: and now at length, the later Schoolmen have proclaimed their
Popes and Councels, for their chiefest Judges, and best Interpreters of the
Scriptures: and These (say they) must be followed of necessity. Durum telum
Necessitas.
Pardon them, Necessity is a deadly dart; there is no necessity by their
doctrine to obey the expositions of Fathers, which is the second Article of
their Faith) but there is a necessity to obey the authority of their late
Popes and Councels, in their Exposition, which is but matter of opinion; and
from hence it will follow, that either the Articles of the R^man Creed were
newly created by Pope Pius the fourth, and that creation was not in his power;
or that those Doctors, and Cardinals had not the oath administered unto them; or
we may justly suspect they have forsworn themselves. Neither was this the
opinion of these particular men only, but the Roman Church, (notwithstanding
their solemn protestation, by which they are enjoined to interpret the
Scriptures) does in many things, by her own confession, wave the
Interpretation of the Fathers. Sanctissimos Patres quos Doctores Ecclesiae ob
illoru^ sublimem eruditionem merito nominamus, quantu^libet spiritus sancti
gratia prae aliis imbutos liqueat, in interpretatione scripturaru^ non semper
ac in omnibus Catholica Ecclesia sequitur. Baron. Ann. Tom* 1 ad ann. 34 nu.
mar. 213
It is the testimony of Cardinal Baronius, Although the most holy Fathers,
whom for their great learning we rightly term the Doctors of the Church,
were endued above others with the grace of Gods holy Spirit, yet the Catholic
Roman Church does not follow them always, and in all things expounding of the
Scriptures. Here is an other confession of a great Cardinal, (who was not
ignorant of the Articles of his faith, that (notwithstanding the Trent Decree,
and the Popes Bull, the Church did not always follow the exposition of the
Fathers. Now if any shall require a reason why the Pope and Cardinals of
former ages dissent from others of these later times, in expounding of the
Scriptures, Friar Stella, who does not condemn the Exposition given by the
ancient Doctors, Been tame^ scimus Pygmaeos gyga^tum humeris impositos plusqua^
ipsos gygantes videre. Stel. enarrat in Luc. ca. 10.
protests, He knows full well, that Pygmeis being put upon Giants
shoulders, do see further then the Giants themselves. But Bishop Fisher does
more warily excuse it, and with plausible reasons assure us, that Many things,
Nec cuiqua^ obscuru^ est quin posterioribus inge niis multa sint, tam ex
Euangeliis qua^ ex scripturis etc. Roffeas Consur. Assert. Luther Art. 18.
as well in Gospells, as in the rest of the Scriptures, are now more
exquisitely discussed by later wits, and more clearly understood, then they
have been heretofore; either by reason that the ye was not as then broken unto
the Ancients, neither did their age suffice to weigh exactly that whole sea of
Scriptures, or because in this most large field of Scriptures, even after the
most diligent reapers, some ears will remain to be gathered, as yet
untouched.

How forcible motives, these reasons may seem to other men, I will not here
dispute: sure I am, they are vain excuses for Roman Bishops and Cardinals,
who are bound by their general Council, and the Popes Bull, to obey the
Exposition of Fathers, as an Article of their faith.

But admit these opinions should be excused for the particular Tenets of some
private men, let us see how faithfully the Popes and Pastors of these latter
times have interpreted the Scriptures, with the uniform consent of Fathers.

Moses says, Whit. and Durae ^s in Camp 9. Reason page 269.
God made man after his Image: Pope Adrian interprets; therefore Images must
be set up in Churches.

Saint Peter says, Behold, De obed. and mayor vna^ sancta^ etc.
here are two swo^ds; Pope Boniface concludes: Therefore the Pope has power
over the spiritual, and the temporal.

Saint Matthew says, Give not that which is holy unto dogs. Jewels Defense, p
^2.
Mr. Harding expounds it: Fiet vnum ouile et vnus Pastor quod quidem de Christo
intelligi non potest s^d d^ ^liquo alio Ministroq^^ bres^t loco eius. Ioh de
Par s^de pot. Reg and Papati c. 30.
therefore it is not lawful for the vulgar people to read the Scriptures.

Saint John says, There shall be one Fold, and one Sheepherd. Johannes de
Parisijs tells us: This place cannot be expounded of Christ, but must be taken
for some Minister ruling in his stead.

The Prophet David says, Thou have put all things under his feet: Antoninus
expounds it: Anton. in sum. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 5. Haebr. 2.
Thou have made all things subject to the Pope, the cattle of the field, that
is to say, men living in the earth: the fishes of the sea, that is to say, the
souls in Purgatory: the fowls of the air, that is to say, the souls of the
blessed in heaven. And lastly, whereas our Savior Christ witnesses of
himself: In Council. Later. sub Leo 10. p. 671.
All power is given to me both in heaven and earth. Stephen Archbishop of
Patraca, applied it to Pope Leo the tenth in the Council of Lateran, in the
audience of the Pope himself, who thankfully accepted it, and suffered it to
be published and printed: and as it is rightly observed by learned Du Moulin,
Pope Innocent the third, in his Book of the Mysteries of the Mass; Buckler of
faith. pa. 30.
the book of sacred Ceremonies, Durants Rationalls, Tolet, and Titleman, and
others do most ridiculously wrest the Scriptures, altogether different from
their right meaning, and the Expositions of the Fathers: as for instance: The
Scripture says, The Rock was Christ: therefore say they, the Altar must be
of stone. It is written, I am the light of the world: therefore Tapers must be
set upon the Altar: It is written: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth: therefore the Priest must kiss the Altar. It is written: Thou shall see
my back parts: Exodus 33.23
therefore the Priest must turn his back to the people. It is written: Laua
me amplius. Psalm. 51.
Wash me again, therefore the Priest must wash his hands twice. It is
written, Exodus 3.5.
Put off thy shoes, for this place is holy: therefore the Bishop at Mass
changes his hose and shoes. And lastly, the Pope himself, at the time of his
coronation, casts certain copper money amongst the people, using the words of
Peter: Silver and gold have I none, but that which I have, I give thee.

These and the like Expositions do much resemble the strict order of Monks,
who reading the words in Matthew, Districtissimi Monachoru^ -- simpliciter
intelligentes fecerunt sibi cruces ligneas easque sibi iugiter humeru
circu^ferentes, etc Ioh. de Polemar. orat in Council. Basil. page 385.
(He that takes not up his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me)
made themselves wooden crosses, and so carried them on their backs
continually, causing all the world to laugh at them: for howsoever they may
seem to be the expositions of some private spirits, yet he that makes oath
in verbo Sacerdotis, to receive and expound the Scriptures, with the uniform
consent of Fathers, and shall render such Expositions of the Text, can be no
true Catholic: Hieron. 24. q 3. cap. Haeresis.
For whosoever does otherwise understand the Scripture (says Hierome) then
the sense of the holy Ghost (who is the Penman of the Scripture) requires,
although he has not departed from the Church, yet he may be termed an
heretic. But (as the Friar said wittily in his Sermon) the truth which he
preached, was like holy water, which every one called for apace, yet when the
Sexton cast it on them, they let it fall on their backs: in like manner the
Romanists seemingly call for the Scriptures, they commonly vaunt that they
expound and receive them according to the uniform consent of Fathers; but (as
Vincentius Lyrinensis said of the heretics of his time,) When they shall
begin not only to utter those sayings, Vbi caeperu^t illas voces no^ iam
proferre sedetiam exponere non ad etc. Vince^t. Lyrin. c. 36.
but also to expound them, then the bitterness, then the sowernesse and
madness is perceived; then a new devised poison will be breathed out, then are
profane Novelties disclosed, then may you see the bounds of the ancient
Fathers to be removed, the Catholic Faith to be then butchered, and the
doctrine of the Church torn in pieces.

Pope Pius the fourth who first published the Articles of the Creed, was not
ignorant, that the Scriptures must be far fetched, and hardly strayned, to
make them speak for the Trent doctrine: he well understood, that it was too
general and strict a tie upon every Mass Priest, to receive and interpret the
Scriptures with the uniform consent of Fathers, (knowing well, that many Mass
Priests were utterly ignorant of the Fathers,) and therefore to qualify the
rigor of that oath, adjoined these words to the aforesaid Article; Artic. 2.
Also that sacred Scripture, according to that sense which the Mother Church
has holden, (whose right is to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
holy Scripture) I do admit: so that by the latter part of the Article, they
allow the Fathers to be interpreters of the Scriptures; and by the first part,
they make themselves sole interpreters of the Fathers; to which addition an
ignorant Priest will swear, with a mental reservation, that he does not
receive nor expound the Scripture, but with the uniform consent of Fathers,
that is, according to the sense and judgment of the Roman church: for it is not
to be doubted, but the Church will allow of that sense which is most agreeable
to that doctrine, and of that interpretation, (although it be far different
from the Ancients,) which is most consonant to their Religion, and the rather I
incline to this opinion; for that Cardinal Hosius does protest it for a
universal and Catholic doctrine of his Church. Si quis habet interpretatione^
Ecclesia Romana de loco aliquo Scriptura, etiamsi nec sciat nec intelligat an
and quomodo cu^ Scriptura verbis conueniat, tamen habet ipsissimum verbu^ Dei.
Hos. de expresso verb. Dei.
If a man have the Interpretation of the Church of Rome, of any place of
Scripture, he has the very words of God, though he neither know nor
understand, whether and how it agrees with the words of Scripture. Now if it
happen that those which are better instructed, by comparing of Scriptures and
Fathers, do make a doubt of some place of Scripture, which the Church teaches
different from the Fathers, Cardinal Cusanus, by way of prevention, gives him
to understand, Non est miru^ si praxis Ecclesiae vno tempore interpretetur
Scripturam vno modo et alio te^pore alio modo, na^ intellectus currit cum
praxi, intellectus enim qui cu^ praxi co^currit est spiritus vinificans,
sequuntur ergo scripturae ecclesiam et non e conuerso. Nich. Cusan. ad Bohem.
Epist. 7.
that there is Fides Temporum, a faith that follows the time: Neither is it
any marvel (says he) though the practice of the Church expound the Scripture
at one time one way, and at an other time another way, for the understanding or
sense of the Scripture runs with the practice, and that sense so agreeing
with the practice, is the quickening Spirit; and therefore the Scriptures
follow the Church, but contrariwise the Church follows not the Scriptures.
This learned Romanist tells us, it is no wonder that the Scripture is at diverse
times diversely expounded: he tells us, the Scripture attends the Churches
pleasure: and lastly, which is most true, he professes the Romish Church
follows not the Scripture, but the times.

That this Cardinal speaks truth, I think no Protestant does make a
question: but that you may be witness also of the practice of these times, you
shall observe how fitly these men have applied the Scripture to their Church:
whereas it is said to Peter in a vision, Arise, In voto Baronij contra Venetos.
kill and eat: Cardinal Baronius being Interpreter, will tell you: The Pope
is Peter, and the Venetians are the meat which must be killed and devoured.
In like manner, whereas Saint Paul says, Haereticum deuita, Avoid an
heretic: the silly Friar applies it to times and persons with this
Exposition: Erasm. Encom. Moriae
Haereticum de-vita toll: kill the heretic, meaning the Protestant: and in
this manner according to the times, the sense runs with the practice; or at
leastwise I am sure, this practice runs with these times.

Thus then you have Fides Ecclesia, an Exposition of Scriptures according to
the Article of the Romish Creed, and Fides temp^rum, an Exposition suitable to
the times, and their own doctrine. If therefore we appeal to Scriptures, they
account them dumb Judges, without the Exposition of their Church: if we
require an Exposition with the consent of Fathers, they tell us we must admit
that sense which the Church holds, whose right is to judge of the true sense
of Scriptures: If we show them, that their Expositions are senseless, and
disagreeing from the Ancients; they tell us the Scriptures may receive
different Expositions according to the times. And thus they make the Scriptures
sound like Bells, according to their fancies, and violate their oath with a
Saluo Iure, saving a right to the sense and meaning of their own Church. This
way therefore is Via Deuia, a Wandering and By-way.

It rests in the last and chiefest place, to observe the difference bewixt
the Church of Rome and us, touching the entire Canon of Scriptures (for without
doubt this is the only and infallible rule of faith,) and there is a curse
denounced by God himself against all those that add to his word, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Reu. 22.18.
or diminish ought from it. It shall appear therefore by many pregnant and
infallible testimonies of our adversaries themselves, that the Canon of
Scripture which we profess and believe, was the same which was taught and
declared by Christ and his Apostles in the first age; the same which was
published, and generally received by the ancient Fathers in succeeding ages;
the same which continued in the bosom of the Roman Church in all ages, till
the days of Luther.

SECT. V. The entire Canon of Scriptures which we profess (without the
Apocryphal additions) is confirmed by pregnant testimonies in all ages, and
most of them acknowledged by the Romanists themselves.
IT was the complaint of Campian the Jesuit, that the ancient Canon of
Scripture was altered at the coming of Luther; and thereupon as a man enraged
against the Lutherans, Camp. Rat. 1.
he makes this open out-crie: What incensed Luthers whelps, to put out of the
true Canon of Scripture, Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, and the two books of
Maccabees? Desperation: for by these heavenly oracles, they are expressly
convinced, as often as they dispute against the defense of Angels, as often as
they dispute against Freewill, as often as they dispute against Praying for the
dead, as often as they dispute against Praying to the Saints. Surely, if this
Romanist had been as real in his proofs, as he was vain glorious in his
speeches, he had gone beyond all the Romish Proselytes of our age: for never
man made greater flourishes with poorer proofs: for it shall appear, that we
have published no other Canon of Scripture, then Christ and his Apostles
taught, and received no other then the ancient Fathers declared to be divinely
Canonical (and those only Canonical) none other then the learned Doctors and
Professors, entirely preserved in the bosom of the Roman Church in all ages:
so that if any curse be denounced against us, for renouncing doctrines of
faith, deduced from Apocryphal Scriptures, I say it shall appear by the same
Decree, they have laid an Anath^ma upon Christ and his Apostles, and have
cursed the ancient Fathers, and the principal members of their own Church.

In the first age, to Ann. 100.
First then we must observe, Romans 3.2. Factique sunt (Iudaei) depositarii et
custodes Eloquioru^ Dei. Tolet. coment. in Romans 3.2.
according to Saint Paul's testimony: Unto the Jews were committed the Oracles
of God: these Oracles, as Gods pledges, were preserved by them, (says
Cardinal Tolet) and according to the number of the Hebrew letters, they were
divided into two and twenty Books, which is the Canon of Scripture now taught
and received by the reformed Churches. The other Books, (which we term
Apocryphal) were never received of the Jews for Canonical, Bell de verbo Dei
lib. 1. cap. 10.
as Bellarmine himself does testify. This Canon of the Jews was so true and
perfect at Christ's coming, that neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles
complained of it: nay more, they cited many things out of the Canonical Books
of Scripture, for proof of their doctrine, with this special character, As it
is written: when as in all the Gospel of Christ, there is not so much as one
authority cited by Christ or his Apostles, out of the Books which we term
Apocryphal. This Canon of the Jews, as it was entirely preserved by them, and
is now received by us, so it is likewise warranted by Christ himself: for
Saint Luke tells us, that our Savior after his Resurrection, beginning at
Moses and all the Prophets, Luke 24.27.
expounded in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself; and what he
meant by all the Scriptures, he afterward expounds in the 44. verse of the
same chapter: Ibid. ver. 44.
These are the words which I speak unto you, which were written in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me; and he gives
the reason in Saint Luke; Luke 24.44.
That all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me. Here then is the true Canon
of Scripture delivered, and rightly divided by Christ himself, into three
several ranks; into the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, under all or any
of which ranks the Books which we term Apocryphal, neither are, nor ever
were contained. And this was the constant Tenet of the Primitive Church,
touching the true Canon of the Scriptures in the first Age.

In the second Age, An. 100. to 200.
Eusebius. hist. Eccles. li. 4 c. 25.
Melito Bishop of Sardis] In an Epistle to Onesimus, numbreth the Books of the
Old Testament, wherein he makes no mention of Judith, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus,
nor the Maccabees: and this is likewise confessed by Bellarmine: Bell de verbo
Dei. li. 1. cap. 20.
Many Ancients (says he) as namely Melito, did follow the Hebrew Canon of the
Jews. Cum dilige^ter de omnibus explorauerat, omni inuestigatione comperit hos
libros esse a veteris Testame^ti Canone reticiendos. Eus. li. 4. ca. 26.
And Eusebius more plainly tells us, that when he had made diligent search of
all the Books of Scripture, he accounted those books (which we term
Apocryphal) to be rejected from the Canon.

In the third Age. An. 200. to 300.
Origen] in his Exposition upon the first Psalm, says; We may not be
ignorant, there are two and twenty books of the Old Testament after the
Hebrews, which is the number of the letters among them. This is likewise
witnessed by Eusebius, that as Origin received the Canon of the Jews, Eusebius.
lib. 6 cap. 18.
so likewise he rejected those six books which we term Apocryphal with the
Jews.

In the fourth Age, An. 300. to 400.
Hilary Bishop of Poictiers] tells us, The Law of the Old Testament is
contained in two and twenty books, In viginti duos libros lex Testame^ti
veteris deputetur, vt cum literaru^ numero conuenirent: qui ita secundu^
Traditiones veteru^ dep^tantur: vt Mosi sint libri quinque Jesus Naue sextus,
Iudicum and Ruth septimus, etc. Hilar. in Prolog. in Psalm explanationem.
according to the number of the Hebrew letters. And there he tells us further,
how they are disposed, and put in order according to the tradition of the
Ancients, (in this manner) There are five books of Moses, Iosuah is the sixth,
the Judges and Ruth the seventh, the first and second of Kings the eight, the
third and fourth of Kings the ninth, the two books of Chronicles the tenth,
Esdras the eleventh, Psalms the twelfth, Solomon's Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, 13. 14. 15. the twel^e Prophets the sixteenth, Esaias, Jeremy with the
Lamentations, Daniel, Ezechiel, Job and Hester, do make up the number of 22.
books.

Cyril of Hierusalem] gives the like lesson to the Reader. Veteris Testamenti
libros meditare duos et viginti. Tu itaque cum sis filius Ecclesia non
transgredi eris illius terminos. Cyril. Catech. 4.
Peruse the two and twenty books, but meddle not with the Apocrypha; meditate
diligently upon those Scriptures, which the Church does confidently read, and
use no other.

Athanasius] tells us, Sunt itaque Canonici veteris Testamentilibri 22. literis
Hebraicis numero pares, praeter istos autem sunt adhuc alii etusdem veteris
instrumenti libri no^ sunt Canonici, qui Catechumenis tantum leguntur Sapientia
Solomonis etc. Athanas in Synops Nec ab hac sententia alienus fuit Damascenus
et Athanasius, quos Theologi multi secuti sunt. Canus loc. Theol. lib. 2. ca.
10. Euse. Chro. li. 2. ex Hier. versione. Eusebio atque reliquis licuit
aliquando dubitare. Can. lib. 2. ca. 10.
The Christians had at that time a definite number of books comprehended in a
Canon, and of that Canon touching the Old Testament, they were twenty two
books, equal to the number of the Hebrew letters: and as touching the
Apocryphal books, as namely, the book of Wisdom, Maccabees, and the rest,
libri non sunt Canonici; they are read only to the Catechumens, but are not
Canonical. This testimony is so true, that Canus confesses, he was not only
of our opinion, but also drew many Divines after him to this opinion.

Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea] says; The Hebrew History of the Maccabees,
reckons from thence, the reign of the Grecians; but those books are not
received among the divine Scriptures. This Author is likewise acknowledged in
this Tenet to be ours. Haec su^t quae Patres intra Canone^ concluseru^t, ex
quibus fidei nostrae assertiones constare volueruut, sciendu^ tamen est, quoth et
alii libri su^t qui no^ sunt Canonici, sed Ecclesiastici a maioribus appellati
su^t vt sapientia Solomonis et alia Sapientia quae dicitur filii Syrach,
eiusdem ordinis est liber Tobiae, et Judith, et Machabaeorum libri -- qua omnia
legi quide^ in Ecclesiis voluerunt, no^ tame^ proferri ad authoritatem ex his
fidei confirmandam. Ruff. sieve Cypt. in explic. Symb. Bell. de verbo Dei lib.
1. cap. 20. Quod vero Ruffinus asserit ex patru^ Traditione eos libros a canone
reiiciendos pace Lectoris dictum sit, patru^ traditiones ignorauit. Can. lib.
2. c. 11. Sicut Judith et Tobiae, and Macabaeoru^ libros legit Ecclesia, sed
eos inter Canonicas scripturas non recipit; sic et haec duo volumina sapientia
Solomonis et Syrach legit ad adificatione^ plebis non authoritate^ dogmatum
co^firmandum. In Praefat. lib Solom. Admitto Hieronymu^ ea fuisse opinione quia
nondu^ generale Co^ciliu^ de his libris aliquid statuerat, etc. Bell de verbo
Dei lib. 1. cap. 10. Ipso ergo sacra Codicis (...) pandam tibi, Omnes libellos
etc. vltimu^ nomen duplex cui est Angelum Malachiam. Greg. Naz. Car. Iamb. ad
Seleucu^ Iamb. 3. De quibus tamen nunc dubitare nefa^ est, antequam aute^ ab
Ecclesia co^muni co^sensu recepti essent, nihil piaculi fuit eos in Canonicoru^
numeru^ ac sede^ minime admittere. Jacob. Bill. in Iam. 3. Nazian. Non oportet
libros qui sunt extra Canonem legere nisi solos Canonicos Noui et Veteris
Testamenti Council. Laod. Can. 59.


Ruffinus] as some say Cyprian, in reciting the Canon of the Scripture,
testifies the like in this age; These be the books which our Fathers have
included within the Canon, out of which they would have the assertions of our
faith to appear: but yet we must know, that there be also other books,
which are not Canonical, but are called of our Ancestors, Ecclesiastical; as
is the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Tobias, Judith, and the books of
Maccabees: all which they will indeed have to be read in the Church, but not
to be alleged for confirmation of faith. Bellarmine confesses (with us) that
Ruffinus did follow the Hebrewe Canon: but his fellow Canus is not contented
with such a moderate confession, but returns this answer, Although Ruffinus
did affirm, that the books of Maccabees were to be rejected by the tradition
of the Fathers, yet by the Readers leave he was ignorant of that Tradition.

Saint Hierome] is our witness; As the Church reads Judith, Tobias, and the
Maccabees, but receives them not for Canonical Scriptures: so these two
books (namely) the Wisdom of Solomon, and Jesus the son of Syrach, does
the Church read for the edification of the people, not to confirm thereby the
authority of any doctrine in the Church. This is likewise confessed by
Bellarmine, I admit (says he) that Hierome was of that opinion, because as
yet in those days a general Council had decreed nothing touching those
books, except the book of Judith, which Hierom afterward received.

Gregory Nazianzen] writing to Seleucus, promises him, that he will show him a
catalogue of the Canonical books, and accordingly beginning from Genesis,
cites the books in order to Malachie, the last of the Prophets. This
authority in our behalf is likewise confessed by Iacobus Billius, a Romanist
in his Commentary upon those verses, but he excuses him in this manner, That
he omitted other books, as namely Judith, the Maccabees, etc. of which
notwithstanding to make a doubt in these days, would be accounted a wicked
thing: but before they were generally received of the Church, it was no sin
not to admit them amongst the number of Canonical Scriptures.

The Council of Laodicea] We ought to read only the books of the Old and
New Testament: and in that 59. Canon, the Council recites only those
Canonical Books of Scripture which we allow; and the Canons of this Council
are confirmed by the sixth General Council in Trullo, and Binius himself
confesses, that the book of Judith, by the authority of this Council, is
rejected amongst the Apocrypha. And this was the constant opinion of the
Primitive Church, Can. 2. Liber Judith authoritate huius Prouincialis Concilii
inter Apocrhyphos reiicitur. Binius in Council. Romans sub Syluest. Not.
touching the entire rule of Scripture in the fourth Age.

In the fifth Age, An. 400. to 500.
Epiphanius] after he had reckoned up the Canon of two and twenty Books,
Vtiles quidem sunt et co^modi sed in numeru^ receptorum non referu^tur quare
neque in Aaron, neque in Testamenti Arcam repositi sunt. Epiph. li. de Men's.
and Ponder.
censureth the Books of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, in these words: They are
fit and profitable, but not reckoned amongst those books which are received by
our Church, and therefore were neither laid up with Aaron, nor in the Arc of
the new Testament.

In Machabaeoru^ libris etsi aliquid Mirabilium numero inserendu^ conveniens
fuisse ordini inueniatur, de hac tame^ nulla cura fatigabimur quiae tantu^
agere proposuimus vt de Diuini Canonis Mirabilibus exigua^ expositionem
ta^geremus. Aug. de Mirab. sacrae Scrip. l. 2. c. 34.

Has supputatio non in Scripturis sanctis quae appellantur Canonica, sed in
aliis inuenitur in quibus sunt et Machabaeoru^ libri. De civ. Dei l. 18. c. 36.


Saint Austen] Although there may something be found in the books of Maccabees
meet for this order of writing, and worthy to be joined with the number of
Miracles, yet we will not we^ry our selves with any care thereof, for that we
have intended only to touch a short rehearsal of the miracles contained in
the divine Canon; And for a further explanation of the true Canon, different
from the Apocryphal Scriptures, he tells us, This reckoning is not found in
the holy Scriptures that are called Canonical, but in certain other books,
amongst which are the books of the Maccabees. And as concerning the authority
of these books, when it was objected against him, that Razis killed himself,
and therefore it was lawful by the Scripture for a man to kill himself:
amongst other answers he returns this for one; The Jews do not esteem
this Scripture called the Maccabees, in such sort, Scriptura quae appell^ tur
Machabaorum recepta est ab Ecclesia non in^tilite^ si sobrie legatur vel
audiatur maxim propter illos Machabaeos qui pro Dei lege indigna perpess.
sunt. Aug. contra Secundu^ Ep. Gaud. li. 2. c. 23.
as the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, to which Christ gives testimony,
as to them that bear that witness of him, saying, It behooved that all these
things should be fulfilled that are written of me in the Law, the Prophets,
and the Psalms: but it is received of the Church not unprofitably, so that it
be read and heard with sobriety, especially because of these Maccabees, which
endured grievous persecutions for the Law of God.

In the sixth Age, An. 500. to 600.
Quarehi libri no^ inter Canonicas Scripturas currunt. M. Quoniam apud Haebreos
quoque super hac differentia recipiebantur sicut Hier. caterique testa^tur.
Iun. de part. diuinae legis lib. 1. cap. 3. Su^tpraterea alii quidem libri vt
Sapientia Solo monis, liber Jesus filii Syrach, et lib. Judith et Tobiae, et
libri Machabaeorqui legu^tur quide^ sed no^ scribu^tur in canone. Isid.
Praenot. Elucid. de script. and Scripturis sac. c. 6 and 7.
Iunilius Bishop of Africa] excludes from the Canonical books, Judith, the
Maccabees, and the book of Wisdom: and concerning them, he puts this
question, and resolves it: Why are not these books inserted amongst the
Canonical Scriptures? Because (says he) the Jews did make a difference of
them, as S. Hierom and others do testify.

Isidore] is a witness, that our doctrine was professed in the church in his
days: there are other books, as namely, the Wisdom of Solomon, the book of
Jesus the son of Syrach, the books of Judith, and Tobias, and the Maccabees,
which are read, but not written in the Canon.

In the seventh Age, An. 600. to 700.
Gregory the Great] did account the books of Maccabees Apocryphal: De qua re
non inordinate agimus si ex libris licet no^ Canonicis, sed tame^ ad
aedificatione^ ecclesiae editis testimonium proferimus. In Job. lib. 19. cap.
13.

B. Gregorius authoritate vt opinor Hier motu^ videtur co^cedere illos non esse
Canonicos cum tamen de it is producat testimonia. Cathat. opusc. de lib.
Canonicis. Secundum Greg. in Moralibus liber Judith, Tob. et Machabeoru^,
Ecclas. atque lib. Sapientiae non su^t recipie^di ad co^firma^du^ aliquid de
fide. Occ. Dial. part 3 tract. 1. l. 3. c. 16.


We do not amiss (says he) if we produce a testimony out of the books of
Maccabees, though not Canonical, yet published for the instruction of the
Church. This is witnessed also by Catharinus their own Scholeman: Gregory
(says he) led as I conceive, by the authority of Saint Hierome, did seem to
grant; that those books were not Canonical, although he produced
testimonies out of them. But learned Occham more plainly declares his opinion
touching Gregory; According to Gregory's doctrine (says he) the book of
Judith, Tobias, the Maccabees, Ecclesiasticus, and the book of Wisdom, are
not to be received for the confirmation of any doctrine of faith.

In the eighth Age, An. 700. to 800.
Damascene.] who was canonized a Saint, for his service at the 2.d. Council of
Nice, tells us, it is operae preti^m, etc worth our pains, to search and know,
(...). Damasc. Orth. fid. l. 4. c. 18.
that there are two and twenty books of Canonical Scripture; and as touching
the Apocryphal, he terms them, (...), they are full of virtuous
instructions, but are not numbered amongst the Prophets, neither were they laid
up in the Arc. Nec ab hac sententia alienus fuit Damascenus quos Theologi
multi secuti sunt. Canus loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 10.
This Author is confessed to be ours in this point: insomuch as Canus
professes, that Damascene and Athanasius were of his opinion, and were
followed in this by many Divines.

In the ninth Age, An. 800 to 900.
Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople] gives us to understand, (...) Niceph.
Patr. C.P. Canon Script. in operibus Pithei. In libro Jesus filii Syrach hac
praefata sente^tia legitur que^ libru^ B. Hier. atque Isidorus inter Apochry.
(id est) dubias scripturas deputatu^ esse abque dubita tione testa^tur. Qui
etia^ liber non te^pore Prophetaru^ sed sacerdotum sub Simone Pont. Max.
regna^te Pto lemao Euergete co^scriptus est. Al^. aduers. Elip. l. 1. col. 941
that the books of the Old Testament were twenty and two. And in treating of
the Apocryphal books, he mentions in particular, the books of Maccabees,
the Wisdom of Solomon, Ester, Judith, Susanna, Tobit.

Alcuinus, Abbot of Saint Martins at Tours in France,] writing against
Elipantus, Bishop of Tolledo, tells him, that he urged authorities out of the
book of Jesus the son of Syrach: but (says he) Saint Hierome did testify,
that without question it was to be reputed amongst the Apocryphal and
doubtful books; and withal adds: This book was not written in the time of
the Prophets, but under the ^^igne of Ptolomey, and Simon the high Priest.

In the tenth Age, An 900. to 1000.
Aelfrick Abb^t of Malmsbury] in his Saxon treaty of the old Testament,
Aelfrick of the old Testament. pa. 17. 22. 23.
tells us, There are two books more placed with Solomon's works, as if he had
made them, which for likeness of style, and profitable use, have gone for his,
but Jesus the son of Syrach composed them: one is called Liber Sapientiae,
the book of Wisdom; and the other Ecclesiasticus, very large books, and
read in the Church of long custom, for much good instruction: amongst these
books the Church has accustomed to place two other, tending to the glory of
God, and entitled, Maccabeorum, I have turned them into English, and so read
them you may if you please, for your own instruction.

In the eleventh Age, An. 1000. to 1100.
Petrus Cluniacensis] after the recital of the Canonical books, says, There
are besides the authentical books, six others not to be rejected, as namely,
Judith, Tobias, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the two books of Maccabees,
which though they attain not to the high dignity of the former, yet they are
received of the Church, De author. veter. Test. Epist. contr Petro Bus^^nos.
as containing necessary and profitable doctrine.

In the twelfth Age, Omnes ergo fiunt numero 22, sunt praterea alit quide^
libri vt Sapientia Solo^monis, liber Jesus filis Syrach, et liber Judith, et
Tob. et libri Machab qui legu^turqui them, sed non scribuntur in Canone. Hugo de
S. Vict. Praeno. Elucid de scrip. et scrip sacris. ca. 6. and cap 7.

Omnes sunt numero 22 su^t praterea et alii libri vt sapientia etc. Rich.
Except li. 2. cap. 9.


An. 1100. to 1200.
Hugo de Sancto Victore] All the Canonical books of the Old Testament, are
twenty two: there are other books also, (as namely) the Wisdom of Solomon,
the book of Jesus the son of Syrach, the books of Judith, Tobias, and the
Maccabees, which are read, but not written in the Canon.

Richardus de S. Victore] was living at this time, and has the same words, All
the books are twenty two: there are other books also, (as namely) the book
of Wisdom and Maccabees, and which are read in the Church, but not written in
the Canon.

In the thirteenth Age, An. 1200. to 1300.
Hugo Cardinalis] speaking of the books rejected by us, Hugo in Prologum
Galeatum.
says, These books are not received by the Church for proof of doctrine, but
for information of manners. And in his Preface to Tobias (he says) they are
not accounted amongst the Canonical Scriptures. Prolog. in Tobiam.


Bonauenture] in his Preface before the Exposition of the Psalter, shows
which are the Canonical books of Scripture: and passing by the books of the
New Testament, he reckons all those, and those only that Hierome does,
sorting them into their several ranks and orders as the Hebrews do.

In the fourteenth Age, An. 1300. to 1400.
Gul. Occham] says, According to Hierome in his Prologue before the book of
Proverbs; and Gregory in his Moralls, the books of Judith, Tobias, and the
Maccabees, Ecclesiasticus, and the book of Wisdom, are not to be received
for confirmation of any matter of faith: Occham Dial. part. 3 Pract. 1. li. 3.
cap. 16.
so also it reads those two volumes of Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom, for the
edification of the people, but not for confirmation of points of faith and
religion. Postquam auxiliante Deo scripsi super libros sacrae scripturae
Canonicos -- alios inte^do scribere qui non sunt de Canone, scil. liber
Sapientiae, Ecclus. Judith, Tobias, et libri Machabaorum. In Praefat. Tobiae.


Nicholas Lyra] After that (by the assistance of God) I have handled the
Canonical books of Scripture, beginning from Genesis, and proceeding to the
end of the Apocalypse; being confident of the same aid and assistance, I
purpose to write of those books, which are not in the Canon, as namely the
book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, and the books of Maccabees.
This Author is so truly ours in this point, Nicholas Lyra in prafatione in
libru^ Tobia dicit, neque eum, neque Judith, neque Machabaorum, neque
Sapientiae, neque Ecclesiasticu^, neque Baruch neque vltimos Esdrae in Canone
haberi, recipi tamen in Ecclesia, legique ad mores informandos, quanquaem eorum
authoritas ad probanda ea quae in contentionem veniunt minus idonea reputetur.
Ioh. Fr. Pic. Mirand. Theorem. 5.
that Picus Mirandula professes, Lyra says, Neither the books of Tobit, nor
Judith, nor the Maccabees, nor Wisdom, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor Baruch, nor
the last books of Esdras, are to be reckoned in the Canon; but
notwithstanding they are received of the Church, and are read for rectifying of
manners, although their authority is of less account for proof of those
things which are in controversy.

In the fifteenth Age, An. 1400. to 1500.
Alphonsus Tostatus] gives his voice with the reformed Churches. Quanquam isti
libri ab Ecclesia recipiantur nullius authoritatis solidae sunt, ideo ad
confirmandu^ et probandu^ ea quae in dubium venerint inutiles sunt etc Tossed.
praef. in lib. Paralip. q. 2. Denique liber iste non est de Canone id est inter
Scripturas Canonicas co^putandus, quamuis de eius veritate non dubitatur.
Dyonis. Carth. prolog. in Ecclesiast. Perer. in Dan. lib. 16. p. 742.
Although (says he) the books (in question) be received of the Church, yet
are they not of any solid authority; and therefore they are improfitable to
prove, and confirm those things which are called in question, according to
Saint Hierom.

Dionysius Carthusianus] in writing upon Ecclesiasticus, (says) That book is
not of the Canon, (that is) amongst the Canonical Scriptures, although there
be no doubt made of the truth of that book. This is confessed likewise by
our adversaries: Dyonisius Carthusianus, and Lyra, do not deny the History
of Susanna to be true, but they deny the books of Judith, Tobit, and the
Maccabees do appertain to the canonical Scriptures.

Ita 22 volumina supputa^tur quibus quasi literis et exordiis in Dei doctrina
etc. Wald. doct. fidei lib 2. art. 2. circa initium. Anton. par. 3. tit 18. ca.
6. juxt. fine^.
Thomas Waldensis] cites out of Hierome, the Canon of the old Testament in
these words, As there are twenty two letters, by which we write in Hebrew all
that we speak, so there are accounted twenty two books, by which as
letters, we are instructed in the doctrine of God; and withal adds, Dicit
Thomas 2.2. Nichol de Lyra super Tobiam, scil. isti non sunt tanta authoritatis
quod ex dictis eorum posset efficaciter argumentari, in his quae sunt fidei,
sicut ex aliis libris sacrae scripturae, vnde forte habent authoritate^ talem
quale^ habent dicta sanctorum Doctorum approbato ab Ecc^esia.
that the whole Canonical Scripture is contained in the two and twenty books.

Antoninus] tells us, that Aquinas, and Nicholas de Lyra say, the Apocryphal
books rejected by the Hebrews, are not of that authority that a man may
argue from their sayings as efficaciously touching points of faith, as from
other writings of the sacred Scriptures; and therefore happily they have such
authority as the sayings of holy Fathers, which are approved by the Church,
but not as the Canonical Scriptures themselves.

In the sixteenth Age, An. 1500. to 1600.
Reliqui, viz. Judith, Tobiae, Machabeoru^ libri, cu^ Sapientia et
Ecclesiastico a Diuo Hier. inter Apocrypha loca^tur. Nec turberis (Nouitie) si
alicubi reperias libros istos inter Canonicos supputari vel in sacris
Co^ciliis, vel in sacris doctoribus Na^ ad Hieronymi lineam reducenda sunt,
ta^verba Conciliorum quam Doctoru^, sic vt libri isti non sint Canonici, id est
regulares ad firmand^m ea quae sunt fidei, possunt tamen dici Canonici, id est
regulares ad aedificatione^ Fideliu^. Caiet. in finecom. Hist. veter. Testament.
Cardinal Cajetan] tells us, The books in question betwixt us (as namely)
Judith, Tobit, the Maccabees, the books of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, are
reckoned by Hierome amongst the Apocryphal books; neither be thou troubled,
(says he) O Nouice, if elsewhere you find these books reckoned amongst the
Canonical Scriptures, both by sacred Counsels, or by the holy Doctors of the
Church, for they are to be reduced to the rule of Hierome, that those books
may not be accounted Canonical, that is, to regulate our faith, but they may
be termed Canonical for the edification of the faithful. This testimony of
Cajetan, against the Tenet of the Church of Rome, fully agrees with us, in so
much that Ambrosius Catharinus, a Romanist professes, that Cajetan in this
point committed almost as many sins as he delivered words. And his fellow
Canus protests, that he is ashamed, that a man otherwise ingenious and
learned, and a godly pillar of their Church, In huius vero confirmatione
argumenti Ambrosius Cath^rinus, Caietanum affirmat tot peccata admisisse, quot
verba pene effudit. Can lib. 2. cap. 11.
should so much degenerate from the learned professors of the Roman Faith,
that when all Writers agree, that the name of Canonical is sacred and divine,
only Cajetan should say the Bishops and Councels did otherwise understand it.
And for a conclusion, Arias Montanus, in his Edition of the Bible, Accesserunt
et huic Editioni libri Graece scripti quos Ecclesia Orthodoxa Hebraorum Canonem
secuta inte Apochryphos rece^set. Arias Mon. in the Frontispice of the Bible
Edit. Antwerp. ex Offic. Plant. Ann. 1584.
tells us, there are added to that Edition books written in Greek, ( as
namely, Toby, Judith, Hester, the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch,
the Additions to Daniel, and the two books of Maccabees) the which books
(says he) the Orthodoxe Church following the Hebrew Canon, reckons amongst
the Apocrypha. And thus by our adversaries own confessions, the true and
Orthodox Church did reject those Apocryphal books which our Church refuses,
which the Trent Council allows at this day for Canonical. And thus briefly I
have produced a Catalogue of ancient Fathers, and modern Writers in the Roman
Church, who have witnessed with us the same Canon of Scripture which we
profess at this day, whereby I have given you a taste of that challenge,
(which God willing I purpose hereafter to make good in the principal points of
our Religion) that our Church and doctrine has continued Visible in all ages,
even to the days of Luther.

SECT. VI. Our Adversaries pretenses from the authorities of Fathers, and
Councels, to prove the Apocryphal books Canonical, answered.
THe former Testimonies are so true, and pregnant in our behalf, that our
learned adversaries are enforced to confess, that most of those Authors did
reject the books in question for Apocryphal. To say nothing of the Trent
Anathema, laid upon those reverend Fathers, and learned Doctors, of the ancient
and modern Churches, who rejected those books in all ages; let us weigh their
chiefest reasons and arguments for defense of their cause, and it will appear,
there are no solid and certain authorities, to prove the Apocryphal books in
question for canonical: Bell. lib. 1. de verbo Dei c. 12.
To instance in particulars: Bellarmine says, the book of Judith was held by
Hierome for Canonical; and withal pretended this reason for it, This book
has a singular testimony from the famous and first general Council of Nice.
It is true, that both contending parties subscribe to this first and best
Council of Nice; but I pray where is that Canon to be found? and sure I am
there is no such testimony extant, Asseruit esse Apocryphu^. Salm. Com. in
Hebr. disp. 2. Acost. lib 2. de Christo Revel c. 13. Quod mihi dubituntis
suspicionem subindieare videtur, na^ Nicena Synodus olim hunc libru^ in Canonem
redegerat cur annis 80 post non accenset eum Synodus Laodicena? cur
Nazianzenus, eius non meminit? quid sibi vult quod idem etc. Lind. Panopl lib.
3. cap 3.
as is pretended by the Cardinal: nay more, Salmeron his fellow Jesuit
protests, Saint Hierome affirmed the book of Judith Apocryphal. And Acosta
the Jesuit professes, (e Canone exemit) he exempted it out of the Canon: and
as touching the Council of Nice, their own Lindanus proclaims, that this
assertion gives him great cause of doubting: for if the Nicene Council did
anciently reckon the book of Judith in the Canon, why did not the Council of
Laodicea reckon it? why did not Nazianzene make mention of it? what meant he
to say, the Church at that time did read the books of Judith, Tobie, and the
Maccabees, but did not receive them amongst the Canonical Scriptures.

Again, look upon the Council of Laodicea, called in the year 364, there
you shall find the book of Judith, Bin. Not. in Council. Rom sub Syluest.
by the testimony of Binius himself, rejected for Apocryphal, and this
Council is confirmed by the second Canon, of the sixth General Council of
Trullo; which the Fathers of that Council would never have done, if the first
General Council of Nice had decreed the contrary.

I proceed to the examination of the chiefest ground and principal cause of
their Trent Decree; The third Council of Carthage, called in the time of
Siricius Bishop of Rome, about the year 399, Placuit vt praeter scripturas
Canocas nihil in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine diuinarum scripturaru^: sunt autem
Canonicae Scripturae, Tobias, Judith, Hester, Esdrae libri duo Machabeoru^
libri duo. Conc. Carth. 3. circa tempora Syri^ij Canone 47.
touching the Apocryphal books, makes this declaration; It pleases us, that
nothing be read in the Church, besides the Canonical Scriptures: and there
they publish for the Canonical books, Tobie, Judith, Hester, Esdras, and the
two books of Maccabees: And to this Council (say the Romanists) Saint Austen
subscribed. This testimony I confess, is extant in the 47. Canon of this
Council; but give me leave to tell you, the Church of Rome does not generally
avowe that Canon of that Council. It is the confession of Cardinal Baronius;
Haud omnes, Haudomnes Canones in hac Synodo sanciti probantur, sed
diuersisaliis co^ciliis Carthaginensibus, vt inter alios iste, quo sacroru^
libroru^ certus numerus definitur. Baron. An. 397. nu^. 46. Canones 50. quoru^
tituli hic assigna^tur non omnes in hac Synodo, sed diuersisaliis co^ciliis
Carthagine^sibus sanciti proba^tur inter alios 19.30. et 47. which last Canon
is the Cano^ in question. Bin. in Council. Carth. 3.
etc. Not all the Canons of this Council are established, but they are allowed
in diverse other Councels of Carthage, as namely, that Canon wherein the number
of sacred books were defined. And Binius the publisher of the Counsels, makes
the like acknowledgment, that the 50 Canons, which were entitled to that
Council, were not all confirmed by it, but by other Counsels of Carthage, (as
namely) the 47 Canon: and that which argues suspicion of a forged Canon, the
books of Maccabees, which are inserted in the Latin copy of that Council,
are not to be found in all, or any of the ancient Greek copies or
Manuscripts. Hic Canon Carthaginensis Concilii extat in collectione Canonu^
Cresconii Africani Episcopi nondu^ edita sed ibi Machabee. ru^ libri non
recensentur ne in omnibus Gracis codicibus editis, and Mss.

Christ. Iustellus obseru. and Not. in Cod. Canonu^ Eccle. Africanae. Bell. de
Roman. Pont. lib. 2. ca. 31. Quintum. Bell. de Council. author. lib. 2. cap 8.
Decimo.


Neither is this Council of that authority as the Romanists themselves
pretend: for when our learned Protestants do otherwise produce this Council
against the head of their Church, Bellarmine makes answer, This Provincial
Council ought not to bind the Bishop of Rome, nor the Bishops of other
Provinces. If we oppose against it the Council of Laodicea, which decreed
those books for Apocryphal: Bellarmine makes answer, The Council of
Carthage is of greater authority then that of Laodicea, because it is later,
and because it was National; but the Council of Laodicea was provincial. In
the one place, when it seemingly makes for him, he terms it a National
Council, in the other, when it plainly makes against him, he terms it
Provincial. But, Oportet esse memorem, Falsehood had need have a good memory.
It is usual with Bellarmine, with Canus, with Costerus, and the best learned
Romanists, to excuse, Saint Hierome, Saint Austen, Saint Gregory, and many
others, which denied the Apocrypha for part of the divine Canon, with this
general Answer: It was no sin, Bell de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 10.
no heresy in them to reject those books, because no General Council in
their days had decreed any thing touching them. If therefore no General
Council had decreed the true Canon of Scripture in their days, how comes it
to pass, that Bellarmine cites the Council of Nice for the book of Judith?
Why do the Romanists claim the antiquity of their Canon from the Council of
Carthage? Why do they profess in honor of that Council, that it was
generally received, and that S. Austen subscribed to it: when as that Canon
touching the Apocryphal Scriptures was not decreed, nor confirmed by that
Council by their own confessions? But admit the Council of Carthage had
decreed it, yet can any man prove that the Church at that time did receive the
books of Judith, of Hester, of the Maccabees, and the rest, for the rule of
faith? Shall we think that Saint Austen maintained the Canon of Scriptures
contrary to Saint Hierom? must we believe that the Council of Carthage,
within less then thirty years did decree contrary to the Council of
Laodicea? nay more, is it so much as probable, that both those Counsels should
be confirmed by one and the same general Council of Trullo; and yet one
should decree a contrary Canon of Faith against the other? And as touching
Saint Austens subscription to that Council, it is a sufficient allegation
against it, that the 47 Canon was never decreed in that Council; and the
rather it appears by this, for that St. Austen did not allow the book of
Judith, of Wisdom, of Ecclesiasticus, and the Maccabees for Canonical, (all
which are expressly decreed in the Council of Carthage for Canonical.)
Touching the book of Judith, St. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. c. 26. and l.
17. c. 20
he tells us, the Pewes never received it in to the Canon of Scriptures; and
withal there he professes, that the Canon of the Jews was most authentical.
Touching the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, he tells us, Solomon was a
Prophet, as his works (namely) the Proverbs, the Canticles, and Ecclesiastes
do witness, all which are Canonical, August. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 17. c. 20.
but Ecclesiasticus, and the book of Wisdom, were only called his for some
likeness of style: but all the learned affirm them none of his: yet the
Western Churches held them anciently of great authority. And lastly, touching
the books of Maccabees, he declares by pregnant and several reasons, that
they are Apocryphal; First, by way of distinction he tells us, this reckoning
is not found in the Canonical Scriptures, but in other books, which the
Church receives for Canonical Secondly, he tells us, they are accounted
Canonical for the suffering of holy Martyrs; whereas the Canonical books are
simply and absolutely of themselves and for themselves Canonical. Thirdly, he
tells us, the Church did receive them not unprofitably, which is as poor a
testimony as he could have given of his own works. Fourthly, they are received
(with this condition) if they be soberly read in the Church. And lastly, he
gives this special reason in behalf of the true Canon of Scripture; Christ
gives his Testimony to those books, as namely, to the Law, to the Prophets,
to the Psalms, because all they bear witness of him: but the Apocryphal
books, neither witness any thing of Christ, neither are they contained under
all, or any of those books, which Christ himself divided into the Law, the
Prophets, and the Psalms.

It is true, Proto canonici. Deuterocanonici.
there was Canon Ecclesiastical, wherein all, or most part of the Apocryphal
books, which are now read and received in our Churches, were anciently read
for example of life, and instruction of manners, and for that cause were
commonly called Canonical: and in this manner Saint Austen speaking of the
Maccabees, tells us, Hos libros non Iudai, sed Ecclesia habet pro Canonicis.
Aug. de ci uit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 36.
These books the Church did account Canonical, which the Jews did not: yet
withal he professes in the same Tract, that those books which were not in
the Jews Canon, and yet were received of the Church for Canonical, were of
less force and authoriritie; when as it cannot be denied, that all the books
truly and divinely Canonical, were always reputed of equal force and
authority. Again, there was Canon diuinus, Aug de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 17 cap. 20.
a divine Canon, which was held the rule of Faith, wherein was numbered only
the twenty two books of Scripture committed to the Jews; and this Canon, St.
Austen (who termed the books of Maccabees Canonical) does distinguish from
the Canon Ecclesiastical, and gives his very instance in the books of
Maccabees: In Machabaeorum libris etsi aliquid Mirabiliu^ de diuini Canonis
Mirabilibus exigua^ expositione^ tangeremus. Aug. de Mirabil. sacrae Scrip.
lib. 2. cap. 34.
There may be something (says he) found in the books of Maccabees, worthy to
be joined with the number of those miracles; yet hereof will we have no care,
for that we intend the miracles, Diuini Canonis, which are contained in the
divine Canon. And thus he distinguished the books of Maccabees, which he
termed Canonical, for instruction of life, from the divine Canon of
Scriptures, Canon Moru^, Canon Fidei. Caiet.
which were received for confirmation of faith: and that divine Canon only,
he acknowledges to be given by inspiration from God, and to be of most
certain credit and highest authority in the Church; and for that cause he
gives this further rule, Bell de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 10.
The books which were received of all Churches (such as were in the divine
Canon among the Jews) were of greatest authority, and ought to be preferred
before those which were not generally received of the all Churches: Diuum
Augustinu^ fuisse certissimu^ omnes libros Canonico^esse infallibilis
veritatis, sed no^ fuisse aeque certum de omnibus libris quos enumerauerat qui
esse^t canonici, na si ita sentiebat, rem no^ fuisse adhuc a generali Concilio
definitam et propterea potuisse sine labe haeresios quosda^libros ab aliis non
recipi. Ide^ ibidem.
and thereupon, Bellarmine confesses, by way of solution; That Saint Austen
was most certain, that all Canonical books were of infallible truth, but was
not alike certain, that all the books of Scripture were Canonical: for if he
did think so, yet he knew the point was not as yet defined by a general
Council; and therefore without any stain of heresy, some books might not be
received of some persons for Apocryphal.

Since therefore the pretended Canon of the Nicene Council is not extant,
since their suggested Canon of the third Council of Carthage, by their own
confessions, is not confirmed in that Council; since the books of Maccabees,
which are joined with the Apocryphal books, in the Latin copies are not to
be found in the Manuscripts of the ancient Greek coppies: nay more, since
contrariwise, we have the testimony of Christ and his Apostles for the entire
Canon comprehended in the Law, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms: since we
have the Council of Laodicca, in the Primitive Church, generally received, and
aftewards confirmed by a general Council; since we have the consent of the
ancient Fathers, and the ample testimonies of Bishops and Cardinals, and
learned Writers, in the bosom of the Roman Church, who witness with us the
Antiquity and Universality of our Canon in all ages; I hope we may with good
reason reject the Apocryphal Scriptures, as often as they are produced against
us for Freewill, for Purgatory, for Prayer for the dead, for Invocation of
Saints, for Worshipping of Angels, and the like: these things I say rightly
considered, and patiently heard on both sides, I shall appeal to their own
learned Cardinal Cajetans confession, who concludes for the antiquity of our
doctrine, and the Universality of the Jews Canon, Duas maximas vtilitates ex
Iudaeoru^ obstinacia percipimus: -- altera est fides libroru^ sacrorum. Si enim
omnes conuersi essent ad Christu^ putaret iam mundus Iudaeorum ad inuentione^
fuisse -- quod fuerit promiss^s Messiis, sed vbi inimici Christi Iudai
perseuerant et testantur nullos alios apud Patres fuisse libros canonice
sacro^nisi istos. Cajet. Comment. in Rom c 11. Bell. de verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap.
2.
with one and the same reason: All Christians receive a double benefit by the
Apostacy and obstinacy of the Jews; one is to know which are the true books
of the Old Testament: for if all the Jews had been converted to the faith of
Christ, then would the world have suspected that the Jews had invented those
promises which are of Christ the Messiah: but now for as much as the Jews are
enemies unto Christ, they bear witness unto us, that there are no books
Canonical, but those only which the Jews themselves acknowledged to be
Canonical.

To conclude therefore this first point, since the Scripture is the most
certain and safest rule of Faith, by our adversaries own confession, since
the Canonical books of Scripture, (which are the only rule of Faith) are
contained in the Law, in the Prophets, and the Psalms, under all or any of
which the Apocryphal books are not contained, I say, to leave this certain
and safe way, and receive Apocryphal additions to that Word, Deuteronomy. 4.2. etc.
12.32. Prou. 30.6. Revel. 22.18
when it is strictly forbidden by God himself: Thou shall not add to this
Word; this is Via dubia, a doubtful and uncertain way; this is Via Deuia, a
wandering and By-way.

But because our adversaries insist upon an other ground, (viz. No^ aliunde nos
habere Scripturam esse diuina^, et qui sunt libri sacri, qua^ ex Traditionius
no^ scriptis. Bell. de verb. Dei lib. 4. c. 4.
) That by no other means we can know the Scriptures to be divine, nor the
books to be holy and (Canonical) but only from unwritten Tradition, I will
leave them to their Apocryphal Scriptures, and pursue them in their unwritten
traditions in the next place.

SECT. VII. The Romanists in point of Traditions contradict the truth, and
themselves; grounding most of their erroneous Doctrine upon unwritten
Traditions, and yet frequently allege the written Word for them.
IT is the first Article of the Roman Creed, to which all Bishops and Priests
are sworn: Bulla Pij 4. Art. 1.
I admit and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the
other observations and constitutions of the Church. What are meant by those
Observations and Constitutions of the Church, and how the Priests are bound to
embrace them. The Council of Trent declares in this manner. Necnon
Traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem tum ad mo res pertine^tes -- pari pietutis
affectu ac reuerentia suscipit and veneratur Conc. Trid Sess. 4. Decret. 1.
Traditions appertaining to faith and manners, as if they were dictated by
Christ himself with his own mouth, or by the holy spirit; and preserved by a
continual succession in the Catholic Church, the Council receives with
equal reverence and religious affection, as she receives the holy Striptures
themselves.

Here was the first alteration made, touching the rule of Faith; and from the
Decree of this Council, Bellarmines doctrine began to take place. Regula
partialis no^ totalis. Bell.
The Scripture is but a partial, not a total rule of Faith: for certainly
till this time, Traditions concerning faith and manners, were never reputed of
equal authority with the Scriptures, nor a part of the Rule of Faith. It was
the Tenet of Aquinas, (and the later Schoolmen knew no other doctrine, till
the Council of Trent. Aquin. in 1. ad Tim. cap. 6.
) The doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is called Canonical, because it is
the rule of our understanding, and therefore no man ought to teach otherwise.
But you shall observe from, and after this time, the Romanists performed their
oath (Ex abundanti) I may say more then enough. Cardinal Baronius tells us,
Tradition is the foundation of Scriptures, Baron. An. 58. n. 11.
-- and excels them in this, that the Scriptures cannot subsist, unless they
be strengthened by Traditions, but Tradition has strength enough without the
Scriptures. And that the world may know it is usual with our adversaries, not
only to equal their unwritten Traditions, but also to advance them above the
Scriptures, let their sayings be weighed by any indifferent man, and it will
appear, the Scriptures are of so little use or esteem with them, as if they
were not worthy to be named in points of controversy betwixt us. Lindan
Panopl. l. 1. c. 22. l. 5. c. 4. l. 1. c. 6. etc.
Traditions (says Lindan) are the most certain foundations of Faith, the most
sure ground of the sacred Scriptures, the impenetrable buckler of Ajax, the
suppresser of all heresies. On the other side, the Scripture (says he) is a
nose of wax, a dead and killing letter without life, a mere shell without a
kernel, a leaden rule, a wood of thieues, a shop of heretics, and the like.
Costerus the Jesuit tells us for certain. It was never the mind of Christ,
either to commit his mysteries to parchment, or that his Church should depend
on paper writings: but say the Rhemists, Rhem. Test. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 19.
We have plain Scriptures, all the Fathers, most evident reasons, that we
must either believe Traditions, or nothing at all: nay more, says Costerus,
The excellency of the unwritten word does far surpass the Scriptures, which
the Apostles left us in parchments; Coster. Euchrist. cap. 1 page 44.
the one is written by the finger of God, the other by the pen of the
Apostles; the Scripture is a dead letter written in paper or parchment, which
may be razed or wrested at pleasure: but Tradition is written in men's hearts,
which cannot be altered: the Scripture is like a scabberd, which will receive
any sword, either leaden, or wooden, or brazen, and suffers it self to be
drawn by any interpretation. Tradition retains the true sword in the
scabberd; that is, the true sense of the Scripture in the sheath of the letter.
The Scriptures do not contain clearly all the mysteries of Religion, for
they were not given to that end, to prescribe an absolute form of faith; but
Tradition contains in it all truth, it comprehends all the mysteries of faith,
and all the estate of Christian Religion, and resolves all doubts which may
arise concerning faith, and from hence it will follow, that Tradition is the
Interpreter of all Scriptures, the Judge of all Controversies, the Remouer of
all errors, and from whose judgment we ought not to appeal to an other Judge,
yea rather all Judges are bound both to regard and follow her judgment.

Now if we look back, and consider those blasphemous speeches used against
the Scriptures, and compare those passages, with the reverend regard they give
unto Traditions, we cannot but conceive there were some special reasons that
induced the Pope and Trent Council to set Traditions in the first place. Quam
Traditionu^ authoritate^ si tollas nutare iam and vacillare videbuntur Andrad.
de Orth. expli. lib. 2.
Andradius who well understood the state of the Church of Rome, being present
at the making of that decree, gives this general lesson in their behalf: Many
points (of Roman doctrine) would reele and totter, if they were not supported
by the help of Traditions. But it may not be forgotten, Suitor. de Translat.
Bibl. c. 22.
their own Monk Petrus de Suitor more particularly shows one special cause
why the Scriptures were denied unto the lay people. (viz.) Because many things
being taught by the Roman Church, and not contained in the Scriptures, would
more easily draw the people from the traditions and obseruances of their
Church. And another reason why Traditions are in that special request above
the Scriptures, is rendered by their own Bishop Canus: Canus. loc. Theol lib.
3. cap. 3.
Because Tradition is not only of greater force against heretics, then the
Scripture, but almost all disputation with heretics, is to be referred to
Traditions. Thus you see by the confessions of two learned Romanists, there was
great cause why traditions should have the first place amongst the Articles of
the Creed; for the one says, they prevent the reading of the Scriptures, which
otherwise would discover the doctrine of their Church: the other says, they
are more availeable then the Scriptures, to confute the doctrine of heretics.

These testimonies premised for the honor and authority of Papal Traditions,
let us examine what are meant by Traditions; and next, which are those
Traditions, that are of that high esteem in the Roman Church: for if their
Traditions be of equal authority with the Scriptures, and yet are not
contained in the Scriptures, there is great reason they should be approved by
testimonies and witnesses aequiualent to the Scriptures.

Kellis. Survey. l. 8. c. 3.
Doctor Kellison tells us, that Tradition is nothing else, but an opinion or
custom of the Church, not written in holy Scriptures, but yet delivered by the
hands of the Church from time to time, from Christians to Christians even to
the last age. And Saint Austen declares more properly: Whatsoever the
Universal Church does hold, Aug. lib 4. contra Donat. c. 24.
not being ordained by Counsels, but has been ever held, that is believed
most rightly to be an Apostolical Tradition.

It appears therefore that Papal Traditions, which are of equal authority
with the Scriptures, must have Universality of Churches, and consent of ages,
(or to use the words of their Trent Council, Such as are preserved by a
continual succession in the Catholic Church. All doctrinall Traditions of
this nature, are received by the Reformed Churches; for we all profess with
the same Father: Conc. Trid. Sess. 4.
Whatsoever is used by the Church throughout all the world, is to be observed,
and it would be most insolent madness to dispute against the same. Let us
hear therefore out of their own mouths, what are those Traditions which are
not written in any Apostolic Author, and yet have those requisite
conditions, and special characters of the Roman Church, viz. Antiquity,
Universality and Succession.

Pet. a Soto in lib. cont. Brentium.
Petrus a Soto gives us to understand, that the sacrifice of the Altar, the
unction of Chrysme, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the dead, the Popes
Supremacy, Consecration of water in Baptism, the whole Sacrament of
Confirmation, Orders, Matrimony, Penance, Extreme unction, Merit of works,
Necessity of satisfaction, and confession to a Priest, are all Traditions of
the Roman Church. Canis in Catech. c. 5. de precept. Eccles. Coster. in refut.
script. Wallesij antith 6. Canus loc. Theol. li 3. ca. 3.
Canisius and Costerus refer to Traditions, the worship of Images, set times
of fasting, all the Ceremonies of the Mass. Melchior Canus tells us, the
imploring help of holy Martyrs, and celebrating their memories, the
worshipping of Images, the consecrating and receiving of the body and blood of
Christ by the Priest, the Sacraments of Confirmation and Orders not to be
reiterated, are no where happily to be found in Scriptures: but amongst all
the Romanists, as it is observed by reverend Whitakers, there is none does so
fully and punctually set down the Traditions of the Roman Church; as their
Bishop Lindan, who amongst other Traditions, Whit. co^tr. 1. c. 5. quest. 6.
mentions the Real presence, the Communion under one kind, private Mass,
Indulgences, Purgatory, Peter's living and dying at Rome. All or most of these
Traditions are substantial and fundamental points, and the denial of them
makes a man an heretic in their Church. Now it is very obseruable in the first
place, that no unwritten Tradition has any ground or foundation in the
Scripture: Peers. de Tradit. p 4.
for Tradition is so taken (says Peresius) that it is distinguished against
the doctrine, which is found in the Canonical books of Scripture; and
consequently touching all, or any of the Papal Traditions, there is no use at
all of Scriptures. Herein then stands the difference betwixt the Church of Rome
and us: Multa pertinere ad Christianorum doctrinam et fide^, quae nec aperte
nec obscu^e in sacris literis co^tinentur. Canus loc. Theol. ca. 3. fund. 3.
There are many things (says Canus) belonging to the doctrine and faith of
Christians, which are neither contained in the sacred Scriptures, manifestly or
obscurely: and this he understands by the Traditions of his own Church: There
is no point of Faith taught in our Church, which is not expressly contained in
the Scriptures, or by necessary consequence deduced from thence; and if we
receive the witness of men, yet the witness of God is greater. 1. Ioh. 5.9.
But that which is incongruous to common sense, and altogether different from
the Romish doctrine, those men which generally profess, that unwritten
Traditions are so called, because they are distinguished from the word written:
and as Bellarmine confesses, Bell de verbo Dei. lib. 4. c 2.
do signify that doctrine which is not written by the first Author, in any
Apostolic Book, (either for want of a continued succession in their
Traditions, or to make the ignorant believe, the Scripture makes in all points
for them, I say for those very points (which they term Traditions unwritten)
they produce the Word written: See the Gag of the Gospel.
as for instance, Purgatory is termed an unwritten Tradition, and therefore by
Bellarmines testimony is not to be found in any Apostolic Author: yet the
Cardinal, Bell. de Purgatorio.
for this very point, cites twenty several places in the written Word to
prove it. Invocation of Saints, is a Tradition unwritten (and therefore not to
be found in Scripture) yet the Cardinal proves it out of the Word written:
Bell. de sancta. B^at. l. 1. c. 20.
Go to my servant Job, and he will pray for thee. The Communion in one kind is
a Tradition unwritten, (and therefore not to be found in any Apostolic
Author) yet Fisher Bishop of Rochester, proves it out of the Word written:
Roffen advers. Luth. A^t. 16.
Give us this day our daily bread. Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue, is
a Tradition unwritten, and therefore not to be found in Scripture, Ledes. de
divine. scrip. quauis lin^ua non legenda. c. 22.
yet Ledesma the Jesuit proves it strongly out of the Word written: Our
Savior opened the book of the Prophet Esaias, and afterward closed it. How
poor and weak are these and the like authorities deduced from the Scriptures,
I leave to every man's judgment: but sure I am, the number of their Traditions
is uncertain, and the nature of them is destroyed by their own Tenets, when
they confound the written word with their unwritten Doctrines.

It was the ancient rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, In ipsa Catholica Ecclesia
magnopere curandum est, vt id teneamus, quoth vbique quoth semper quod ab omnibus
creditu^, hoc est enim vere proprieque Catholicum quoth ipsa vis nominis raticque
declarat Vince^t. Lyrin. c. 3.
In the Catholic Church we ought to be careful, to hold that which has
been believed in all places, at all times, and of all persons, for that is
truly and properly Catholic, which the force and reason of the name does
declare. Those men therefore which assume the name of Catholic, and accurse
all those, who receive not Traditions with equal reverence and authority with
the Scriptures; let them prove that their doctrinall Traditions, (before named)
have been ever held and believed at all times, in all places, and of all
persons; let them prove they were received with the uniform consent of
Fathers, let them prove they were decreed in a constant succession from age to
age, from Christians to Christians throughout the whole universal Church. These
are requisite conditions, and ancient characters of Apostolic Traditions: But
that there are any such, or ever were in the Chuch of Rome, excepting those
only which are expressly, or by necessary consequence deduced from the word
of God, although they are daily pretended by them, yet to this day were never
proved. And hence it is, that for want of sure footing and foundation in the
Scriptures, many Rituall Traditions, and Observations of the ancient Church are
changed, and many doctrinall Traditions and Constitutions of the Roman Church
are newly brought in, which are pretended to be ancient.

Touching Rituall Traditions, (...). Bass. de Spirit. sanct. ca. 27.
Saint Basil tells us: It was not lawful for any man to kneel in the Church
upon the Sunday: and this Traditionn (says he) was given unto us in secret
charge by the Apostles of Christ. Yet this Tradition is altered. St. Austen
says, Between Easter and Whitsuntide it was not lawful for any man to fast,
Aug. ad Casulanum.
by the Tradition of the Apostles: yet this Tradition is abrogated. Sententiae
haec infantibus Eucharistiam esse necessariam cerciter sexentos annos viguit in
Ecclesia. Mald. Com. in John 6.
The giving of the Eucharist to Infants, was an ancient Tradition, and
continued in the Church six hundred years after Christ, says Maldonat: yet
this Tradition is abolished. And as touching the doctrinall Traditions and
Constitutions of their Church, (which are made of equal authority with the
Scripture,) you shall scarcely find any of them; I say confidently, you shall
find none of them to have been received de Fide, as Articles of faith, with
the Universality of Churches, the consent of Fathers, and continued succession
of the now received doctrine in all ages.

That this may the more plainly apeare, I will examine the Tenets of the
Papal Traditions ab Initio, and see what the Roman Church in general, and
the Greek Church in particular, (which for many hundred years communicated in
the same Faith with the Roman) has taught and believed concerning their
doctrine.

SECT. VIII. The most general pretended Traditions of the Roman Church, were
utterly unknown to the Greek Church, and want Antiquity, Universality, and
Succession, the proper marks of true Traditions in the Roman Church.
TO examine the foundation of the Greek Church, let us look up to the time of
the Apostles, where we shall find S. John writing to the seven Churches in
Asia; Revel. 1 11
and Saint Paul sending his Epistles to the Corinthians, to the Ephesians, to
the Thessalonians, all principal members of the Greek Church. In these
Churches, according to the doctrine of the Apostles, there is nothing that
makes for the now Roman Faith and Doctrine, but rather against it: and that
the Romanists may not vainly arrogate to themselves the title of Catholic and
Universal Church, (as if the whole Christian Faith were confined to the Bishop
of Rome and his Diocese) it is plain and evident, that Saint Peter taught the
word at Antioch, Saint Andrew in Greece and Muscouie, Saint James in Judea,
Saint John in Asia, Saint Philip in Assyria, Saint Thomas in India, Saint
Matthew in Aethiopia, Saint Thaddeus in Armenia, Saint Paul in all the
countries from Arabia to Slauonia, St. Bartholomew in Scythia, Saint Simon in
Persia, Joseph of Arimathea in Great Britain: and all these published the same
Faith for substance which we at this day profess in the Church of England.

Look upon the Greek Church in general: Terra Graecorum vndique destinata
est fides. Aug. Ep. 178. and Ep. 170.
Saint Austen tells us, From the land of Grecia, the faith into all places was
spread abroad: and in particular, Saint Chrysostom tells us, The name of
Christians beginning first from the city of Antioch, as from a spring, has
flowed over the whole world. And without doubt, that famous City in Greece
gave the first name and title to the Christians, and therefore was called,
Theopolis, Antioch.
the City of God.

It cannot be denied, that the Eastern Church is before Rome in time, she
has larger bounds, and multitudes of people, almost all the Apostolic Seas,
most of the Patriarchs, seven Universal Counsels, the Syrian language wherein
Christ spoke, the Greek, wherein the Scripture of the New Testament was
written, and withal a personal Succession, even from the Apostles themselves
without interruption; and that which is known to the meanest Grecian, (...).
the words of Church, of Bishop, of Priest, of Deacon, of Baptism, of
Eucharist, of Christian, are al derived from the Greeks, and prove that
Religion came from them, from whom those terms were borrowed. This doctrine is
so true, that it enforced the Bishop of Bitonto to profess openly in the
Council of Trent. Eia igitur, Graecia Matter nostra, cui id totu^ debet quod
habet Latina Ecclesia. Conc. Trid. orat. Episc. Bitont.
It is our Mother Grecia, unto whom the Latin Church (or the Church of Rome)
is beholding for all that ever she has. And thus much touching the foundation
of the Greek Church. Now that we may the better discern the Antiquity of our
Religion, and the Novelty of the Roman, let us examine the Tenets of the
Greek Church, and by them we shall discern whether the Roman church has
continued visible in that doctrine which she now teaches, and consequently
whether their pretended Apostolic Traditions have Antiquity, Universality,
and Succession in all ages.

Matthias Illiricus, being borne in Dalmatia, not far from the confines of
Graecia, and therefore may be thought to be well acquainted with their orders,
tells us: The Churches of Grecia, the Churches of Asia, Macedonia, Misia,
Valachia, Russia, Muscouia, and Africa joined thereunto, that is to say, in a
manner the whole world, or at least the greater part thereof, never granted the
Popes Supremacy, never allowed either Purgatory, or Private Masses, or the
Communion under one kind; we may add to these, Transubstantiation, Prayer in
an unknown tongue, Forbidding of marriage to Priests, and Popish Invocation of
Saints, (as it is now believed) were utterly unknown to the Greek Church, and
consequently want Antiquity, Universality and Succession, the proper marks
of true Traditions in the Roman Church. To examine them in order.

The Popes Supremacie] is a Tradition Apostolical, and declared for an Article
of Faith in the Roman Church; yet this Tradition wants Antiquity,
Universality and Succession.

Nemo decessoru^ meoru^ hoc tam prophano vocabulo vti co^sueuit-Nullus
Romanorum Pontificum hoc singula ritatis nome^ assumpsit. Greg. lib. 4. ep. 76.
and 80
Touching Antiquity,] Pope Gregory 600 years after Christ, professes
publicly, That none of his predecessors did ever assume that profane
(Universal) title.

Touching Vniuersalitie] Aluarez tells us, that Prester John sent unto him, to
know why the Pope divided the Churches of Antioch and and Rome, seeing the
Church of Antioch was in a manner the chief, and head of all Churches, Cathol.
Trad. page
wherein St. Peter governed and dwelt 5 years. Whereunto when he answered,
they were obliged by an Article of their faith; he replied; If the Pope would
usurp so great a prerogative, as to command things unlawful, they would make
no reckoning of it: and if by such means their Abuna, (their Primate) would
presume so far, they would burn the copy of such a command. In like manner
Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, tells us, Nilus lib. 1. de Primat. Papae.
The Greek Church, though it never denied the primacy of Order to the Pope of
Rome, yet their assumed predominance of authority it always resisted.

Touching Succession] Bellarmine himself confesses, Bell. in Praefat. de Romans
Pontif.
The first who most earnestly withstood the Supremacy of the Bishops of Rome,
seem to be the Grecian Fathers: for since the year 381, they labored to
prefer the Bishop of Constantinople, the three Patriarchs of the East, in the
second place next to the Bishop of Rome; and this (says he) may be understood
by the second General Council. And as in this Council of Constantinople,
there was a resistance made against the power and jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome: so likewise he tells us further, that in the year 451, Bell. ibide^.
the Greek Fathers not being content with their determination, labored to
make the Bishop of Constantinople equal with the Bishop of Rome: for in the
Council of Chalcedon, the Greek Fathers decreed it, (but deceitfully) in the
absence of the Popes Legate, that the Bishop of Constantinople should have the
second place after the Bishop of Rome: notwithstanding he should have equal
privileges with the other. Thus two general Counsels, the one consisting of
150 Bishops, the other of 630, by the testimonies of the Popes Cardinal,
opposed the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the which Supremacy (if in those
days) it had been received for an Article of faith, or a Tradition
Apostolic, without doubt those two famous Councels would have subscribed to
it, without any resistance or opposition to the universal Head of the Church.
And that you may yet further know the Churches of Asia, and Grecia, continued
their Resolution in this point, Conc. Florentinum. An. 1436.
look upon the late Council of Florence, and there you shall observe, Paulus
Aemilius Pantalcon.
that Michael Palaeologus, by reason he submitted himself to the Pope in that
Council, was hated of all the people while he lived, and being dead, was
forbidden Christian burial. And Isidorus, the Archbishop of Kiouia in Russia,
Math a Michonia in Nouo Orb Jewel. p. 411
for that he began for Unities sake, to move the people to the like
submission, was therefore deposed of his Bishopric and put to death.

Thus the Popes Supremacy, wants Antiquity, Universality, and Succession,
the proper marks of Roman Traditions, and consequently can be no Article of
Faith, no Apostolic Tradition, as is pretended in this first point.

Purgatorie] is reputed a Tradition Apostolical, and received in the Roman
Church for an Article of Faith; yet this doctrine wants Antiquity,
Universality and Succession.

Touching Antiquitie] Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, professes in the name
of the Greek Church, that it could be no Tradition Apostolical: for (says
he) We have not received by Tradition from our Fathers, Nil. de Purgat. igne.
C^th. Trad. q. 16.
that there is any fire of Purgatory, or any temporal punishment; and we know
that the Eastern Church does not believe it. And amongst other reasons why
Purgatory was not received by them, Marcus Ephesians in Graecorum Apolog. de igne
Purgatorio ad Council. Florentinum.
they render this for one: that whereas their Fathers had delivered unto them
many visions and dreams, and other wonders concerning the everlasting
punishment (in hell) yet none of them had declared any thing concerning the
temporary fire of Purgatory.

Legate qui velit Graecoru^ veteru^ Co^mentarios et nullum quantum opinor aut
qua^ rarissime de Purgatorio sermone^ inueniet. Sed neque Latini simul omnes at
sensim huius rei veritatem conceperunt neque ta^ necessaria fuit, sieve
Purgatorii, five Indulgentiaru^ fides in Primitiua Ecclesia at que nunc est
Roffen A^t. 18 p. 496.
Touching Vniuersalitie] It is the confession of Fisher, their own Bishop of
Rochester: Whosoever will read the Commentaries of the ancient Greeks, so
far as I see, he shall find very seldom mention of Purgatory, or none at
all: and the Latins (in the Western Church) did not receive the truth of this
matter altogether, but by little and little; neither indeed was the faith,
either of Purgatory, or Indulgences so needful in the Primitive Church, as
now it is. A strange confession of a learned Bishop, that two principal
Articles of Faith (viz.) Purgatory, and Indulgences, were scarce known in the
ancient Church, nor yet very necessary to be received at all times, and of all
persons. Let it suffice, many points of the now Roman Religion were utterly
unknown to the Greek Church, (which in the first ages did wholly communicate
with the ancient Roman Faith:) and therefore their Alphonsus a Castro, thinks
it the best way to solue the point in question with this answer: Vnus ex
notissimis erroribus Graecoru^ et Armenoru^ est, quo docent nullum esse
purgatoriu^ locum quo animae ab hac luce migrantes purgentur a sordibus. Alph.
a Cas. aduers. haeres. lib. 12.
It is one of the most known errors of the Grecians, and Armenians, whereby
they teach there is no place for Purgatory, where souls after this life are
purged from their offenses.

Touching Succession] St. Chrysostom, Gregory, Neocaesaria, Olympiodorus, and
diverse ancient Fathers were utterly ignorant of it; and Saint Austen a Latin
Father was so far from receiving it as a point of Faith, that doubtingly he
professes, Tale aliquid etiam post ha^c vita^ fieri incredibile no^ est, et
vtru ita s^ quaer^ potest, and aut ^^en^^ ^u^latere. Aug. in Enchirid. ad
Laurent. cap. 69.
It is not incredible, that some such thing should be after this life; and
whether it be so or no, it may be^ a question: and it may be either found, or
be hidden. (...) we all know, and confess, that if Saint Austen and the
Roman Church, had received the doctrine of Purgatory in his days, (as it is
now taught for an Article of Faith) certainly he would never have told us,
perhaps it is so, it may be, or it may not be; and it is a doubt whether there
be any such place or no. And howsoever it is pretended, that the Greek Church
at the Council of Florence, for peace sake, was content to yield, that the
middle sort of souls were in a place of punishment; but whether that were
fire, or darkness, and tempest, or something else, they would not contend:
yet, I say, if they had assented to this or the like doctrine, it was (1400)
years after Christ, and therefore most unfit to be received for an Article of
Faith: but the truth is, Marcus Bishop of Ephesus, who was one of the Legates of
the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, would never consent to this Doctrine;
neither could the Greek Church afterward by any means be drawn to yield to
it. Besides, within two years after, Cardinal Cusanus, and the Deputies of
the Council of Basil, in the year 1438, do sufficiently manifest the opinion
of the Greek Church; wherein the Grecians begin their disputation in this
manner: Mart. Crus. in Turc. Graec. p. 186
A Purgatory fire, and a punishment by fire which is temporal, and shall at
last have an end; neither have we received from our Doctors, neither do we
know that the Church of the East d^eth maintain it. And from these and the
like propositions, they make this peremptory conclusion. (...). Ibid. Sacran.
c. 2.
For these reasons therefore, neither have we hitherto affirmed any such
thing, neither will we at all affirm it. I may add to these Testimonies the
opinions of the Muscouites, who affirm that there is no Purgatory, but only
two receptacles for souls, Heaven and Hell. Again, the Cophites, and the
Abissines, the Georgians, and Armenians, together with the Syrians and
Caldeans, that are subject to the Patriarchs of Antioch and Babylon, from
Cyprus and Palestina, unto the East Indies, never made discovery of the new
found land of Purgatory.

This doctrine therefore wants the proper marks of the Roman Church, (viz.)
Antiquity, Universality, and Succession, and therefore can be no Article of
faith, no Apostolic Tradition, as is pretended in the second point.

Private Masse] wherein the Priest alone does communicate without the people,
has neither Antiquity, Universality, nor Consent, and consequently has not
the true marks of Romish Traditions.

Touching Antiquitie] it is the confession of their own Cochleus; Coch. de
sacrif. Missae contra Musculum.
Anciently all the Priests and people did communicate together, as appears by
the Canons of the Apostles, and writings of ancient Fathers. Odo in Exposit.
Canonis.
And Odo Cameracensis professes, that in the Primitive Church they never had
Masses without the conuention of the people to communicate together.

Touching Vniuersalitie] it is the confession of Johannes Hoffmeistenus:
Cassand. Consult. de solit. Miss. page 906.
The thing it self does speak and cry aloud, both in the Greek and Latin
Church, that not only the sacrificing Priest, but the other Priests and
Deacons, and the rest of the people, or at least some part of the people, did
communicate together: and how this custom ceased, it is to be wondered, and it
is to be endeavored, that this good custom may be restored to the Church.

Touching Succession] St. Chrysostom speaking to the lay people of his time,
Chrysostom in 2. Thessal. Hom. 4.
says: Neither do we receive more, and you less of the holy table, but we
taste thereof equally both together. And St. Basil an other Greek Father
witnesses the common union of Priests and people expressly in these words:
Liturg. Basilii.
All we receiving of one bread and one cup, etc. the Quire sings the
Communion, and so they communicate together. I will add to these the
confessions of their own learned Authors: Cardinal Bessarion, a Greek borne,
declares the manner of the Communion in his time; Primu^ consecrare, deinde
fra^gere postea distribuere, quod nos in praesenti facimus Bessar. de sacr.
Euch. An 1450.
The very order of the things required: first that we should consecrate, (or
bless bread:) next, that we should break it, last of all, that we should
divide (or deliver it to the people) which thing we (Grecians) do at this
present day. And for a conclusion of this point, Justinian and Durand publicly
declare and profess, that in ancient times, Justin. in 1. Cor 10. Durand. Rat.
4 c. 53.
diverse parts of one consecrated loaf were distributed to all, (the which the
Greek Church uses at this day) that by their Communion, their union with
Christ might be more plainly expressed.

Thus Private Mass wants the requisite conditions of the Roman Church, (viz.)
Antiquity, Universality, and Succession; and therefore can be no Catholic
doctrine, no Apostolic Tradition, as is pretended in the third place.

The Communion in one kind] is reputed a Tradition Apostolical, and received
in the Roman Church for an Article of Faith; yet this doctrine wants
Antiquity, Universality, and Succession.

Touching Antiquitie] It is the confession of the Council of Constance (where
the Cup was taken from the people) that Christ did institute in both kinds,
Council. Constable. 1414.
and the Primitive Church did continue it to the faithful in both kinds. And
Alphonsus a Castro tells us, Alphons a Castr. cont ^aeres. li. 6.
that anciently for many ages, the Communion in both kinds was used among all
Catholics.

Touching Vniuersalitie] Cassander witnesses, Satis compertum est vniuersale^
Christi Ecclesia^ mill amplius. Cassand. Consult. de vtraque specie.
that the universal Church at this day, and the Roman Church for more then a
thousand years after Christ, did exhibit the Sacrament in both kinds, as it
is most evident by innumerable testimonies both of Greek and Latin Fathers.

Touching Succession] In later ages, Salmeron the Jesuit professes, Salmer.
Tract. 35.
It was the general custom for lay people to communicate under both kinds, as
at this day it is used among the Grecians, and was used in times past among the
Corinthians, and in Africa. And Jeremy the Oecumenicall Patriarch, returns
this answer to the defenders of the Faith in both kinds: (...). Patr. resp.
1. c. 21.
Dicitis, you say, that all ought to communicate under both kinds, and you say
well: for we do so when we participate of the venerable mysteries.

Cassand. Liturg. c. 11 p. 28.
Franciscus Aluarez tells us, that in the kingdom of Prester John, they use in
their Church to make a cake of honey, meal, and oil, and power wine into the
cup, and all that communicate of the body of Christ, communicate also of the
Cup.

The Christians in Armenia, Idem Liturg c. 14. p 32.
after they have communicated with bread, in lieu of the cup, by reason there
is no wine in India, they take dried grapes, and put them into water; and
before the time they are to communicate, they press them, and strain them,
and use that liquor instead of wine.

This doctrine therefore wants the requisite conditions of Antiquity,
Universality, and Succession; and therefore can be no Article of Faith, no
Apostolic Tradition, as is presented in the fourth place.

Transubstantiation.
TRansubstantiation] is reputed a Tradition Apostolical, and received in the
Roman Church for an Article of Faith, yet this doctrine, if you respect the
name, or nature of it, wants Antiquity, Universality, and Succession.

In Primitiua Ecclesia de substa^tia fidei erat corpus Christi sub speciebus
co^tineri, tamen non erat de fide, substantiam panisin corpus Christi co^uerti
etc. Io. Yribarne in 4. d. 11. q. 3. disp. 42. Vnum addit Scotus quod
minimeprobandum quoth ante Lateranense Co^cilium non fuisset dogma fidei. Bell.
li. 3. de Euch. c. 23.
Touching Antiquitie] It is the confession of learned Yribarne: In the Primitive
Church, it was believed for a point of faith, that the body of Christ was
contained under the forms of bread and wine, but it was not believed as a
matter of faith, that after consecratition, the substance of the bread was
converted into the body of Christ. And their learned Scotus professes, that
before the Council of Lateran (which was twelve hundred years after Christ)
Transubstantiation was not believed as a point of faith.

Touching Vniuersalitie] Eusebius a Greek Father, paraphrasing upon the words
of Christ; (The words which I speak unto you, are spirit and life) delivers
this doctrine flat contrary to Transubstantiation: (...) Eusebius. l. 3. Eccl.
Theol. cont. Marcel. Ancyr. M ss. in Oxon. Bibli. publica.
Do not think that I speak of that flesh wherewith I am compassed, as if you
must eat of that; neither imagine that I command you to drink my sensible and
bodily blood, but understand well, the words which I have spoken unto you, are
spirit and life. And Saint Chrisostom a principal member of the Greek Church,
in his Epistle written to Caesarius, has these words; Etiamsi natura panis in
ipso permansit. Chrysostom. ad Caesarium Monachum
As before the bread be sanctified, we call it bread, but when Gods grace has
sanctified it, by the means of the Priest, it is delivered from the name of
bread, and is reputed worthy the name of the Lords body, although the nature of
the bread remain still in it. And to prevent that gross opinion, that after
consecration, there remain only the shows and accidents of bread and wine;
Theodoret concludes against the heretic with this Catholic doctrine:
(...). Theod. in Dial. 2. Inconf.
The mystical signs, after the consecration, depart not from their own
nature; for they remain in their former substance.

Euphraemius Patriarch of Antioch, gives his joint assent with us flatly
against the doctrine of Transubstantiation, he tells us: Ephrae de sacr.
Antio. legibus lib. 1. in Phocij Biblio^heca Cod. 229.
The Sacrament of the body of Christ does neither depart from his sensible
substance, and yet remains undivided from intelligible grace: and Baptism
being wholly made spiritual, and remaining one, does retain the property of
his sensible substance (of water I mean) and yet loses not that which it is
made. This holy Father, by comparing the Sacraments together, does demonstrate
the faith of both; and as he proves that in the Sacrament of Baptism, the
substance of water still remains after consecration, (which both Papists and
Protestants acknowledge) in like manner (says he) the substance of bread
remains in the Sacrament of the Eucharist after consecration, which the
Protestants confess, and the Papists deny.

To omit many other proofs touching the universality of our doctrine, let
Pope Gelasius be heard for the Catholic doctrine of the Roman Church in his
time. Gelas. cont. Eutich.
An Image or similitude (says he) of the body and blood of Christ, is
celebrated in the action of the mysteries: It is therefore apparent and evident
enough, that we must hold the same opinion of Christ the Lord which we
profess, celebrate and receive in his image: that as those signs by the
working of the holy Ghost pass into the divine substance, and yet remain in
the propriety of their own nature: even so that very principal mystery it
self, whose force and truth that Image assuredly represents, does
demonstrate one whole and true Christ, to continue the two natures, of which he
consists properly remaining. And that we might the bettter understand what
he meant by those words, (viz.) The signs still abide in the propriety of
their own nature, he expounds himself in these words, which utterly
overthrow the doctrine of Transubstantiation: Non desinit esse substantia, vel
natura panis and vini: the substance or nature of bread cease not, or
perishes not. Thus briefly I have given you a taste of the general doctrine
of the Fathers in the first ages, who publicly professed the Protestant Faith,
that the Eucharist was altogether a spiritual food, and that the nature of
bread, and the very substance of bread did remain after consecration.

Touching Succession] To let pass many Writers of eminent note in the Roman
Church, who in the later ages opposed Transubstantiation, as namely Bertram,
Aelfrick, Rupertus, Rabanus Maurus, and diverse others, who were never condemned
by their own Church: Look upon the doctrine of the Greek Church, and you
shall find they have kept the ancient faith of the Sacrament successively from
their Predecessors. Pope Eugenius, after he had answered the Grecians at the
Council of Florence, that he was well satisfied by them touching the
Procession of the holy Ghost: Operae pretium est vt de Purgatorio igne, and de
summo Pontificis principatu, et de Azimo et ferme^tato pane agamus, vt omni ex
part coniunctio nostra sit absoluta. Con. Florent. Sess. 25.
tells them further, it was well worth the labor, to treat of other points in
difference, as namely, of Purgatory, of the Supremacy, of Leauened bread, and
of Transubstantiation, that their agreement might stand absolute in all
respects. If Transubstantiation, and the other points of doctrine had bin
successively received with the uniform consent of the Greek Church, there had
needed no reconciliation at that time between the Eastern and Western
Churches for those Tenets: and that we might yet farther understand, the
difference betwixt them was great in this very question; Marcus the Archbishop
of Ephesus, speaking of the Roman Mass, Casaub. answ. to the Ep. of C. Peron
p. 42.
affirms: It is manifestly repugnant to the Expositions and interpretations,
which we have received by Tradition, and to the words of our Lord, and to the
meaning of those words. And those which defend the Roman Rites concerning this
matter, the same Marcus pronounces: that they deserve to be pitied, both in
regard of their double ignorance, and their profound sottishnes.

It is true, (...).
the Greek Church does hold there is a mystical transmutation in the
Sacrament; but withal, they deny a Transubstantiation: they deny that any
alteration is made by the words of consecration, (which is the general Tenet
of the Roman Church:) nay more, they call it bread after the words of
Consecration are uttered. Touching the first, Salmeron the Jesuit, speaking in
the person of the Grecians, delivers their opinion in this manner. Dan. Cha^.
Panstr. lib. 6 de Euch. c. 7
Forasmuch as the Benediction is not superfluous or vain, neither gave Christ
simply bread, it follows, that when he gave it, the transmutation was already
made, and those words, (This is my body) did demonstrate what was contained in
the bread, not what was made by them. De diuino denique sacrificio quaesitum
est a latinis, quomodo prolatu^ Christi verbu, accipite et comedite, hoc est
enim corpus meu^ -- vos ha^c postea orationem additis dicentes. Et fac quidem
hunc panem pretiosum corpus Christi tui sancto tuo spiritu transmutans. Council.
Florent. Sess. 25. p. 595. Binius.
This confession is agreeable to that question the Romanists put to the
Grecians at the Council of Florence, (viz.) Why they used to pray after the
words of Consecration in this manner? Make this bread the precious Body of
Christ; and so call it bread after Consecration? To which the Grecians made
answer. We confess, by these words, (This is my body) (...), the bread is
consecrated, (which Binius most falsely has translated, Transubstantiated) and
becomes the body of Christ, and we pray that the holy Ghost may descend upon
us, and change the bread, and make it the body of Christ to us, to the
spiritual food of our souls. Transubstantiari.
And that we may know what is meant by that change or transmutation in the
Sacrament, Binius in Conc. Flor. Sess. 25. p. 695.
the Patriarch tells us: The body and blood of Christ are truly mysteries;
Patr Resp. 1 ca. 10. and 13.
not that these ((...)) are changed into humane flesh, but we into them. And
for further confirmation of our doctrine, that it is not the real and
substantial flesh of Christ which is offered: but the Sacrament of his flesh;
Nec data est t^c ^aro Domini qua^ gestebat Apostolis comedenda, neque sanguis
bibe^dus, nec etiam nunc in sacro hoc ritu descendit Dominicum corpus de coelo,
(...) blasphemia enim hoc esset. patr Resp. 1 cap. 10. de Coena Domini.
he tells us: The flesh of Christ which he carried about him, was not given
to his Apostles to be eaten, nor his blood to be drunk, neither does the
body of our Lord at this day descend from heaven in the Sacrament; for this
(says he) were blasphemy. And certainly, if neither Christ's Body in which
he suffered, nor his body glorified be present in the Sacrament, (as this
Patriarch professes) there can be no corporal, no real and substantial
presence of that or any other body, and consequently no Transubstantiation, no
Article of Faith, no Apostolic Tradition, as is pretended in the fifth place.

Prayer in an unknown tongue.
PRayer and Service in an unknown tongue] is a Tradition of the Roman Church,
and reputed of equal authority with the Scripture, yet this doctrine wants
Antiquity, Universality and Succession.

Touching Antiquitie] Cassander tells us; Cassan. Liturg. c. 28.
The Canonical prayers, especially the words of Consecration of the body and
blood of Christ, the ancient Fathers did so read it, that all the people might
understand it, and say Amen. And it is the confession of Mr. Harding to Bishop
Jewel: Jewel. in 3. A^t Diu^s 28.
Verily in the primitive Church, (prayer and service in a known tongue) was
necessary when faith was a learning, and therefore the prayers were made then
in a common tongue known to the people, for cause of their instruction. And
Card. Bellarmine professes, Bell. de ver. Dei. l. 2. c. 16
that all the people in the first ages, in the time of divine Service did
answer one Amen, as understanding the Priest, and joining with him in prayer.

Touching Vniuersalitie] It was the custom of the ancient Church (as appears
by the Popes Decretals) whereby it was publicly proclaimed: Decr. Greg. lib.
tit. 31. de offic. Iud. Ord. ca. 14.
We command that the Bishops of such cities and Diocesses, (where nations are
mingled together) provide meet men to minister the holy Service, according to
the diversity of their manners and languages.

Touching Succession] Bellarmine confesses, Bell. de ver. Dei. l. 2. c. 16.
that the custom of celebrating divine Service in a known tongue, whereby the
people answered the Priest, continued long in the East and West Churches. And
it plainly appears by the ancient Liturgies, ascribed to Chrysostom and
Basil, (which are in use at this day) the divine Service in the Greek Church
was publicly delivered in a known tongue. And agreeably to this custom, the
Armenians, Egyptians, Acthiopians, Muscouites, and generally all the Eastern
Churches, do consecrate the Sacrament in the language of their own country.

This doctrine therefore wants the requisite conditions of Antiquity,
Universality, and Succession; and therefore can be no Apostolic Tradition,
no Catholic doctrine, as is pretended in the sixth place.

Single life in the Clergy.
Single life in the Clergie] is reputed a Tradition in the Roman Church, and
made of equal authority with the Scripture, yet this doctrine wants
Antiquity, Universality and succession.

Touching Antiquity,] Their own Doctors tell us, Did. 84. Cum in praeterito,
and Nichol. Cusan. ad Boem. Ep. 2. post aliquot tempora visum fuit etc.

Nec ratione nec authoritate probatur quod absolute loque^do Ordo Sacerdotalis
vel in quantu^ est Ordo, vel in quantu^ sacer est, impeditivus est matrimonii
sieve ante, sieve post, seclusis omnibus legibus, stando tantu^ his quae a
Christo and Apostolis haebentur.

Caiet Tom 1. tract. 27.


that until the time of Pope Syricius, that is to say, for the space welneere
of four hundred years after Christ, it was lawful for all Priests to marry,
without exception, neither vow, nor promise, nor Law, nor ordinance, nor other
restraint being then to the contrary. And their learned Cardinan Cajetan
professes. If we stand only to the Tradition of Christ and his Apostles, it
cannot appear by any authority or reason, that holy Order can be any
hindrance to marriage, either as it is an order, or as it is holy.

Touching Vniuersalitie] It is the confession of Pope Stephen the second. The
Tradition of the Eastern Churches is one, the Tradition of the holy Church of
Rome is an other, for the Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons of the Eastern
Churches are joined in Matrimony. Did. 31. Aliter.
This confession is agreeable to the Decree of the ancient Council holden at
Ancyra, where it was ordained, Hii, si post modu^ vxoores duxerint, in
Ministerio maneant. Council. Ancyr. Can. 9.
That Deacons, as many as be ordered, if at the time of receiving their Orders,
they made protestation, and said that they would marry, for that they find not
themselves able so to continue without Marriage, if they afterward marry, let
them continue in the Ministry.

Touching Succession] This doctrine was not generally received, no not in the
Western Churches, a thousand years after Christ: for in the time of King
Rufus, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Dialogue between the Master, and
the Scholar, makes this Quaere: Desideramus certificari tua solutio ne super
vul gari in toto orb, quaestine; quae ab omnibus quotidie ventilatur, (scil.)
An liceat Presbyteris post acceptu^ Ordine^ vx ores ducere. Anselm. Di al.
Inquisitione prima.
We are desirous by your answer, to be certified about this common question,
that is now tossed through the world, and yet lies undiscussed, (I mean)
Whether a Priest being within Orders may marry a wife. Whereby it appears,
that the Law of Single life, was a point questionable, and not resolved for an
Apostolic Tradition in the Roman Church for many ages. About 400 years
after, Bell. de scri Eccles. ab An. 1400. to 1500. p. 288.
Panormitan, an Archbishop, a Cardinal, and a principal Proctor for the Pope,
resolves the question about marriage in this manner. Si clare co^stet de
matrimonio Papa, tunc aut vxor inducetur ad co^tinentia^, aut si noluerit,
reddaet debitum, and nihilo minus stet in Papatu, quia non repugnat substantiae
Papatus, seu Clericatus, na^ et Petrus habebat vxore^ cu^ promoueretur in Papam
-- vnde videmus quoth Presbyteri Graeci sine peccato contrahunt matrimoni um.
Extr. ce Elect. C. licet de vita^d Abb. Patriarch. resp. 1. c. 21.
If it may clearly appear (says he) that the Pope has a wife, (as having
married her before he was Pope) then either his wife must be persuaded to
live single, or if she will not, let the Pope yield her marriage duties; and
yet nevertheless remain in the Popedom still. For marriage duty is not
contrary to the substance and Office, neither of Popedom, nor of Priesthood:
for Peter had a wife when he was promoted to be Pope. As for the rule of
single life, it was brought in by the Ordinance of the Church. Hence is it,
that we see the Priests of Graecia being within Orders, do marry wives, and
we see they do it (sine peccato) without sin, or breach of Law, either of
God or man.

Look upon the confession of the Greek Patriarch since Luthers time. We allow
(says he) marriage to Priests before Ordination. Look upon the confession of
their own Cardinal Caietan: Caiet. tract 27. test. Greg. de Val. disp. 9. q 5.
It was held lawful in the Eastern Church, to marry after Ordination. Add
to these the Traditions of other Countries, as namely the Priests in India, in
Armenia, in Syria, in Russia, in Cyprus, in Muscouia, daily marry, and execute
their offices of Priesthood, being married persons.

The Law therefore of single life wants the requisite conditions of Antiquity,
universality, and Succession, and consequently can be no Apostolical
Tradition, no Catholic Doctrine, as is pretended in the seventh place.

Invocation and worship of Saints.
Invocation and Worship of Saints] Is reputed a Tradition Apostolical, and is
received for an Article of faith in the Roman Church: yet this faith,
(notwithstanding their great braggs of Catholic doctrine) wants Antiquity,
Universality, and Succession.

Apostoli scribere hoc in sacris literis noluerunt ne ambitiosi viderentur
honorem istum sibi ipsis ambire, ne sub cultu illo defu^ctoru^ Ge^tilium cultum
infer viderentur. Ecch. Ench. cap. de vener. Sanct.
Touching Antiquitie] I appeal to their own Ecchius: The Apostles (says he)
would not insert this doctrine into the written word, lest they should seem
ambitiously to assume that honor to themselves, and under pretense of
worshipping the dead, might bring in the worship of the Gentiles. This doctrine
then, as it wants a foundation in scripture, (which a point of faith ought to
have) so likewise it is most certain, for the same reason, the Apostles would
not deliver it by Tradition: for without doubt they would never teach that
doctrine of faith by word of mouth, which they refused to publish by their
writings. This is not only probable, but certain true; and therefore Ignatius,
the Apostle St. John's Scholar, who could not be ignorant of a point of Faith,
teaches the virgins of that time another lesson, he does not teach them to
direct their prayers and supplications to Saints and Angels, but to the
Trinity (only.) O ye Virgins (says he) in your prayers set Christ (only)
before your eyes, Virgins solum Christu^ in precibus vestris ante oculos
habete et Patre^ illius, illuminata a spiritu. Ignat. ad Philadelph.
and his Father, being enlightened by the Spirit. And the Church of Rome being
conscious of such an ancient Evidence against their Angel-worship, in the
Greek Original have turned (...) into (...) Prayers into Souls. Ignat Lugd
impress. An. 1572.


Touching Vniuersalitic] Iraeneus Bishop of Lions, tells us, that in his days,
the Church per vniuersum mundum, Ecclesia per vniuersum mundum -- nec
Inuocationibus Angelicis facit aliquid, nec etc. Iren. l. 2. c. 57.
throughout the whole world, does nothing by Inuocations of Angels, nor by
Incantations, nor any wicked curiosity, but decently, comely and manifestly
directs her prayers to God which has made all, and calls upon the Name of
our Lord Jesus. And Tertullian, a learned Father in the Church of Africa, makes
this open profession of his faith. Quacunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt
haec ab alio orare, non possum, qua^ a quo scio me consequaturu^, quoniam et
ipse est qui so^ praesta^^ et ego famulus eius qui eu^ solu^ obseruo. In Apol.
ca. 30.
Whatsoever are the wishes of man or Prince, these things I can ask of no
other, then of him, from whom I know I shall obtain them, because he alone it
is, who performs these things, and I am his servant, who depend upon him
alone.

Touching Succession] In Origens time this Trent faith was unknown: for when
Celsus the Philosopher (began to play the Romanists) and said of Angels: They
belong to God, and in that respect we are to put our trust in them, and make
oblations to them, according to the Laws, and pray unto them, and that they
may be favorable unto us. Origin makes him this answer: Origin. li. 8 contr.
Celsu^
Away with Celsus his counsel, saying, We must pray to Angels; let us not so
much as afford any little audience to it. For we must pray to him alone, who
is God over all; and we must pray to the Word of God his only begotten, and
the first borne of all creatures, and we must entreat him, that he as high
Priest, would present our prayer (when it is come to him) unto his God, and our
God, and unto his Father, and the Father of them that frame their life
according to the word of God.

In the succeeding Age, the ancient Council of Laodicea decreed, Conc. Laodic.
Can 36.
We ought not to leave the Church of God, and invocate Angels. And the Roman
Church being likewise conscious of this Evidence against their Invocation of
Angels, have turned Angelos into Angulos: saying, Merlin. fol. 68. Edit. 1530
and Crabbe fol. 226 Edit. 1538.
We must not leave the Church of God, and have recourse to Angles (or
corners.) This Council was called in the year 364, in Laodicea, a capital
City in Phrygia, where this Angel-worship was frequent, wherein they had
Oratories and Chapels to pray to St. Michael, the chief Captain of Gods host
among them. This Canon of the Council, Photius does note to have been made
against the Angelites, Phot. Nomocanon. tit. 12. c. 9. Aug. de haeres. cap. 39.
those heretics that were inclined to the worship of Angels. And Theodoret, a
Greek Father, more particularly makes twice mention of this Canon, and
declares the meaning of it in these words. Theod. in Colos. 3. and in Col. 2.
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God, and the Father by him. -- The Synod of Laodicea also
following this rule, and desiring to heal that old disease, made a law, that
they should not pray unto Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. Cardinal
Baronius is not well pleased with Theodoret, for delivering his opinion
touching the sense of that council. Ex hic videas Theodoretu^ haud foeliciter
(eius pa^e dictum sit assecutum esse Pauli verborum sensum. Baron. An. Tom. 1.
An. 60.
By this you may see (says he) that Theodoret did not well understand the
meaning of Saint Paul's words. But that which is most obseruable, the pretense
which the heretics made in those days for their Angel-worship, is the chief
reason alleged for their doctrine of faith by the Romanists in these times.
Ambr. in Romans cap. 1.
We have recourse (say they) to Angels and Saints, with devotion and humility,
that by their intercession, God may be more favorable unto us. Now Saint
Ambrose complains, that the Heathen Idolaters, to cover their shame for their
neglecting of God, were wont to use this miserable excuse, that by these they
might go to God, as by Officers we go to the King. But hear what answer
he makes to the vanity of such worshippers: Ambr. ad Romans ca. 1.
Go to, is any man so mad, or so unmindful of his salvation, as to give the
Kings honor to an Officer? -- For therefore do men go to the King by
Tribunes or Officers, because the King is but a man, and knows not to whem to
commit the state of the Common wealth: but to procure the favor of God, from
whom nothing is hid, (for he knows the works of all men) we need no
spokesman, but a devout mind: for wheresoever such a one shall speak unto him,
he will answer him. But of all the Fathers, Saint Chrysostom is most
plentiful in refuting this pretended reason, of Intercession by Saints and
Angels: Chrysostom. Sermon. 7. de Paenitent.
When thou have need to sue unto men, (says he) thou art forced first to
deal with doore-keepers, and to entreat parasites and flatterers, and to go
a long way. But with God there is no such matter, without an Intercessor he is
entreated, without money, without cost he yields to the prayer. Lastly, for
an example he sets before us the woman of Canaan: Chrysostom. in dimissione
Chananaeae. tom, 5. Edit. Sauil. p. 195.
She entreats not sames (says he) she beseeches not John, neither does
she come to Peter, but break through the whole company of them, saying, I
have no need of a Mediator, but taking repentance with me for a spokesman, I
come to the Fountain it self. For this cause did he descend, for this cause
did he take flesh, that I might have the boldness to speak unto him: I have
no need of a Mediator, have thou mercy upon me.

It is true, that about this time Invocation of Saints was practiced by some
particular persons, but never till this later age received for an Article of
faith. Gregory Nazianzene was one of the first, who called unto, rather then
called upon the spirits of dead men, in his Invectiues which he wrote against
Julian the Emperor, (...).
makes this Invocation, Hear, O thou soul of Great Constantine, (if that thou
have any understanding of these things.) And in his funeral Oration, which he
made upon his sister Gorgonia, he speaks unto her in this manner: Greg. Naz.
Orat. 11 in Gorgon.
If thou have any care of the things done by us; if holy souls receive this
honor from God, that they have any feeling of such things as these, receive
this Oration of ours, instead of many, and before many funeral obsequies. The
first Invocations then were but Apostrophes at the Tombs of Saints, and those
also delivered doubtingly, with this supposition, If thou hear, if thou
do understand. Besides, Invocations at first were but wishes, and no
prayers. But if any (says Cassander) would have such compellations to be
taken also for a direct speaking to them, Cass. Ep. 19 ad Ioh. Molinaeum p.
1109. Ide^ Schol. in Hymn. Eccles operu^. page 242.
I do not gainesay it; notwithstanding I would think that a tacit condition
ought to be understood in such an intimation, as was used by Gregory
Nazianzene, that is, (if they do hear, if they do understand) or otherwise,
that is to say, All ye Saints pray unto God for me, should import as much, as
if it were said, Would to God that all the Saints should pray to God for me.

But that which is remarkable, and as I conceive, is worthy of all men's
obserseruation: Our adversaries confess, there was no Invocation of Saints
before the coming of Christ, because they were in Lymbo, and did not see God:
and therefore, it is to be noted, Bellar. de Sanct. Beat. lib. 1. c. 19.
(says Bellarmine) Because the Saints which dyed before the coming of Christ,
did not enter into heaven, neither did see God, nor could ordinarily take
knowledge of the prayers of such as should petition unto them: therefore it was
not the use in the Old Testament to say, Saint Abraham, pray for me. If this
were the only reason, why Invocation was not used in the old Law, for the same
reason we may confidently aver they ought not to produce the testimonies of
ancient Fathers since the New: for most of the Greek and Latin Fathers, did
hold that the faithful after death remained till the day of Resurrection, in
certain receptacles of Rest, without attaining the blessed vision of God.
Iren. lib. 5. Aug. Euchi. c. 108. Hill. in Psalm. 120. Ambr. de Cain and Abel.
l. 2. c. 2. Bet n. Ser. 3. de omnibus Sanctis.
Iraeneus terms them, Invisible holds, Saint Austen, Hidden Receptacles; Saint
Hyllarie, The bosom of Rest; Ambrose, Places of suspense; Bernard, Atria,
Outward Porches, or Courts. And for a further testimony of these and other
particulars, their learned Stapleton professes, Tot illi et ta^ celebres
antiqui patres Tertullianus etc. huic sententiae (quae nu^c in Concilio
Florentino magna de mu^ conquisitione facta vt dogma fidei definita est) quod
iustorum animae ante die^ iudicii Dei visione fruuntur, non sunt assensi, sed
sententiam contrariam tradideru^t Stapl def^s. Ecclesiast. authorit. cont.
Whitak. l. 1. c. 2.
That many famous ancient Fathers, (as namely) Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, Ambrose, Clemens, Romanus, and
Bernard, did not assent unto this Sentence, (which now in the Council of
Florence, was at length, after much disputing, defined as doctrine of faith)
that the souls of the righteous enjoy the sight of God before the day of
Judgment; but did deliver the contrary sentence thereunto. From hence therefore
I may infallibly conclude, that such as held that the Saints were not admitted
to the sight of God, could not well hold, that men should pray unto them in
such manner as the Romanists use now to do; because the Saints not enjoying
the sight of God, are not able ordinarily to take notice of the prayers that
are put up unto them.

Saint Austen tells us, that in his time it was a great question, Respondeo
magna^ quide^ esse quaestionum -- verum vel quatenus, vel quomodo ea quaecirca
nos aguntur, nouerint spiritus mortuoru^. Aug. in Psalm. 108. Enarrat. 1.
(and not easily to be determined) Whether at all, or how far, or after what
manner, the spirits of the dead did know the things that concerned us here.
And Anselmus Laudunensis, in his interlineal gloss upon that text; Abraham is
ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, Esa. 63. notes, that Saint Austen
says, that the dead, even the Saints, do not know what the living do, no not
their own sons.

Non proprie inuocamus Sanctos sed Deu^, non enim aut Petrus aut Paulus audit
Inuoca^tes, sed gratiae quam habent (viz. apud Deum Resp Patr ad Ger. c. 21
Add to these testimonies, the confession of the Greek Church: We do not
properly invoke Saints, but God: for neither Peter, nor Paul, hear any of
those that invoke them, but the grace and gift that they have, according to
the promise; I am with you until the end of the world: meaning, (as it may be
conceived) that the Saints hear not them that invocate them; but Christ the
Son of God, who was given unto them, and promised to be with them unto the
worlds end. Add to these opinions, the sayings of their own Schoolmen:
Scotus in 4. did 45. quaest. 4. Pet. Lomb. Sentent lib. 4 did. 45.
Scotus says, it is probable; Peter Lumbard says, It is not incredible, that
the Saints should hear our prayers. Add to the uncertainty of the Fathers
opinions; some did use wishes, and compellations, not Invocations: others
denied the Saints could take notice of their prayers, by reason they did not as
yet see God; others doubted whether they did hear when they were called upon;
Altissid. in Su^m. part. 4. l 3. tract. 7. c. de orat. quaest 6. Biel. in Ca^.
Missa Sect. 30.
others, (as namely Guilielmus Altisidorensis, and Gabriel Biel) resolved, that
neither the Saints do pray for us, neither are we to pray to them. These, (I
say) and the like reasons considered, I may safely conclude, that Invocation of
Saints wants Antiquity, Universality, and Succession; and that opinions
doubtful and uncertain, reasons probable and not incredible, are no sure
grounds for the salvation of a Christian; and therefore it is no Article of
faith, no Catholic doctrine, no Apostolic Tradition, as is pretended in the
eighth place.

Thus briefly I have showed you, that the Trent Traditions, (which are received
with the same reverence as the Scriptures themselves) want the proper marks of
their own Church. I have showed you likewise, that the Greek Church in the
principal points of controversy, is altogether different from the Roman, and
in the chiefest of those points agrees wholly with the Protestants. And for
this cause the Greek Patriarch congratulates with the Reformed Churches in
this manner: Nunc Deo omnis gratia authori gratias agimus, et latamur cum
multis aliis tum no^ minimum in hoc quod in multis vestra doctrina cum nostra
consonat Ecclesia. Patr. resp 2. in init. and resp. 1. p. 148.
We give thanks to God the Author of all grace, and we rejoice with many
others, but especially in this, that in many things your doctrine is agreeable
to our Church. And certainly, we likewise have great cause to rejoice in our
own behalf and theirs, that the Greek Church has continued the truth of our
doctrine in all ages, which plainly shows the Antiquity and Visibilitie of
our Church, in the affirmative points which we maintain, and the Novelty of
the Roman, in those Negative opinions, which we condemn.

If we look beyond Luther, we shall easily discern, that the Muscouites,
Armenians, Egyptians, Aethiopians, and diverse other countries and Nations, (all
members of the Greek Church) taught our Doctrine from the Apostles time to
ours. This is so true an Evidence in our behalf, that Bellarmine, as it were
in disdain of the Churches, Bell. de ver. Dei. l 2. ca. vlt. in fine.
makes this answer: We are no more moved with the examples of Muscouites,
Armenians, Egyptians and Aethiopians, then with the examples of Lutherans, or
Anabaptists, and Caluinists: for they are either heretics, or Schismatiques.
So that all Churches (be they never so Catholic and ancient) if they
subscribe not to the now Roman Faith, are either schismatic or heretical.

But let these men observe what Rules they list, let them brag of Antiquity,
Universality and Succession; let them reject the confessions of all Christian
Churches but their own, yet shall they never be able to prove those unwritten
Traditions Apostolic, and of equal authority with the Scriptures, which
contrary the doctrine of the Apostles, or by consequence overthrow the
foundation of the written Word. If the Apostle teach us to pray with the
spirit, 1. Cor. 14.
and to pray with the understanding also: how can prayer in an unknown tongue,
without understanding, be proved a Tradition Apostolical? If the Apostle
teach us by the written Word, that the Communion in both kinds extend to all
believers, by the general words of Christ: Drink ye all of this. How can the
Communion in one kind be termed a Tradition Apostolical, which imposes the
contrary on the Non Conficient Priest, and the lay people, Drink ye none of
this? If the holy Spirit dictate by the mouth of an Apostle: Search the
Scriptures: how can that doctrine be said to be Apostolical, which inioynes
the contrary to the lay people, Search not the Scriptures? If the written Word
proclaim it for an Apostolic doctrine: Vtrumque est malu^ et nubere et vri
imo ^eius est nubere quic quid reclame^t aduersarii etc. Bell. de Monach. l. 2.
c. 30.
It is better marry then burn: how can that unwritten Word be termed a
Tradition Apostolical, which teaches the contrary: It is better for a Priest
to burn then marry? If an Angel from heaven proclaim of the real presence of
Christ's body: He is risen, he is not here: and the Apostle declares it for an
Article of belief, The Heavens contain him till his second coming. How can
the corporal and real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, be a Tradition
Apostolical, which affirms that Christ's body is contained in the heavens,
and in a Pix at one and the same time? If the Communion of the body and blood
of Christ, be a common union of Priest and people, and by the Apostles written
Word We are all partakers of one Bread, and one Cup: how can Private Mass be
termed a Tradition Apostolical, wherein the Priest receives the Bread and Cup
alone without the people? If God himself forbid by his Moral Law, the
worshipping of Images; and the same Law stood in force with Christ and his
Apostles; how can that doctrine be made a point of Faith, and termed a
Tradition Apostolical, which on the contrary gives adoration to Images?
Lastly, if an Angel from heaven forbids the worshipping of Angels by a
particular instance in himself: Worship not me, for I am thy fellow servant:
How can it be reputed a Tradition Apostolical, and an Article of Faith, Art. 8.
that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be worshipped and prayed unto?
These Papal Traditions unwritten, are different, if not flatly opposite to the
Word written; and therefore I will say with Tertullian, who answered the
heretics in his days: Tert. praesc. advers. haeres. c. 32.
Their very doctrine it self being compared with the Apostolic, by the
diversity and contrariety thereof, will pronounce, that it had neither any
Apostle for an Author, nor any man Apostolic. Now if any Romanist shall take
that poor exception, and say their Tenets are not flat contrary to the
Scriptures; let him take his answer from Saint Chrysostom: Non dixit si
contraria annutiauerint, aut si totu^ Euangelium sub verterint, sed si vel
paulu^ Eua^gelizauerint prarer Euangeliu^ quoth accepistis etia^si quidvis
labefactauerint. Anathema sint. Chrysostom. in Galat. c. 1 and Aug. in Ioh. Tra. 98
Saint Paul teaches not (says he) if any man preach contrary to the Gospel,
or overthrow the whole Gospel; but if they preach any little thing besides the
Gospel he has received, if he overthrow any thing, whatsoever it be, let
him be accursed. I say therefore, if this or the like unwritten Traditions be
found praeterquam, or contraquam, either besides or contrary to the Scriptures
(as certainly most of their Traditions are) I say, it is impossible to
reconcile them for Apostolic Traditions, and consequently more absurd to
equal them with the Scriptures, and make them a partial rule of faith: for
Although (says Tertullian, Tertul. de praesc^. c. 26.
) the Apostles did deliver some things unto their domestical friends (as I may
call them) yet we must not believe, that they delivered any such things as
should bring in another rule of Faith, different and repugnant to that, which
they generally propounded in public, as though they had preached one Lord in
the Church, another in their lodging.

To leave therefore a certainty for an uncertainty, to forsake the written
Word, which is the safest and surest rule of belief; for unwritten Traditions
which have neither Antiquity for their leader, nor Universality for their
assurance, nor Succession for their evidence; this I say, is Via dubia, a
doubtful and uncertain way, this is Via Deuia, a wandering and By-way.

SECT. IX. The Scriptures are a certain, safe, and evident direction to the
right way of Salvation; and consequently, to ground Faith upon unwritten
Traditions, is an obscure, uncertain, and dangerous By-way.
I Confess it for a truth, that in the first ages of the world, the Ancients
had the knowledge of God without writing, and their memories, by reason of
their long lives, were Registers, instead of Books: but afterward, when God
had taken the posterity of Jacob to be his peculiar people, the lives of men
were shortened; and therefore he gave them their laws in writing, which
writing was so true and perfect, Non desunt aliqui Catholicorum qui negant
nullu^ fuisse Traditione^ non scripta^ apud Iudaeos Bell. de verbo Dei non
scrip. l. 4. c. 8
that some Romanists confess, the Jews had nothing pertaining to the
knowledge and service of God, that was not written. And as in the creation of
the world, before the Sun was made, the light was sustained and spread abroad
by the incomprehensible power of God; yet after the Sun was created, God
conveyed the whole light of the world into the body of the Sun: so that though
the Moon and Stars should give light, yet they should shine with no other
light, but what they received from the Sun; Even so in the constituti-of the
Church, howsoever God at first preserved and continued the knowledge of his
truth, by immediate revelation from himself to some chosen men, by whose
ministry he would have the same communicated to the rest, yet when he gave
his word in writing, he conveyed into the body of the Scriptures, the whole
light of his Church, so that albeit there should be Pastors and Teachers
therein, to shine as stars, to give light to others, yet they should give no
other light, but what by the beams of the written Law was cast upon them. And
that we might have good warranty for the written Word, God himself showed the
first way by his own example, who with his own finger wrote the Decalogue in
tables of stone; and (says Moses) The Tables was the work of God, Exodus 32.16
and the writing was the writing of God upon the Tables. And as God was the
first Author of writing in the old Law: so our Savior Christ, God and Man,
taught the same lesson by his own example and direction in the New: For when
the Disciples wrote (says Austen) what Christ showed and said unto them, Cum
illi scripserunt, qua ille ostendit et dixit, nequaqua^ dicendum est, quod ipse
no^ scripserit, etc. Aug. de consens Euangel. lib. 1. c. 35.
it is not to be said that he did not write, because the members wrought that
which they learned by the inditing of the Head. For whatsoever he would have us
to read of the things which he did and said, he gave in charge to them, as his
hands to write the same. And thus one and the same Spirit, that prescribed the
old Law to Moses, gave also express charge to the Evangelist Saint John:
Scribe, Revel. 1.11.19.
write these things. And lastly, the reason of this writing, Saint Luke renders
to Theophilus, Luke 1.4.
That thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have been
instructed. Now as things written are of longer continuance, and better
assurance, whereby we have the certainty of our faith and doctrine: so
likewise by that certainty we enjoy the more safety: and for that cause the
Apostle Saint Paul tells the Philippians, that which he delivered by word of
mouth being present: Phil. 3.1.
To write the same things (says he) to me it is not grievous, but for you it
is safe. And this may be a good comfort for all believing Protestants, that we
have these two benefits of the written Word, (by the doctrine of two Apostles)
Certainty and Saftie.

Scriptura Regula credendi certissima tutissimaque est. Bell. de verbo Dei.
lib. 1. cap. 2 Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 14.
This doctrine was rightly observed, and earnestly pursued by the true believers
in the Primitive Church, in so much, as it is observed by Eusebius, that the
faithful who had heard the preaching of Saint Peter, not thinking that
sufficient, nor contented with the doctrine of that divine preaching unwritten,
most earnestly entreated Mark, that he would leave them in writing, the
Commentaries (or records) of the doctrine which they had delivered unto them br
word; and ceased not till they had persuaded him thereto. Now it is reported
(says he) when the Apostle understood this to have been done by the
revelation of the holy Ghost, he ioyed much in the desire of those men, and by
his authority warranted this Gospel in writing to the reading of the Church.
Here was a memorable example, both for the Certainty, and Safety of the
Christian Faith; the faithful hear the Word of God, yet fearing the
uncertainty of that which might be delivered upon report, from hand to hand,
they entreat Mark the Scholar and follower of Peter, that he would commit
the same to writing: this was performed accordingly, and Saint Peter ioyed in
the performance of it; and withal testified by his approbation, that their
good motion proceeded from the Holy Ghost.

In like manner you shall observe, as the Apostle St. Paul wrote those things
which he deliuerd by word of mouth to the Philippians: so likewise he delivers
the same things to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.3.
which he received according to the Scriptures. And from hence will arise a
third benefit, (which is the grand point in question) The Scriptures are alone
sufficient without the help of Traditions: for that which Saint Paul has
testified of the Church at Corinth and Philippi, the same Nicephorus expresses
more particularly in these words: Niceph. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. ca. 34.
What Saint Paul being present, taught by word of mouth amongst the
Corinthians, Ephesians, Galathians, Colossians, Philippians, Thessalonians,
Jews, Romans, and many other persons, whereunto the holy Ghost sent him, and
whom he begat in the faith of Christ, the same things in his absence be
compendiously reuoketh into their memory by his Epistles written unto them. If
therefore St. Paul set down in his Epistles all that doctrine which he
delivered by word of mouth to those several Churches, and withal taught that
doctrine which he received according to the Scriptures, it will follow of
necessity, that all things necessary to salvation, are contained in the
Scriptures: for he witnessed of himself: I have not shunned to declare (all)
the Council of God. Acts 20.27.


Let us appeal to him, touching the sufficiency of the Scriptures: First, he
exhorts Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.14
to continue in those things which he had learned, and had been assured of:
neither does he tell him, he was assured of Traditions, but plainly expresses
in that place his meaning of the Holy Scriptures; and that it might appear the
Scriptures were not denied by the Apostles to children and ignorant persons,
(as it is now used in the Church of Rome) he testifies in his behalf, that
from a child he had known the holy Scriptures: Verse 15.
and that it might yet further appear the Scriptures were sufficient for his
saving knowledge, without the help of Traditions, he protests to him, Ibidem.
that they were able to make him wise unto salvation. And lastly, lest it might
be thought a particular instruction to Timothy alone, and not to the rest of
the faithful, he proclaims the written Word as a general rule, and
conclusion for all believers: Verse. 16.17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. So that, if you
regard the authority of the written word, it came from God by inspiration; if
the use of it, it teaches, corrects, improueth; if the end and perfection of
it, that the man of God might be thoroughly furnished to every good work. Now
whatsoever is so profitable unto all these ends, to make a man wise unto
salvation; must needs be sufficient of it self, and the rather, because there
is nothing can be wished for, either to soundness and sincerity of Faith, or
to integrity and godliness of life, that is, to man's perfection, and the way
of salvation, which, the Scripture given by inspiration of God does not teach
the faithful servants of Christ: nay more, if that which is written, be not
sufficient by the belief whereof we may attain to eternal life; without
doubt, Saint John, the beloved Disciple of Christ would never have told us:
John 20 31.
These things are written, that we may believe, and believing we may have
eternal life.

I proceed to the examination of the ancient Fathers, that out of the mouth of
two or three witnesses, (...). Athan. orat cont. Genesis in init. Sufficiebat
quide^ credentibus Dei sermo, qui in aures nostras Euangelistae
testimonie-tra^sfusus est? quid enim in eodem Sacrame^to salutis humanae non
continetur? aut quid fit quoth reliquu^ est, aut obseurum? Plena sunt omnia vt a
pleno et perfecto facta. Hill. de Trin. l. 2 Tert. contr. Hermo. c. 22
that written Word may be established.

Athanasius] the holy Father tells us: The holy Scriptures given by inspiration
of God, are of themselves sufficient to the discovery of the truth. And as
concerning the fullness of all truth, which is revealed in the Scriptures.
Saint Hillary assures us, that in his days The word of God did suffice the
believers; yea, (says he) what is there concerning man's salvation, that is not
contained in the Word of the Evangelist? What does it want? What is there
obscure in it? All things there are full and perfect. And Tertullian himself
professes, that he honors the fulness of the Scriptures, and denounces a
woe to Hermogenes the heretic, if he take ought from those things which are
written, or adds to them. And Saint Cyrill more expressly, Non omnia qua
Dominus fecit conscript^ sunt sed qua scribentes sufficere puturunt tam ad
mores quam ad dogmata, vt recta fide et operibus et virtute rutilantes ad
regnum coeloru^ perveniamus. Cyr. in Ioh. li. 12 c. 68. In iis quae aperte in
Scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia quae co^ueninient fidem moresque
viuendi. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
All things (says he) which Christ did, are not written, but those things are
written, which the Writers thought sufficient, as well touching conversation,
as Doctrine, that shining with right faith, and virtuous works, we may
attain to the Kingdom of Heaven. And Saint Austen gives his consent with the
rest of the holy and ancient Fathers: that In those things which are laid down
plainly in the Scriptures, all those things are found which appertain to
Faith, and direction of life. And thus by the testimonies of the blessed
Apostles, and the consent of holy Fathers, we have certainty, we have safety,
we have assurance, we have all sufficiency in the Scriptures.

Surely the ancient Fathers did little dream, that the precious stones and
timber, on which the Church of Rome was first built, should be repaired in her
decaying age, with straw and stubble of unwritten doctrines, and unknown
Traditions. Saint Cyprian, that blessed Martyr, was so far from allowing
Ecclesiastical Traditions for a point of Faith, that he makes this Quaere:
Whence is this Tradition? Vnde ista Traditio? vtrumne de Dominica, etc ea enim
facienda esse qua scripta sunt Deus testatur. Cypr Epist. 74. ad Po^p.
is it derived from the Lords authority, or from the precepts of the Apostles?
for God wills us to do those things which are written. But this quaere is so
distasted by Bellarmine, that to this short demand, he returns this sharp
answer: Respond^o Cyprianum haec scripsisse eu^ errorem suum tuer^ veilet and
ideo si more errantium tunc ratiocinaretur etc. B^^ (...) vet Dei li 4. ca. 11.
Cyprian spoke this when he thought to defend his own error, and therefore
it is no marvel, if he erred in so reasoning: yet we may see what time and
errors have brought to pass, those authorities of Scripture which the
heretics pretended for their unwritten Traditions in the ancient Church, are
the very same which the Romanists at this day assume in behalf of their
Traditions. Irenaeus tells us, that in his time the heretics complained, Iren.
l. 3. c. 2
that they who were ignorant of Traditions, could not find the truth in the
Scriptures, for the truth was not delivered by writing, but by word of mouth.
And for proof of their assertion, they cite the words of Saint Paul. We speak
wisdom amongst them that be perfect. 1. Cor. 2.
Bellarmine alleges in this very Text, Bell. de ver. Dei. l. 4. c. 8.
to prove, that many mysteries require silence, that it is unmeet they should
be explained by the Scriptures, and therefore are only learned by Traditions.
Tertullian tells us, that the heretics confessed indeed, Tertul. de praescip.
advers. haeres. cap. 25.
that the Apostles were ignorant of nothing, -- but they say the Apostles
revealed not all things unto all men. And for proof, they cite the Word
written: O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust. In like manner
Saint Austen tells us, that All foolish heretics do seek to color their
devices by the pretext of this Gospel; Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 97. and 96.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. But
(says he) seeing Christ himself has been silent of those things, who of us
can say they are these and these? or if he dare say it, how does he prove
it? These and the like places are cited by Bellarmine, and the Romanists, Bell
de vervo Dei. li. 4. cap. 5.
for the honor and authority of their unwritten Traditions: nay more, they
are urged with such eagerness in defense of their doctrine, that some of them
publicly professed. Si Paulus ille Tharsensis, etc. Favor. Antiq. page 275
If that same Paul of Tharsus, the chief instrument of divine Philosophy,
should condemn any Traditions of the Catholic (Roman) Church, I would
confidently prescribe him; abandon him, pronounce Anathema, with direful
execrations against this Saul.

Waltram Bishop of Naumburg, a principal member of the Roman Church, and
conversant amongst the Monks of former ages, gives the reason which occasioned
the Romanists of these later times to stand upon justification of their
Traditions. About the time the Devil was let loose, (that is to say, a
thousand years after Christ) certain Monks (says he) for the upholding of
Pope Hildebrands faction, desired other doctrines, Alienas doctrinas appetunt
and magisteria humana institutionis inducunt. Lib. de unit. Eccles. p. 233.
and brought in masteries of humane Institution: and to prevent the knowledge
of the truth, they permitted not young men in their Monasteries, to study the
saving knowledge (of the Scriptures,) to the end, Vt inde ingenium nutriatur
siliquis daemoniorum qua sunt consuetudines humanaru^ Traditionu^ Ibid. p. 228.
that their rude wit might be nourished with the husks of devils, which are
the customs of humane Traditions, that being accustomed to such filth, they
might not taste how sweet the Lord was. This learned Author gives us to
understand, that the unwritten doctrines in the Roman Church, were but filth
and husks of Devils, which without doubt the heretics of former ages had
scattered and left behind them. And thus the Priests and Friars have received
the doctrine of Traditions from the Monks, the Monks from the heretics, and
both jointly sympathize with the heretic Eutyches in the general Council of
Chalcedon, and make one and the same general acclamation. Council. Cha. Act. 1
Thus I have received of my forefathers, thus I have believed, in this faith I
was baptized and signed, in the same have I lived till this day, and in the
same I wish to die.

I speak not this to decline the authority of Apostolic Traditions: for I
know well, the same Apostle, who tells, the Scriptures are able to make us wise
unto salvation, gives also this warning to the Church of Thessalonica: stand
fast, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our
Epistle. Here the Apostle calls his own written Epistle a Tradition; and for
ought can appear, that which he taught by word of mouth, was but the word
written; (for a man may teach one and the same doctrine diverse ways) but what
Protestant, I pray, did ever refuse to hold the traditions which Saint Paul and
the rest of the Apostles taught by word of mouth? We generally confess, that
they were of equal authority with the Word written; but who can tell us what
Traditions those were, if they were not written? We may grant without prejudice
to our cause, that Saint Paul delivered more to the Thessalonians by word of
mouth then was contained in that Epistle (although the words alleged, enforce
no such thing,) for we take not upon us to maintain that the first Epistle to
the Thessalonians contained all the doctrine to salvation; but does it
therefore follow, that he delivered more unto them then was contained in the
whole Scriptures?

When Paul came to Thessalonica, three Sabbath days (says the Text) he
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures: He taught them, Acts 17.2.
that it behooued Christ to suffer, and rise again from the dead, and that
Jesus was Christ: and after that, Acts 26.22.
he witnesses both to small and great, saying none other things then those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Therefore whatsoever he
delivered to the Thessalonians, although it be not found in his written
Epistle, yet it must needs be contained in the holy Scriptures. Again, if the
Thessalonians had insisted only upon unwritten Traditions, yet the Apostle
would by no means approve of it: for he professes that the Jews of Beraea,
were more noble, then those of Thessalonica, and there he gives the reason for
it: Acts 17.11.
In that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. And hence we have an example of
the undoubted Traditions of the Apostles themselves, which were examined by the
touchstone of the Scriptures: but no man can show me that ever the Scriptures
were examined by unwritten Traditions.

We say therefore that all unwritten Traditions which concern the salvation of
the believer, are either immediately, or at least by sound inference, derived
from the Scriptures, and those also have a manifest and perpetual testimony of
the Primitive Church, and the uniform consent of succeeding Christians in all
ages. And whereas our adversaries charge us, that we likewise hold doctrinall
Traditions, which have no foundation in the Scriptures, as namely the Canon of
the Scriptures, the keeping of the Sabbath, the baptizing of Infants, and the
perpetual Virginity of the blessed Virgin; it is sufficiently apparent, that
these things are also derived from the Scriptures: for as we deny not, that
the Canon of the Scripture may be termed a Tradition in a large sense; yet
we say, even that Tradition is derived also from the testimony of the Apostle
Saint Paul, yea and of Christ himself, who witnesses, that whatsoever he
spoke, was written in the Law, in the Prophets, and the Psalms, under which
none of the Apocryphal Books are contained. Touching the Sabbath day, we hold
the observation of it to be perpetual, Acts 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2. Reave. 1.10.
and unchangeable, because we find it noted in the Scriptures. Touching
baptism of Infants, Bellarmine himself proves it; first from the proportion
between Baptism and Circumcision: secondly, from two places of Scripture.
John. 3.5. Math. 19.14
Lastly, concerning the perpetual Virginity of Marie, although for the honor
and sanctity of that blessed Virgin we believe it, Index Biblicus in Regiis
Biblus vocabulo (Maria) multis scripturae locis significari perpetuam
virginitatem Maria ostendit.
yet this doctrine is not de necessitate, but de pietate fidei; it is more for
pious credulity, then for necessity; and yet if we require Scripture for it,
the Fathers prove it out of the 44 of Ezech. 2. as Hierome shows in his
Commentaries upon that place.

Now if any man list to be contentious, and demand of us, where it is written
that the Son of God is of the same substance with the Father? Where is it
written, that Christ is God and man, subsisting in one person? Where is it
written, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son as well as from the
Father? or where is the word Trinity to be found written in the whole body of
the Scripture? If any man shall deny the truth of these things, because they
are not plainly in the same words delivered in the Scriptures, what can his
question argue less then a plain cauilling, and shifting of a known truth;
for as Athanasius in the like case answered the Arrians, touching the word
(...), (of the substance with the Father. Athan. Ep. quod decreta Synodi
Nicaenae co^gruis verbis sunt exposita.
) Albeit the word be not found in the Scriptures, yet it has the same meaning
that the Scriptures intend, and import the same with them whose ears are
entirely affected toward Religion. And in like manner Saint Austen made the
like answer: Quia etsi fortasse nomen ipsum non inueniret, res tame^ ipsa
inveniretur; quid est enim contentiosius, qua vbi de re co^stat certare de
nomine. Aug. Epist. 174.
Albeit the word perhaps be not found there, yet the thing it self is found;
and what more frivolous quarrel is it, then to contend about the word, when
there is a certainty of the thing? I will not require of our adversaries to
show me in the Scriptures, the word of Transubstantiation, of Mass, of
Supremacy, and the like, because they receive them as Traditions which are not
contained in the Scriptures: but on the other side, if any Romanist will deny,
that the Articles of the Apostles Creed are not contained in the Scriptures,
and yet will show me in express words, I believe in God the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth: or that, the holy Catholic Church and Communion of
Saints, are the express words contained in the Scriptures, I will subscribe
to the Articles of the new Roman Creed, and allow all Papal Traditions for
Apostolical. For we do not say that nothing is to be believed de fide, but
what is written in the Scriptures in express terms, but we profess it must
be directly, or by necessary consequence deduced from the Scriptures. It was
the answer of Epiphanius to the disciples of Arius in the Primitive Church.
We all of us do confess the Father to be unbegotten, Epiphan. haeres. 69.
nu. 71.
and increate; and it is surely an admirable saying, but show me if you can,
where this saying is written: for neither does the Law of Moses, nor the
Prophets, nor yet the Apostles make any mention thereof. If then we do piously
acknowledge this saying, though it were not written any where; Idem. haeres. 75.
who can find fault with us, though the word Coessentiall, or Consubstantiall
be not written. As therefore we confess the words, Unbegotten, Increate,
Consubstantiall, the word Trinity, and the like, are not found in Scriptures:
so I think no Romanists will or can deny, but that all those words are employed
in the Scripture, or by necessary inference deduced from them.

To conclude therefore this second point, and first Article of the Roman
Creed, since Papal Traditions have no foundation in the Scripture, nor are
contained in any Apostolic author (by our adversaries confession) since they
want a continued succession from the Apostles time, with universality of
Churches, and consent of Fathers, since they are not resolved of a certain and
definite number of doctrinall Traditions, (which ought to be resolved in points
of Faith.) Lastly, since the Scriptures by the testimonies of both sides, is
the safest and furest rule for all believers: and since many Papal Traditions
are different, if not contrary to the Scriptures. To follow unknown, and
unwritten doctrines, for known and written verities, is Via dubia, a doubtful
and uncertain way; it is Via deuia, a wandering and By-way.

I proceed in the next place to the examination of the ancient Fathers, whereby
it shall appear, the Romish faith and doctrine, as it wants Antiquity and
Universality of Churches, so likewise it is utterly destitute of the consent
of ancient Fathers.

SECT. X. Our Adversaries make great boast of the testimonies of the ancient
Fathers in general, yet when they come to sifting particular points, either by
secret evasion they decline them, or openly reject them.
Cant. 1.7. and 6.1.
TEll me then, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, whither is thy
beloved turned side, that we may seek him with thee? Shall we seek him in
the Fathers? Oh (says Campian) If we once name the Fathers, Camp. Rat. 5.
the field is fought, the wager is won on our side, for they are all ours. Yea,
(says Bristow) In most matters of Controversy they are so plain on our side,
Brist. Mot. 14.
that it cannot with any color be denied, or called in question. Yea Duraeus
the Jesuit claims a peculiar interest in the behalf of the Roman Church: Nos
Patru^ very filii sumus. Dur. coutr. Whitak p. 125. and 140.
We only are the true sons of the Fathers, we do not cite them by the
halues, sometimes allowing one part of their doctrine, sometimes rejecting
another, but we embrace them all. And for confirmation of this assertion, the
Romanists in their Apology, or Petition of Lay Catholics, make this general
acclamation: Apolog. or Pet. of Lay Cath. 1604. cap. 4.
For one place of a Father, sometimes ill cited, sometimes falsified, sometimes
mutilated, and sometimes wholly corrupted, (by Protestants) we can produce a
thousand, not by patches and mammockes, as they do, but whole pages, whole
chapters, whole books, and the uniform consent of all the ancient Fathers,
and Catholic Church.

Thus the wicked Jews claimed Abraham for their Father; and thus the frantike
Grecian claimed all the ships in Athens to be his, Thrasilaus.
when the poor man had least interest in them. If Campian and his fellow
Jesuits had been living in the days of the ancient Fathers, surely they had
been branded with the marks of heretics for their false alarums: for Carosus
the Eutychian heretic, although his claim reach not to all the Fathers, Ego
secundum expositionem trecentu^ octodecem Patrum, sic credo etc. Council. Chalc.
Act. 4 p. 877.
yet (says he) according to the Exposition of three hundred and eighteen
Fathers, so I believe, and in this faith was I baptized; what should ye say
more to me, I cannot tell. And Dioscorus the heretic, much like the Jesuit,
makes an open outcry in the Council of Chalcedon: Ego cum Patribus eiicior,
ego defendo Patrum dogmata, ego horum habeo testimonia non simpliciter aut
transitory, sed in ipsorum libris expressum. Council. Chalc. Act. 1.
I have the testimonies of the holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregory, Cyril, I
vary not from them in any point, I am thrown forth and banished with the
Fathers, I defend the Fathers doctrine, I have their judgment uttered, not by
chance, or unadvisedly, but remaining expressed in their books. Thus Paynims
and heretics, Jews and Jesuits claim Antiquity and Universality in
Traditions and Fathers: yea, the heretics did glory and vaunt of the Fathers
in the two famous Councels of Nice and Chalcedon, in the very presence of the
Fathers themselves; yea Pelagius the heretic, when he disagreed from the
doctrine of the Fathers, (like a true Romanist, thought to advance his own
heresy, by magnifying the Faith of Ambrose an ancient Father: Blessed St.
Ambrose (says he) that Bishop, Pelag. lib. 3. de lib. Arbitrio. q.
in whose books the Roman faith especially appears, who like a beautiful
flower shined amongst the Latin Writers, whose faith and most pure
understanding of the scriptures, the enemy himself dares not reprehend. This
is the very practice of the Roman church in these days. They glory in the
name of the Fathers, as if they were the true children, and only heirs of
their doctrine, when as in truth their chiefest points of faith were scarce
known, much less believed de fide, in their days. Neither do I conceive that
the Romanists do thus vaunt of the Fathers, because they are favorable to
their cause, but because they know the common people can learn nothing of the
Fathers, but what they hear and understand from the report of their own
Priests.

Look upon the practice of the greatest champions in the Roman church: does
not Andradius, Card. Bellarmine, and Card. Caietan (contrary to the Article of
the Roman Creed) decline the Exposition of the ancient Fathers? Does not
Cardinal Baronius profess that the Church of Rome does not always follow the
consent of Fathers? Does not their own Lyra witness, that the sayings of the
holy Fathers are not of so great authority, Nam dicta Sanctorum Patrum no^
sunt tantae authoritatis, quin liceat contrarium tenere in it is quae per
Scripturas non determina^tur Lyra. in Math. 1.
but that it is lawful to hold the contrary to them, in those things which are
not determined by the Scriptures? Does not their Bishop Canus acknowledge,
that the ancient Fathers sometimes err, and against the ordinary course of
Nature bring forth a monster? Canus loc. Theol lib. 7 c. 3 n. 7.
Nay more, do not their own Divines at Doway make this public declaration:
Cum igitur in Catholicis veteribus aliis plurimos feramus errores, and
extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe negemus, and co^modum iis
sensum affingamus, cu^ opponuntur in disputationibus aut in confictionibus cum
aduersariis. Ind. Expur. Belgi^. p. 5. Edit. Antw. An 1. 1571.
We bear with many errors in the old Catholic Writers, we extenuate them,
we excuse them, and by inuenting some devised shift, we oftentimes deny them,
and feign some commodious sense for them, when they are objected in
disputations, or conflicts with our adversaries? If therefore the best learned
Romanists, sometimes excuse them, sometimes decline them, sometimes condemn
them, shall we think the Fathers are all theirs? I appeal to their own
confessions. First, touching the words of Christ. Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church. Maldonat the Jesuit makes this confession. The
meaning of these words (viz. Mald. in Math. 16.19. p. 352.
) That the Rock is Christ) seems not to me to be the true meaning, which
all the Fathers think to be so, whom ever I remember to have read, Hillary
excepted. In like manner touching the words; Whatsoever thou loosest on earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven, etc. he makes this public profession; I will not
interpret, Idem. Ibid.
that this which is here spoken to Peter, is spoken also in the same sense to
the other Apostles, although I see all Interpreters to be of that mind,
Communis sententia Theologoru^ admittit simpliciter meritu^ de co^digno, quae
sente^tia verissima est. Bell. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 16
Origin only excepted. Will you have instances without exception? It is the
common sentence of all Divines (says Bellarmine) simply to admit merit of
condignitie, which sentence is most true. Yet their own Friar Walden protested
confidently, Sicut omnes sancti priores vsque ad recentes Catholicos and
communis scripsit Ecclesia. Wall. Tom. 3 de Sacram. tit. 1. cap. 7.
that he was the sounder Divine, and more faithful Catholic, who does simply
deny such merit, -- as all the former Saints, that is, (all the ancient
Fathers) and the universal Church (until the late Schoolmen) have written.
Again, it is the general vote of the later Romanists, that the words (This is
my body) are the very formal and efficient cause of Transubstantiation: yet
their own Archb. of Caesarea witnesses, Christoph. li. 1. pa. 115.
that all the orthodox Fathers both Greek and Latin, teach that Consecration is
made by Christ's prayer and benediction, and not by those words, This is my
body. Lastly, it is the general Tenet of the Roman Church at this day, that
the blessed Virgin was conceived without original sin: in so much as
Bellarmine professes, Inter Catholices non sunt numerandi. Bell. de Amissa
gra. l. 4. c. 15
they are not to be numbered amongst Catholics that think the contrary: and
yet their own Bishop Canus witnesses with us, that Sansti omnes, Sancti omnes
vno ore asseueraru^t beatam virgine^ in peccato originali conceptam fuisse.
Canus loc. Theol lib. 7 c. 1 n. 1. n. 3.
All the holy Fathers, (vno ore) with one consent affirm, the blessed virgin
to have been conceived in original sin. The Fathers then, by their good
leave, are not all theirs; and in some capital points, by their own confessions
they are none of theirs, nay, they are reputed no good Catholics by their own
Tenets that teach not contrary to the Uniform consent of Fathers. I proceed to
the examinanation of more witnesses in the fundamental points of their Roman
faith. Touching the Communion in one kind, Patres and Primitiua Ecclesia
populum a Co^munione calicis non prohibebant nos arcemus. Aene. Syl. Epist. 130.
it is the confession of Aeneas Syluius: The Fathers in the Primitive Church
did not forbid the people to drink of the Cup, but we drive them from it.

Touching the doctrine of Transubstantiation, it is the confession of Card.
Cusanus: Certain of the ancient Fathers are found of this mind, Cusan.
exercit. lib. 6.
that the bread in the Sacrament is not transubstantiated, nor changed in
nature.

Touching Private Mass, it is the confession of Cardinal Bellarmine: Bell. de
Missa. lib. 2. c. 9.
There is no express testimony amongst the ancient Fathers, but it may be
gathered by conjectures.

Touching Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue, it is the confession of
Cassander: Cassand. Liturg. cap. 28.
The Canonical Prayers, and especially the words of Consecration, the ancient
Fathers did so read it, that all the people might understand, and say Amen.

Touching Adoration of Images, it is the confession of Massonus, a learned
Papist: E Bibliotheca Papirii Massoni ^^eius libellis de picturis et imaginibus.
There is no example in Scriptures or Fathers, for Adoration of Images: they
ought to be taken for ornament to please the sight, not to instruct the people.

Touching Indulgences, and Pardons, it is the confession of Cardinal Caietan:
There is no authority of Scriptures or Fathers, Caiet. opusc. 16. c. 1.
Greek or Latin that bring them to our knowledge.

Touching Purgatory, it is the confession of Fisher Bishop of Rochester: Roff
Art. 18. contra Lutherum.
Of Purgatory there is very little or no mention amongst the ancient Fathers.

Touching the number of seven Sacraments, it is Bellarmines confession: Bell.
de effect. Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 24.
The Protestants ought not to require of us to show the number of seven
Sacraments in Scriptures or Fathers.

Lastly, touching the Exposition of the Scriptures, Cardinal Baronius makes
this ingenious acknowledgment: Baron. Annal. ad An. 34. nu. mar. 213.
Although the holy Fathers for their great learning be rightly termed the
Doctors of the Church: yet the Catholic Roman Church does not follow them
always, and in all things, in expounding of the Scriptures.

These men therefore, which so much magnify the Antiquity of their Church,
and doctrine of the ancient Fathers, upon examination and trial of their
cause, plainly intimate unto us, that the most substantial points, and
chiefest articles of the Roman Faith, were altogether unknown, or at leastwise
did want the uniform consent of Fathers: And that you may yet further know,
notwithstanding they seemingly magnify the Fathers amongst the common people;
yet there is scarce any ancient Father of note, but either they cite him by the
halues, or condemn him as erroneous, or reject him for a counterfeit at their
pleasure. Nay more, there is scarce any point of the Roman Faith, which is not
ratified and confirmed by our adversaries from the authorities of some
pretended ancient Father; the which authorities upon other occasions are
decreed by their own fellow Romanist for vpstart and counterfeit opinions: as
for instance.

Linus the pretended successor of St. Peter, is cited by Coccius for proof of
Purgatory: Cocc. tom. 1 l. 5. de sanct. art. 9.
Upon an other occasion his fellow Bellarmine makes answer: Bell. de Po^t. lib.
2. c. 9.
The history of Linus is truly counterfeit, and therefore of no authority at
all.

Pig. Hier. lib. 6. c. 6.
Anacletus Epistles are cited by Pigghius and Stapleton for proof of the
Supremacy: Cusan. Concord. Cath. li. 2. c. 34.
their fellow Cardinal Cusanus pronounces them to be a matter of forgerie.

Primasius upon the Hebrews, is cited by Bellarmine for the Carnal presence,
Bell. li. 2. de Euch. c 31.
and the Sacrifice of the Mass: his fellow Salmeron makes answer: Salm. lib.
1. de Miss. c. 6.
Primasius never wrote them, but Haymo a late Bishop in Germany.

Rhem. in Romans 3.20.
St. Hierom upon the Epistles is cited by the Rhemists for Justification by
works: Their associate Bellarmine elsewhere declares: That this book is a
shameless counterfeit, Bell. li. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 5.
and has for his Author, rather the heretic Pelagius, then such an holy
Father.

St. Austen de Ecclesiae dogmatibus, Rhem. in 1. Cor. 11.28.
is cited by the Rhemists for Auricular confession: Alph. haeres. 10. tit. Bapt.
Alphonsus a Castro denies the Tract to be Austens, and condemns it for a
crafty counterfeit.

Athanasius Sermon, Bell li. 3. de Sanct. c. 16.
De Sanctissima Deipara, is cited by Bellarmine for Invocation of Saints:
Baron. tom. 1. ad 48. number. 19.
his fellow Baronius professes that the Sermon is a mere counterfeit.

Anselme in his Commentaries, Bellar. de Purg lib. 1. cap. 6. Lib. 2. de Euch.
c. 36.
is cited by Bellarmine for Purgatory, for the Real presence, for the blessed
Virgins immaculate Conception, for Freewill: yet his fellow Posseuine
professes, Lib. 4. de amissa. great. cap. 15. Lib. 5. de great. and lib. arbit.
c. 26. Posseu. Appar. verbo Herucus.
that one Herueus Natalis, living about 250 years since, is the writer of
those Commentaries falsely ascribed to Anselme. And thus the Romanists resemble
bad debtors, who would satisfy their creditors, some with light gold, some
with cracked, some with soldered, some with counterfeit; protesting, that if they
be not all English Angels, yet they be Flemish: at least they are stamped with
the image of an Angel. But that which is most proper for every man's observation
(especially for those that study the Controversies of these times) let them
peruse the works of their greatest Champion Cardinal Bellarmine, and they
shall find, as in every point of Controversy the Fathers are cited plentifully
by him, in behalf of the Roman faith: so likewise upon other occasions, when
the same Fathers in the same Tractates are produced against them in our
behalf, he reiects the same Fathers and their authorities as counterfeit, and
accounts them rather as children, then ancient Fathers. As for example.

Dionysius the Areopagite is cited by Bellarmine for Invocation of Saints, for
Pugatory, Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. cap. 19. Idem l. 1. de Purg. c. 6. Idem lib.
2. de Monach. cap. 5. Ide^ de confirm. l. 2. c. 7.
for Monastical life: yet elsewhere he confesses, it is uncertain whether
the book be St. Denis, whose name it bears.

Bell. de great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 25. Idem lib. 2. de Pont. c. 2
Clemens Recognitions is cited by Bellarmine for Freewill: yet when they are
alleged against the Popes Succession, showing that Peter dyed not at Rome, he
disclaimeth them as Apocryphal books.

Bell. lib. 2. de Euch. ca. 2. initio. Ide^ de Euch. l. 4. c. 26. Resp.
Ignatius a Greek Father is cited by Bellarmine for Transubstantiation, but
when he is produced by us for the Communion in both kinds, he answers, that
Ignatius Greek writings are not much to be trusted to.

Bell. li. 3 de Euch. l ^0. Lib. 2. de Miss. c. 2. Lib. 1. de Purg c. 6. Bell.
li. 4. de Euch. c. 26. Tertius locus. (v)
Cyprian de Coena Domini is alleged by Bellarmine for the Sacrifice of the
Mass, for Purgatory, for Transubstantiation: but when it is produced by us for
the Cup to the Lay people, he disclaimeth the Sermon to be Cyprians.

Abdias his works are cited by Bellarmine for Monastical life: Bell. l. 2 de
Mon. c. 27.
yet elsewhere he confesses that the learned of his own Church hold the same
for counterfeit; Ego certe nullum ab eo testimonium petii. Ide^ de bonis oper.
l. 2 c. 24.
and for my part (says he) Ego nullum, etc. I have had no testimony from him.

Amphilochius his Vita St. Basilij is cited by Bellarmine, Bell. li. 4. de Euch
c 24.
to prove the Eucharist was given to the sick in one kind: Haud dubio falsa
vel. supposititia. Idem de Scrip. Eccle. de Amphil. Ann. 380.
and yet in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Authors, he pronounces the same
book to be false and counterfeit.

Damasus Pontifical, is cited by Bellarmine for Images, Bell. li. 2. de Imag.
c. 9.
and to prove, that Election of Bishops only belongs to the Pope: Idem lib.
1. de Cler. c. 8. Bellar de Scrip. Eccle.
and yet in his Catalogue aforesaid, he says, It is known that Damasus was
never the writer of that book, but Anastasius only the Master of the Popes
Library.

Ann. 367. Bell. li. 4 de great and lib. arb c. 14. Idem de Script Eccles an.
380 Obseru 3 Libri non videntur esse S. Greg. Nyss.

Lib. 2. de Imag. c. 28. Li. de scrip Eccles. ann. 290.


Gregory Nyssen his eight Books De Philosophia, are cited by Bellarmine for
Freewill: yet in his Catalogue aforesaid, he confesses they seem not to be
the books of Gregory Nyssen.

Lactantius Verses are cited by Bellarmine for Adoration of the Cross: and yet
he confesses elsewhere, that it is doubted whether Lactantius were the Author.

Bell. li 1. de ver. Dei. ca. 14. Nec librum illum esse Augustini vt erudit
fatentur. Bell. de Mis. lib. 2. c. 12.) Ad locum.
Saint Austen is cited ad Orosium by Bellarmine, to prove Ecclesiasticus
Canonical Scripture: but elsewhere when he is objected in our behalf in that
Tract, he answers it is not Saint Austens work, as learned men confess.

Justin Martyr, Bell lib de Bap c. 25. Idem lib. de Confir. c. 5. Idem lib. de
Euch. c. 2. Idem lib. 1. de Sanct. 1. 4 3.
his Questions are alleged by Bellarmine for Unction in baptism, for the
Sacrament of Confirmation, for Transubstantiation: but elsewhere he declares
them to be the work of some new Author, and not the works of Justin Martyr.

Origin in his Homilies on the Gospels, Lib. 2. de Euch. c. 8. lib 3. de
paenit. ca 7.
is cited by Bellarmine for the Real presence, and his Homilies on the Psalms
he cites for Auricular confession: In lib. de Script Eccles.
yet the one he disclaimeth as none of Origens, the other he freely confesses,
it is doubted of who is the Author.

Cassianus is cited by Bellarmine for an ancient Author, Bell de Iustif. l. 1.
c. 13
for the point of Justification, Ide^ de bon. oper. cap. 2. lib. 2.
and set times of fasting: yet elsewhere he acknowledges the book for
Apocryphal and counterfeit, Bell li. 6. de lib. arb. ca. 4 accedat.
and condemned in a Roman Council under Pope Gelasius.

Bell li. 2. de Pont. c. 14.
Eusebius, his third Epistle is cited by Bellarmine for the Supremacy: yet he
professes elsewhere, Idem de Confirm. lib. 2. c. 7.
it is not certain who is the Author thereof.

He that shall read these and many such like authorities of pretended Fathers
in behalf of the Roman Religion, might at first sight happily be induced to
believe, that all or most of the ancient Doctors of the Church belong to them,
when as in truth our adversaries use them but as Merchants use their Counters,
sometimes they stand with them for pence, sometimes for pounds, as they be
next and readiest at hand to make up their account.

Thus one while they muster up their forces by multitudes of authorities, as if
they would make that good by number, which they want in weight. Sometimes they
condemn them as counterfeit, sometimes they purge them, as if they were full of
corruptions, and according to several occasions they have their several
devices, to produce them, or avoid them at their pleasure: Si conficta historia
non est vllius authoritatis Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 9.
whereas, if they be counterfeit, (as they are confessed to be) they are of
no authority: if Catholic and Orthodoxe, they make nothing for the points in
Controversy, as shall be presented in the next place.

SECT. XI. The most substantial points of Roman Faith and Doctrine, (as they
are now taught and received in the Church of Rome) were never taught by the
Primitive Church, nor received by the ancient Fathers.
NEither are these men content to challenge a right to all the Fathers,
(although they confess they are not all orthodox and true Fathers) but they
likewise charge us, that, Sebast. Flash. in profess. Cath.
we make no more account of them, then we do of the Turks Alcaron, or Aesops
Fables. Nay (says Bristow) it is well known to such as hear the Protestants
Sermons, Bristow. Mot. 14.
or be in place to hear them, talk boldly and familiarly among themselves,
are not afraid to confess plainly, that the Fathers are all Papists. A
strange and senseless fiction devised by these men, when not only our learned
Divines, but the vulgar people, are all eyewitnesses, that the Book written
by the Jewel of our age, is published in all the Churches of our kingdom, whose
challenge for the principal points of our Religion is made good, and will ever
remain unanswerable out of the Writings and Authorities of the ancient
Fathers. But admit some Protestants were so ignorant or senseless, as to say
privately, All the Fathers were Papists: what stupiditie then may we think it
in the chief Pastors of the Roman Church, which by their public writings,
and open confession acknowledge the principal points of Controversy; yea,
their chief Articles of Faith, were unknown to the ancient Fathers.

We confess it for a truth, that the ancient Fathers, St. Austen, S. Ambrose,
St. Hierome and the rest were learned men, they were Instruments of Grace, and
Mercy: we read them, we reverence them, we give God thanks for them: but
withal we learn this lesson from them: We weigh not the writings of men,
August ad Fortunat. Epist. 111.
be they never so worthy, and Catholic, as we weigh the Canonical
Scriptures, but yielding that reverence that is due unto them. We may mislike
and refuse something in their writings, if we find they have thought otherwise
then the truth may bear: and such (says Austen) am I in the writings of
others, and such I would wish others to be in mine. Saint Austen thought it no
prejudice to the Roman Church, nor disparagement to his own learning, to have
his writings examined by the rule of Scripture. Nay more (says he) that which
in my books thou think to be undoubtedly true, Quod certu^ non habebis
nisi certum intellexeris noli firm retinere. Aug in Proae. lib 3. de Trinit.
unless thou perceive it to be true indeed, hold it not resolutely: St.
Ambrose was so far from wishing Prince or people to rely upon his doctrine,
that by way of prevention he writes to Gratian the Emperor: Nolo argumento
eredas sancte Imperator and nostrae disputationi Scripturas interrogemus. etc.
Ambros de Fide ad Great l 1 c. 4
Believe not (O Emperor) our Arguments and our Disputations, let us ask the
Apostles, let us ask the Prophets, let us ask Christ. Now admit a doubtful
Recusant at this day repair for instruction to a Romish Priest or Bishop, will
he answer him with Austen, Examine my doctrine by the rule of Scripture, and if
you find it not agreeable to that Word, hold it not resolutely? or will he
answer him with Ambrose, Hear not my arguments, believe not us that are the
professed Priests and Pastors of the Church; but read the Scriptures, consult
with the Oracles of God, let Christ the Head of the Church resolve the doubts
and controversies of Religion? Surely nothing is more to be wished for by us,
nothing is less to be hoped for from them.

True it is, that St. Hierome in the question betwixt him and St. Austen,
(whether St. Paul reproved Peter colourably, or in earnest) alleges seven
Fathers against St. Austen; and withal desires him, to give him leave to err
with seven Fathers. But what answer makes Austen? He appeals to St. Paul,
Ipse mihi pro his omnibus et supra hos omnes Apostolus Paulus occurrit ad ipsum
confugio, ad ipsum ab omnibus qui aliter sentiu^t literaru^ tractaetoribus
prouoco Aug. Ep. 19.
and (says he) Instead of all, and above all, I have Paul the Apostle, to him
do I run, to him I appeal from all Writers that think otherwise. Here we
see seven principal members of the Church against the meaning of one Apostle,
and yet all they were not able to remove St. Austen from that one authority;
which was preualent against all; and I think it cannot be denied, but that
this Father went the right way to the Gospel. Again, when he was pressed by
Cresconius a Gramarian, with a testimony out of Cyprian, he returns this
answer, I am not bound to be tied to that Epistle, because I do not account
of Cyprians Epistles as of the Canonical Scriptures, Ego Epistola huius
authoritate no^ teneor, quia etc. Aug. contr. Cres. lib. 2. c. 32.
but I examine them by the Canonical Scriptures, and what I find in them
agreeable to that word, I receive it with commendations; what I find to
disagree from it, with his good leave, I leave it.

This was the account the ancient Fathers made of their own writings, and
their fellow Bishops, even at that time when the Church was most visible, and
when the Fathers were in chiefest estimation in the Christian world.

I speak not these things, as if there were less hope to find the truth in
the writings of the ancient Fathers, then in new and vpstart opinions of some
private spirits. It is the voice of God and Nature: Ask thy father, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
and he will show thee, thine ancients, and they shall tell thee: and herein we
are obedient children, and according to our duty, Leu. 19.23.
We rise up before the hoarie head, and honor the person of the aged. We
agree with the Fathers, wherein they agree with the Scriptures, and with
themselves; and if in some particular points we dissent from some particular
Fathers, yet it is in those things which want universality and consent, or are
doubtfully uttered, or are delivered as private opinions, and not as Articles
of Faith: we follow the Anciens as Leaders, not as Masters: for their writings
are no rules of faith, Scriptae Patrum non sunt regulae fidei, nec habent
authoritatem obligandi. Bell. de Council. author. lib. 2. c. 12.
neither have they authority to bind: This is Bellarmines confession, this is
ours. And that the world may know our adversaries have no such cause (as they
pretend) to brag of the authorities of the Fathers, let any Protestant or
Romanist, examine the substantial points of Controversy, as they are now
published, Bulla Pij 4.
and decreed by the Popes Bull, and Council of Trent, let them I say, observe
the questions, as they are now stated with Anathemas, for Articles of faith,
and compare them with the doctrines of the ancient Fathers, and they shall
easily discern, that our adversaries oftentimes obtrude the Tenets of
particular persons for the general consent of Fathers, and produce doubtful
opinions, to prove Articles of faith: for I dare confidently avow, that in all
fundamental points of difference, either they want Antiquity to supply their
first ages; or Universality, to make good the consent of Christian Churches:
or unity of opinions, to prove their Trent Articles of belief. And for tbe
better manifestation of this my assertion, I will give you instance in the
principal points of the Roman faith and doctrine, that by comparing the
doctrine of the Fathers in the first place, with the Tenets of the Romanists in
the later, it shall appear, that the Northern and Southern Poles shall
sooner meet together, then their opinions, standing as they do, can be
reconciled.

He therefore that will take upon him to prove out of the ancient Fathers,
that Christ is really present in the Sacrament to all faithful Communicants,
let him spare the labor, I will confess it: (for we acknowledge that Christ
is really present, both spiritually by faith, and effectually by grace
conferred upon all worthy receivers.) But let him prove, that Christ's body is
substantially, corporally, and carnally in the Sacrament, under the accidents
of bread and wine; and that Reprobates, and creatures void of reason, much more
of faith, may really partake of his flesh and blood, as is now taught and
believed de fide in the Roman Church, and I will subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that the Sacramental bread and
cup were carried home to men's houses, in the time of persecution, and sometime
privately received, let him spare the labor, I will confess it: but let him
show me, that private Masses, that is, the receiving of the Eucharist by the
Priest alone, without a competent number of Communicants, was the pulique
practice of the ancient Church, as it is now used in the Roman, and I will
subscribe.

Het at will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that the consecrated bread was
sometimes given without the cup to sick folks, to impotent, and abstenious
persons; let him spare the labor, I will confess it: but let him prove that
the Fathers did generally forbid the Lay people, and the communicating Priest,
to partake of the Sacramental cup, and that the bread alone was adjudged
sufficient without the Cup, as it is now received in the Roman Church De fide,
as an Article of Faith, and I will subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that Prayers and Service in the
Roman Church was commonly taught and practiced in the Latin tongue, let him
spare the labor, I will confess it; (for it was the common and known
language of the Latin Church) but let him show me that Prayers and Service was
delivered in a tongue unknown, and not understood of the common people, as it
is now used and received with Anathema in the Roman church, and I will
subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that Images were allowed for
memory, for history, for ornament, let him spare the labor, I will confess
it: but let him prove that they were allowed by the Fathers for public and
private veneration, or religious worship; and that such worship was established
as a doctrine of Faith, as it is now used in the Roman Church, and I will
subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that the Bishop of Rome, and
all other Bishops had power to dispense with the rigor of Ecclesiastical
Penance, by Pardons, and Indulgences, let him spare the labor, I will confess
it: but let him prove that those Indulgences were the treasure of the Church,
by the application of Saints merits, and that private satisfactions which were
left to the discretion of every Bishop were transferred wholly to the power of
the Pope, and so received de Fide, as an article of faith, as it is now used in
the Roman Church, and I will subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, are oftentimes called by the name of Sacraments, let him
spare the labor, I will confess it: But let him prove the point in question,
that al those Sacraments were instituted by Christ in the new Testament, and
that there are neither more nor less, then seven termed by the name of
Sacraments, and those only were properly so called, and that number of seven
was received de fide, as an Article of faith, and I will subscribe.

He that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that St. Peter had a primacie
of Order amongst the Apostles, and that the Bishop of Rome had the first place
amongst other Bishops; let him spare the labor, I will confess it: but let
him prove that Peter had jurisdiction over the Apostles, and that the Bishop of
Rome was held Christ's Vicar general, and Head of the Universal Church, and
that such his power and Supremacy was received de fide, as an article of
faith, as it is now taught in the Roman Church, and I will subscribe.

Lastly, he that will prove out of the ancient Fathers, that out of the Cath.
church there is no salvation, let him spare the labor, I will confess it: but
let him prove, that the present Roman Church, is that Catholic Church, as it
is decreed de fide, by their last Article of their Creed, and I will subscribe.

Thus briefly I have given you my poor opinion how to examine the Trent Faith
and doctrine, whereby you may easily discover the vanity of those men, who
challenge an interest in all the Fathers, in behalf of their Religion: and
certainly if this rule be rightly observed, and pursued by any indifferent
Judge, he shall find there is not greater distance in the times, then
difference in their doctrine.

This is so well known to the best learned on their side, that when we charge
them, that they have created new Articles of Faith, unknown to the first and
best ages: by way of prevention they give this solution; that true it is, many
points of doctrine were not explicit revealed, and publicly declared, as
Articles of faith in the days of the ancient Fathers, because no heretics did
then oppose them: but (say they) they were, implicit, obscurely, secretly,
reseruedly known, and received of the Ancients, with an implicit faith: by
which confession, their later error will be greater then the first; for as
one way they would seemingly avoid the creating of new Articles of faith: so by
acknowledgement of an implicit faith, they overthrow by consequence the
Visibilitie of their Church: for if the Church of Rome had but an implicit
belief in those things which are now publicly declared, without doubt the
Church at that time was not visible in the faith, it was not like a City upon
a hill, known and conspicuous to all persons; and thereupon the grand point of
Visibilitie, (which they so much magnify among themselves) will easily be
called in question.

For a conclusion of this point, I will give you but one instance, whereby you
may the better judge of the rest. Look upon the learned Treatise of the right
Reverend Bishop of Mead, (now Primate of Armach) wherein the judgment of the
ancient Fathers, An Answer to a challenge made by a Jesuit in Ireland. 1624.
touching several points of controversy, is faithfully delivered in our
behalf: what Reply (might we think) could be made by our adversaries, to
those Authorities so rightly produced* Behold, a Jesuit by Order, W. Malone by
name, A Reply to Mr. Vshers answer.
has made a Reply, wherein he has produced in number many more authorities
of Fathers, in behalf of the Roman Church, and Trent Doctrine. The encounter
being made, the end of the victory may seem doubtful: for the Fathers are
produced by both contending parties, and seemingly they adhere to both sides,
as if they made both for Papist and Protestant, in one and the same
substantial points of doctrine. The reason being examined, it will appear the
Fathers do not vary from themselves, nor from us in points of faith: but the
Jesuit produces Authorities impertinent to the point in question: As for
instance in the first Article of Traditions.

Our Reverend Bishop tells the Jesuit by way of prevention, B Usher cap.
Traditions p. 35.
that Traditions of all sorts, are not promiscuously struck at by us, but such
unwritten traditions which are obtruded for Articles of Religion: As for
example. It is the first part of the Article of the Roman Creed: I admit and
embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiesticall Traditions. To this first part of
the article, the reformed Churches do subscribe: but the other Obseruances and
Constitutions of the Church, which is the latter part of the Article, we think
it great reason to gainesay: for under the pretense of (other Obseruances) the
Church of Rome does uphold her private Mass, her Latin Service, her half
Communion, her Invocation of Saints, her worship of Images, and the like: all
which are admitted for part of Gods worship, and accepted by them for
Apostolic Traditions, when as in truth they are flat contrary to the doctrine
of the written Word. The question then is not whether the doctrine delivered by
Christ or his Apostles by word of mouth were of equal authority with the Word
written (for this never any Protestant denied:) but whether the unwritten
Doctrine now taught in the Roman Church, were delivered by Christ and his
Apostles: whether their Ecclesiastical Observations and Constitutions now used,
be of equal authority with the written Word: whether their Papal Traditions
were always, or ever admitted into the rule of faith: and lastly, whether the
Scriptures are not sufficient for the salvation of the believer, without the
help of those Traditions. Let these questions be rightly propounded in our
behalf, and the multitude of the Jesuits authorities will fall to ground of
themselves: for what Father has he produced to prove that the Papal
Traditions now received de fide, in the Church of Rome, were delivered by word
of mouth by the Apostles? what Father has he cited, to prove that the
Constitutions of their Church had a constant and continual succession from the
time of the Apostles, (as Articles of faith ought to have?) what Fa her has he
urged, that admitted doctrinall Traditions unwritten into the Rule of faith?
Lastly, what ancient Father has he truly alleged, that denies the
Scriptures to be sufficient for all believers, without the help of Romish
Traditions?

It were no difficult matter as I conceive, to give a full answer to the
Jesuits reply in the right stating of the Questions, whereby it might easily
appear, that he and his associates have taken great pains to little purpose:
but I submit my opinion to the judgment of the learned, and proceed from the
Fathers in general, to particulars, wherein I will instance in two principal
Lights of the Western Church, St. Austen, and St. Gregory, the one Bishop of
Hippo, the other Bishop of Rome, whereby you shall plainly discern how the
later Popes and Bishops do differ from the former, and how these two Fathers
of the Church concur expressly with the doctrine professed in the Reformed
Churches, different from the Roman.

SECT. XII. Saint Austen in particular is much disparaged by the Romanists, and
for instance in many several points of moment, wherein he professedly
concurreth with us, is expressly rejected by them.
TOrrensis the Jesuit has abbreuiated all St. Austens works, and published
them in honor of his Church, by the name of Augustiniana Confessio, Austens
Confession. Brerely the Priest has contracted his doctrine into a lesser
model, and more particularly applied it to the Roman faith, by the name of
Saint Austens Religion, as if Saint Austen and the Romanists did profess one
and the same Religion, and made one and the same confession of their faith. To
say little of their great brags of this holy Father, I will give you but one
instance, and so descend into particulars, Is Author est Augustinus, vt eius
sententia si vel nulla scriptura, nulla ratione, nullis aliis authoribus
probaretur sola personae reuerentia satis magna authoritatem meretur. Mal. in
Ioh. 6. number. 68.
Maldonat the Jesuit tells us, that Saint Austen is an Author of that esteem,
that his opinion, were it neither proved by ^cripture, nor reason, nor any
other Author, yet the sole reverence of his person deserves sufficient
authority of it self. Here is an ample testimony touching the great light of
the western Church: but look we back to the Jesuits proceeding, in that very
Tract upon the same Chap. within six foregoing Verses of the same Text, (where
he gives this free and full approbation of this learned Father) and finding
that S. Austens Exposition of an other Scripture did disagree from the Roman
Church, Non nego me huim interpretationis authorem nemine^ habere, sed hanc eo
magis probo qua^ illa^ altera^ Augustini, caetera^u^alioqui probatissimam, quod
haec cu^ Caluinistarum sensu magis pugnat. Mald. in Ioh. 6 n 62.
and accord wholly with the Protestant faith, instantly, as it were with the
same breath, cries out against him: I confess, I have no author for my
Exposition, but I rather allow it, then that of Austens, (although his of the
rest be most probable) because this of mine does more cross the sense of the
Caluinists. I will descend into particulars, and notwithstanding our
adversaries great brags of St. Austen, I will give you instances in many
principal points of doctrine, wherein they plainly intimate by their own
confessions he is wholly ours.

1. Touching the proof of Purgatory: whereas Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 3.
The fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; for the day shall
declare it. Aug. de fide and oper. c. 16
St. Austen (interprets) by this fire is meant the fire of tribulation in this
world: Bell de Pur. lib. 1. cap. 5.
but this opinion of his we have rejected, says Bellarmine.

2. Saint Austen says, When Peter received the keys, he represented the holy
Church: Quarto. Aug. Tract. in Ioh. 50.
and therefore the power of the keys was not given to Peter only. Albertus
Pigghius is a witness against him, that he is the only man, De Augustino
possem dicere quod vnus homo fuerit hac in re, nec firmiter secum nec cu^ aliis
consentiens Hier. Eccles lib 6 cap. 4.
who in this point neither agrees constantly with himself, nor with others.

3. Saint Austen says, by the daily sacrifice spoken of in the Prophet
Malachie, is meant the prayers and praises of Saints. Azorius makes answer:
Aug. lib. 2 contr lit. cap ^6. Reliquum veteru^ Patru^ coetum atponimus et
Council. Tridentini testimonium Azor. Instit Moral. part. 1. l. ^0 c. 11. Aug
contr. Adim. c. 12. Jewel. Art. 12 pa 346.
We oppose against him the general consent of other Fathers, and the
testimony of the Council of Trent.

4. St. Austen says, Christ spoke these words, This is my body, when he gave
a sign of his body. Master Hardin makes answer, that St. Austen fighting
against the M^nichees, oftentimes uses not his own sense and meaning, but
those things which by some means, howsoever it were, might seem to give him
advantage against them, so as he might put them to the worst.

5. St. Austen says, Those words of Saint Luke, August de Consens. Evang. lib.
3. cap. 1.
I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine, are to be understood
of the Sacramental Cup, and consequently the fruit of the vine, was wine in
substance after consecration. Dico Augustinum non expendisse hunc locum
diligenter. Bellar. de E^ch. li. 1. cap 11.
Bellarmine is a witness against him, that he did not well consider of that
text, which appears by this, that he passed it over lightly.

6. Saint Austen says, The Israelites eat of the same spiritual meat, Aug
in Ioh. Tract. 26.
but not the same corporal which we eat: for they eat Manna, we an other
meat, but both the same spiritual meat. Maldonat confesses, this is the
doctrine of the Caluinists: Hoc dicopersua um me habere^ D. Augustinu^ si
nostra fuisset aetate long aliter censurum. M^ld. in Ioh. 6. n. 50.
but (says he) I am verily persuaded, that if Austen had been living in these
days, and had seen the Calutnists so interpret Saint Paul, he would have
been of an other mind, especially being such an utter enemy to heretics.

7. Saint Austen says, Sine fide etia^ quae vide^tur bona opera in peccata
vertuntur.

Aug. contr. duas Ep. Pelag. ad Bonif l. 3. c. 5.

Non seque^da illa opinio quam Tridentinu^ Concilium nuper merito damnauit
(omnia infidelium opera esse peccata) qua^uis maximu^ authorem Diuu^ Augustinu^
habuisse videatur. Mald. Com. in Math. 7.18.


The works which are done without faith, though they seem good, are turned
into sin. Maldonat answers: We may not defend that opinion which the
Council of Trent did of late justly condemn, although the great Father S.
Austen seem to be of that opinion.

8. Saint Austen says: He crowns thee, Coronat te quia dona sua coronat, non
merita tua. Aug. in Psalm. 10^. Bish in his Refor. of a Cathol. deformed.
because he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. M. Bishop protests, that
Saint Austen was too wise to let any such foolish sentence to pass his pen.

9. Saint Austen says: I know certain worshippers of Tombs and Pictures,
August. de Mor. Eccles. li. 1. c. 34. Bell. de Imag. c. 16.
whom the Church condemns. Bellarmine answers: This book was written in the
beginning of his first conversion to the Catholic Faith. Aug. de corrept and
gra. cap 1. D. Augustinus du^ toto spiritus ac verboru^ ardore pro defensione
diuinae gratiae pugnat aduersus Pelagianos liberu^ arbitriu^ cu^ iniuria
diuinae gratiae ex^olle^tes in altera^ quasi foueam dela^s vtdetur, minusque
interdum iribuere quam par sit liberae hominis vol^tati. Sixth. Sene^^. in Bib.
sanct. l. 5 in Prefat. Nos no^ moueat Augustinus vel tantillum, etc.

Episc. Bitont. comment in Ep. ad Romans ca. 5. p. 270.




10. Saint Austen says, In doing good none can be free in will and act,
unless he be free by him that said: If the Son free you, you are truly
freed. Sixtus Senensis says: Whilst Saint Austen does contend earnestly
against the Pelagians, for the defense of divine Grace, he does seem to fall
into an other pit, and sometimes attribute too little to Freewill: But says
the Bishop of Bitonto: Let not Saint Austen move us at all: for it is proper
ana peculiar to him, that when he opposetth any error, he does it with that
vehemency, that he seems to favor an other error: even so, when he
prosecutes Arrius, he seems to favor Sabellius; when Sabellius, Arrius; when
Pelagius, the Maniches; when the Maniches, Pelagius: and this is very
considerable, and ought especially to be noted in him.

Lastly, Saint Austen (upon the words of Christ) says, Thou art Peter, August
de verb. Dom. Sermon. 13.
and upon this Rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock which thou have
known, saying, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God, will I build my
Church -- for the Rock was Christ. Stapl. princip. doct. lib. 6. c. 3.
Stapleton answers: It was lapsus humanus, an humane error, caused by the
diversity of the Greek and Latin tongue, which either he was ignorant of, or
marked not. Bell. li 1. de Pont. ca. 10.
Bellarmine replies: Saint Austen was deceived by the ignorance only of the
Hebrew tongue. But Albertus Pigghius concludes with a witness against him:
Nusquam hanet, nusquam figit, sed vbique explorat, vbique tentat, et suberatur
omnia, et quicquid probabile occcurrit alicubi amplectitur, quoth co^tinuo post
displicet and retractatur -- Ociose secum inquire^tu et tenta^tis omnia Alb.
Piggh. Hier. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 5.
Nusquam haeret, nusquam figit. He never resolves certainly upon any thing, but
(as if he were idle-headed, given to crotchets) he fetches about this way,
and that way, and at length lighting upon some probability, lays hold on it,
and then dislikes it, and presently retracts it.

Thus, if we may credit their best learned Romanists, St. Austen did not agree
constantly with himself, nor others: his doctrine is opposed by the consent of
Fathers in the Trent Council: he used not his own meaning in fighting
against heretics: If he had been living in these days, he would have been
of an other mind: He is inconstant, and fixes in certain upon nothing, but as
an idle-headed man; full of crotchets, one while he resolves, an other while
he retracts it.

You have heard Saint Austens confession, and our adversaries solution,
touching the chief points in question betwixt us; whereby as yet I see no cause
why the Romanists should brag of the ancient Fathers in general, nor of St.
Austen in particular.

I proceed in the next place to examine the faith of Austen the Monk, that it
may appear, whether that doctrine, which he published here in England, above
a thousand years since, be consonant to our Religion, or the doctrine of the
Roman Church.

SECT. XIII. Saint Gregory pretended to be the Founder of the Roman Religion
in England, by sending Austen the Monk for conversion of this Nation; in his
undoubted writings, directly opposes the Romish faith, in the maine points
thereof.
Austen the Monk, was sent into England by Gregory the Great, about the year
600, and is termed by the Romanists of this latter age, Englands Apostle. To
say nothing of the haughtiness of his person, (through whose pride and
contempt twelve hundred poor Christians and holy men of Bangor were murdered,
as it is related by Venerable Bede, Bid. Hist. Ang l. 2. c. 2
) let us observe the doctrine of that age: and because we have no Records of
the Monks doctrine, let us reflect upon Gregory the Great, whose writings are
extant; and who without doubt, professed the substance of that Faith, which by
his Warrant and Commission was then published in England by Austen the Monk.

It is the general vote of the Romanists in this latter age, that the Faith
which Gregory delivered in his days, was so true and Catholic, that If an
Angel from heaven should teach other doctrine, then that we have received from
Gregory, we are not to hear him. Canus the Bishop of Canaries well
understood, that this Assumpsit was of too large an extent, and therefore wisely
by way of prevention, gives this caveat to the Reader: Canus li. 11 loc. Theol.
c. 6. p. 540.
It is fitting for a Divine to be admonished, and not suddenly to be
persuaded, that all things are perfect which great and learned Authors have
written: as for example, Gregory and Bid, the one in his History of England,
the other in his Books of Dialogues, have published such miracles, commonly
received and believed, which the censurers of this age will think to be
(doubtful) and uncertain. I speak not this to decline the doctrine of
Gregory, Quid est hoc quaeso te quoth in hi^ extremis temporibus t^m multa de
animabus, etc Greg. Dial lib 4. cap. 40.
for howsoever many ceremonies and strange opinions, through visions and
apparitions of dead men, (which Gregory in his Dialogues complained of) sprung
up in his days, yet the principal points of doctrine did as yet remain sound
and stable: so that (setting aside his Dialogues, which are but Aniles fabulae,
no way fit to prove Articles of Faith:) In his undoubted Writings, there will
be found few or no substantial points which are not agreeable to the Tenets
of our Church, and altogether different from the Roman: and that this may
become more manifest to the Reader, I have compared the Trent Doctrine and ours
with Gregory, that by parallelling the Articles on both sides, the Antiquity
of the true Church may visibly appear by the faith of Gregory.

The Canonical Books of Scripture.
Gregorie] We do not amiss, Non inordinate agimus si ex libris licet no^
Canonicis, sed tamen ad edificatione^ Ecclesia editis testimonium proferamus.
Greg. Moral lib. 19. ca 13. Artic 6.
if we bring forth a testimony out of (the books of Maccabees) which though
they are not Canonical, yet are they set forth for the edification and
instruction of the Church.

Church of England] The books of Maccabees the Church does read for example
of life and instruction of manners; but yet it does not apply them to establish
any doctrine.

Conc. Trid. Sess 4.
Church of Rome] If any shall refuse the books of Maccabees for Canonical
Scriptures, let him be accursed. In hoc volumine omnia quae crudiu^t cuncta
quae aedificant scripta co^tine^tur. Greg. in Ezekiel. l. 1. Hom 9. A^tic. 6.
Scripturae sine Traditionibus nec fueru^t simpliciter necessaria nec
sufficientes Bell. de ver. D no^ scrip. c. 4. et Conc. Trid. Sess. 4 decret. 1.


The sufficiency of the Scriptures.
Gregory.] Whatsoever serves for edification and instruction, is contained in
the Volume of the Scriptures.

Church of England.] Holy Scriptures contain all things necessary to
salvation.

Church of Rome] Scriptures, without Traditions, are neither simply necessary,
nor sufficient.

Reading of the Scriptures.
Gregory.] The Scripture is an Epistle sent from God to his creature, (that
is, to Priest and people) If thou receiuest a letter from an earthly King,
Greg. lib. 4. Epist 40. ad Theedor. Medicum. This instruction was to a
Physician a lay man.
thou will never rest nor sleep before thou understand it. The King of Heaven,
and God of men and Angels, has sent his Letters unto thee for the good of thy
soul, and yet thou neglectest the reading of them. I pray thee therefore
study them, and daily meditate of the words of thy Creator, and learn the
heart and mind of God, in the words of God.

Church of England] The Scriptures are Manna, and gi-giuen us from heaven, to
feed us in the desert of this world. Jewel in his Treatise of the holy
Scriptures page 46. 47.
Let us read them, and behold them, and reason of them, and learn one of
another, what profit may come to us by them: -- for all have right to hear the
word of God, all have need to know the word of God.

Index lib. prohib in obseruat. circa Regulam. 4.
Church of Rome] Whereas it is manifest by experience, that if the holy Bible
should be permitted (to be read) in the vulgar tongue, it would bring more
danger then benefit, by the rashness of men; therefore they are forbidden to
the common people, See Hard. in Jewel. Art 15. diuis. 3.
yea and to Regulars to read or retain any vulgar Translation, without the
license of their Bishops, or Inquisitor.

The Real Presence.
Gregory. Preciosi sa^guin^ effusione genus humanum Christus redemit, and
sacrosancti vi^^sficies car poris sui and sanguinis mysterium me^bris suis
tribu^^, cuius perceptione corpus suum quoth est Ecclesia, pascitur and potatur,
abluitur and sanctificatur. Greg. in 6 Psalm. poenitent.
] Christ with the effusion of his most precious blood, redeemed mankind, and
gives unto his members the most holy mysteries of his quickening body and
blood, by the participation whereof, his body which is the Church, is nourished
with meat and drink, and is washed and sanctified. Here Gregory makes a
plain difference between the body of Christ offered on the Cross, and the
mystery of that body offered in the Sacrament: and that we might know, it was
not a corporal but a mystical body, he tells us, Christ's Body is the Church:
and that we might yet further know, the members of Christ were not fed with
real flesh and blood: for, there is nothing more absurd, ( says Bellarmin)
then to think the substance of our flesh should be nourished with the flesh of
Christ: Bellar. de Euch. lib. 2. cap 4.
he tells us, they are nourished with meat and drink, and withal are washed
and sanctified, by the mystery of his body. And to remove all imaginations of
a carnal presence, he proclaims it elsewhere in the words of an Angel: Greg.
Hom. in Euan 21
He is risen, he is not here: Christ (says he) is not here in the presence
of his flesh, yet he is absent no where, by the presence of his Deity.

Church of England] The Body of Christ is given, Jewel Art. 5. p. 238.
taken and eaten in the Supper, only after a heavenly and spiritual manner.
We seek Christ above in heaven, and imagine not him to be bodily present
upon the earth.

Church of Rome. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 1.
] In the Sacrament of the Eucharist, after consecration, our Lord Jesus Christ,
true God and man, is truly, really, and substantially contained under the
form of sensible things. Si fuissent mill hostiae in mill locis, eo tempore
quo Christus perpendit in cruce, Cristus fusset crucifi^ous in mill locis
Holcot in Sententque
Insomuch as Holcot the Jesuit professes, If there had been a thousand Hosts
in a thousand places, at that very time when Christ hung upon the Cross, then
had Christ been crucified in a thousand places.

Private Mass.
Gregory.] Let not the Priest alone celebrate Mass: for as he cannot
perform it without the presence of the Priest and people: Sacerdos Missam
solus nequaquam celebret. Greg. in lib. Capitulari cap. 7. apud. Cassand.
Liturg. 33. p. 83.
so likewise it ought not to be performed by one alone: for there ought to be
present (some) to whom he ought to speak, and who in like manner ought to
answer him: and he must withal remember that saying of Christ, Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, I will be present with them.

Church of England.] The breaking of bread which is now used in the Mass,
Jewel. Art. 1. in fine
signifies a distribution of the Sacrament unto the people; as Saint Austen
says unto Paulinus, It is broken, to the end it may be divided.

Church of Rome.] If any shall say that Private Masses, in which the Priest
alone does Sacramentally communicate, Conc. Trid. Can. 8. Sess. 22.
are unlawful, and therefore ought to be abrogated: let him be accursed.

Communion in both kinds.
Gregory.] You have learned what the blood of the Lamb is, not by hearing, De
Consecrat Did. 2. Q^i^ sit sanguis.
but by drinking. Again, The blood of Christ is not powered into the hands of
unbelievers, but into the mouths of the faithful (people.)

Church of England.] The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay
people: Arti^. 30.
for both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and
commandment ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike.

Church of Rome.] Although our Savior did exhibit in both kinds, Conc. Trid.
cap. 3. Sess. 21.
yet if any shall say, the holy Catholic Church was not induced, for just
causes, to communicate the lay people under one kind, and shall say they erred
in so doing, let him be accursed.

Merit of works.
Sunt nonnulli qui saluos se suis viribus exulta^t suisque praecedentibus
meritis redemptos se esse gloriantur, quorum profecto assertio, inuenitur
sibinetipsis contraria, quia dum Innocents se asserunt, et redemptos, hoc
ipsu^ in se rede^ptionis nome^ euacuant. In 28 1. Job l. 18. c. 22. Aliud est
secundum opera, aliud propter opera reddere. Ide^ 7. Psalm, Poenit.
Gregory.] There are some which glory that they are saved by their own
strength, and brag that they are redeemed by their own precedent merits; but
herein they contradict themselves: for whilst they affirm that they are
innocent, and yet redeemed, they frustrate the name of Redemption in
themselves. Again, If the blessedness of the Saints be acquired by mercy,
not by merits, how is it said, He will render to every man according to his
works? If it be according to his works, how is it given of mercy? It is one
thing (says he) to give according to their works, another thing to give for
their works sake. And from this ground he makes this his confession. I pray
to be saved, Idem in 1. Psalm. Paenit.
not trusting to my merits, but presuming to obtain that by thy mercy alone,
which I hope not for by merit.

Church of England.] We are accounted righteous before God only, Art. 11.
by the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not our own
works: For to have affiance in our works, Homily of goodworks
as by merit of them to purchase to our selves remission of sins, and
eternal life, is blasphemy.

Church of Rome.] Good works are meritorious, Rhem. Annot. in Heb. 6. ver. 10.
and the very cause of salvation, so far that God should be unjust, if he
rendered not Heaven for the same. Again, All good works done by Gods grace,
after the first justification, Idem in 2. Tim. 4.8.
be truly and properly meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life, and
that thereupon Heaven is the due and just stipend, crown or recompense, which
God by his Justice owes to the persons so working by his grace, for he
renders or repayeth heaven, as a just Judge, and not only as a merciful
Giver; and the Crown which he pays, is not only of mercy, or favor, or
grace, but also of justice.

Worship of Images.
Gregory.] In his Epistle to Serenus, Bishop of Masilia, says: Greg. lib. 7.
Epist. 109.
Your Brotherhood seeing certain worshippers of Images, broke the said Images,
and cast them out of the Church: the zeal which you had, that nothing made
with hands should be worshipped, we praise: but we think you should not have
broken them down. For Painting is therefore used in Churches, that they which
are unlearned, may by sight read that on the walls, which in books they
cannot. Your brotherhood should therefore have spared the breaking of them, and
yet restrained the people from worshipping them, Adoratione^ omnibus modis
deuita. Lib. 9. Ep. 5.
that the rude might have had how to come by the knowledge of the Story, and
yet the people not sin in worshipping the picture.

Church of England.] The Romish doctrine concerning the worshipping and
adoration, Art. 22.
as well of Images, as of Relics, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and
grounded upon no Warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God.

Church of Rome.] We teach, Conc. Trid. Sess. 25.
that the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mother of God, and other Saints, are
chiefly in Churches to be had, and retained, and that due honor and worship
is to be given unto them.

The Popes Supremacy.
Gregory. Ego fidenter dico. Lib. 6. ep. 30 Mauricio Augusto. Idem lib. 6. ep
24. lib. 4. ep 32. 34. 36 38. 39.
] I say confidently, Whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called the
(Universal Bishop) in the pride of his heart, is the forerunner of Antichrist.
For, the title of (universal Bishop) is the puff of arrogancy, the word of
pride, a new, pompous, a perverse, foolish, a rash, a superstitious, a profane,
an ungodly and wicked name, a name of singularity, a name of error, a name of
hypocrisy, a name of vanity, and a name of blasphemy. And writing to
Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, he makes this profession: For mine own part,
Greg. lib. 7. ep. 30.
I seek to increase in virtues, and not in words; for if you call me
Universal Bishop, you deny your selves to be that, which you confess to be
wholly in me: but God forbid, let us rather put far from us these words which
puff up pride, and vanity, and wound Charity to the death.

Church of England.] It is plain, that the Bishop of Rome challenges this day
a title that St. Peter never had, Jewel. Art. 4 Diuis. 4.
that no holy nor godly man would ever take upon him, that St. Gregory utterly
refused, and detested, and called blasphemy.

Church of Rome.] The Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome may be proved by
fifteen several Names or Titles, Bell. de Po^t. lib. 2. c. 31.
as namely, the Prince of Priests, the High Priest, the Vicar of Christ, the
universal Bishop, and the like: and from those high and mighty Titles, they
have created this Article of faith. We declare, Subesse Romano Pont. omni
humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus omnino esse
de necessitate salutis. Bonif. 8. in extran. de Mayor. and Obed. Cap. Vnam
Sancta^ etc.
we pronounce, we define, that every creature upon necessity of salvation,
must be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Thus briefly I have given you the principal points of doctrine delivered by
Gregory; and from these his several confessions, I hope the Romanists will
give me leave, to return them their own assertion: If an Angel from heaven
teach other doctrine (Touching the books of Maccabees, the All-sufficiencie,
and reading of the Scriptures, the Real presence, Private Mass, Communion in
both kinds, Merit of works, Worship of Images, and the Popes Supremacy) I say
with our adversaries, If an Angel from heaven teach other doctrine then (in
these particulars) we have received from Gregory, we are not to hear him.

I proceed from Fathers to Councels; and upon a reviewe of the Fathers
Doctrine, I will here conclude, Since the ancient Doctors are no Rules of our
Faith, nor have any power to bind (as Bellarmine* confesses,) since their
books are sometimes purged, their authorities sometimes condemned as spurious
and counterfeit, as their Inquisitors confess; since their Expositions with an
uniform consent, are sometimes decreed for an Article of Faith, Bulla Pij 4.
Artic. 2.
sometimes declined by their best learned Romanists, as namely, Card.
Bellarmine, Andradius, Card. Cajetan, and Card. Baronius profess: And lastly,
since the Scripture is the most certain and most safe Rule of faith, Scriptura
regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque. Bellar.
(as it is acknowledged on both sides:) I say to leave this certain and safe
rule, and to follow the Fathers in all, and tread in their steps, as children
do in sport, it is Via Dubia, a doubtful and uncertain way, it is Via Devia,
a wandering and By-way.

SECT. XIIII. Counsels which are so highly extold and opposed against us, were
neither called by lawful authority, or to the right ends, as is confessed by
ingenious Romanists.
ECckius the Romanist tells us, the authority of Counsels is of that
consequence, Tollatur Co^ciliorum authoritas, et omnia in Ecclesia erunt
ambigua, dubia, pendentia, incert^, na^ omnes mox redibu^t haereses. Ecck.
Ench. Art. de Council.
that if they should be taken away, All things would become ambiguous,
doubtful, wavering, uncertain, and all heresies would revive again. And that
the Romish proselyts might know, what obedience ought to be given to Councels,
Gregory de Valentia gives them this caveat: Si Synodus Episcopalis aut co^munis
co^sensus plurium Theologoru^ statueret aliquam propositionem esse proposita^
ab Ecclesia vt de fide -- tunc talis teneretur, etc. Valent. in Tom. 3. disp.
1. q. 2. punct. 5.
If you find but an Episcopal Synod, or consent of diverse Divines only,
affirming such a doctrine to be the sentence of the Church, you are bound to
believe it, though it be a lie. Pardon me if I believe them not: for our
adversaries give just cause of suspicion, when their chiefest respect tends to
the honor of Traditions, of Fathers, of Councels, and the sacred Word is made
a byword of Obscurity and Insufficiency.

I speak not this, as if our Church did decline the authority of Counsels;
for we profess that General Councels, are the representative Body, and as it
were a little Model of the whole Church. We approve the first four General
Counsels, confirmed by our Church, Eliz. 1. Whitak. Rat. 4. verse. Camp.
and Acts of Parliament: we acknowledge with reverend Whitakers, The name of
Councels is honorable, their credit singular, and their authority of great
esteem: nay more, we testify with learned Bellarmine, Bell de Eccles. and
Council. li. 1. c. 10 in Initio.
that General Counsels are very profitable, and in some sort necessary (for
the suppressing of heresies) yet (says he) they are not absolutely and simply
necessary, and of this I am easily persuaded for this reason. First, because
the Primitive Church for the first three hundred years had no General
Counsels, and yet perished not: Again, as the Church during those three
hundred years continued safe without general Counsels, so without doubt it
might have continued three hundred years more, and again six hundred years
after that, and so likewise a thousand years more: for in those (first) times,
there were many heresies, many schisms, many vices and abuses, all which,
notwithstanding they wanted the assistance of general Counsels, could not
endanger the Catholic Church.

But admit that Councels were simply necessary, (which Bellarmine denies) yet
their calling must be answerable to their beginning, and therefore let us first
inquire by what authority they were first called, and observe how the
Commission has been executed from time to time, by warrantie of the first
Author.

We read in the book of Numbers, Number. 10.1, 2.
that the Lord commanded Moses to make two Trumpets of silver, that he might
use them for calling of the Assembly. Moses according to Gods Law, did assemble
the people; and, says the Text, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
Moses was king in Iesurum, when the heads of the people, and the tribes of
Israel gathered together. Moses then had Ius Regale, a Regal power, (although
in propriety of speech he were no King) and by this Regal power he
assembled the people, and this authority was executed by him as by a King.
This right was assumed after him by King David, by king Solomon, by king
Josiah, by king Iehoshaphat, and so from Moses to the Maccabees they all
practiced the same power of calling assemblies, as Kings and Princes, and there
was none of Gods Prophets, I say not any one that either opposed, or prohibited
these assemblies. At the coming of Christ this commission was renewed, but not
altered, there was no new order for calling them, other then had bin taken in
the old Law, and as soon as kings received the Christian faith, they executed
the same power of the Trumpets, which was first granted to Moses.

The first Council of Nice it was the first and best General Assembly that was
summoned in the Christian world, after the Apostles time; and this was called
by the Emperor Constantine the Great.

The 2d. general Council at Constantinople, was called by the Emperor
Theodosius the elder.

The third at Ephesus, by the Emperor Theodosius the younger.

The fourth at Chalcedon, by the Emperor Valentinian and Martian. These four
general Councels, are likened by Gregory to the four Evangelists, and these
had their right calling by Kings and Emperors, and not by the Bishop of Rome.

If we look upon particular Councels, it will appear, they were likewise
called by Kings and Princes in their several dominions, for many ages. The
first Council of Arles was called by Constantine the Great. The Council of
Aquileia, was called by the Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius: The first of
Orleance, by king Clodoueus: the second of Orleance, by Chidelbert the French
King; and this manner of calling assemblies by Kings and Emperors continued from
Moses to Constantine, and from Constantine to Arnulphus, above 2400. years:
for otherwise if this new assertion must take place: The Pope must call
Councels: the first four General Counsels, which all Christians had in such
reverence, not one of them is a lawful Council, nay, says our Reverend and
learned B. Andrews, D. Andrews in his Sermon of calling Assemblies.
The Church of Christ has to this day never a General Council, Vna litura,
with one wipe we dash them out all, we have never a one, no not one. And that
you may know it is not the testimony of the Protestants alone, Cardinal
Cusanus does witness with us, Cusan. Concord. Cath. lib. 3. ca. 13. and 16.
that all the General Councels to the eight, inclusiuely, were all called by
the Emperors: and that we may justly charge the Pope of Usurpation, both in
calling, and assuming a pre-eminence of place and dignity in Councels, Semper
inuenio Imperatores et Iudices suos cum Senatu Primatum habuisse and officiu^
Praesidentia per interloquutiones, et ex conse^nsu Synod^ sine mandato
conclusiones et iudicia fecisse. Cusan de Con. lib. 3. c. 16.
the Cardinal makes this confession: I evermore find, that the Emperors and
their Judges with the Senate, had the government, and Office of Presidence, by
hearing and conferring of matters, and that they made Conclusions, and
Judgments with the consent of the Council, and without any further Commission.

Those men therefore that are so earnest in calling upon us for Counsels,
should first show us the lawful calling of their assemblies. If Demetrius and
his fellow craftsmen will assemble together of their own heads, and keep a
shouting and crying for the great Diana of their Religion, this rowt will
prove a riot, and is punishable by the Laws of God and man: away therefore
with this confusion, away with Demetrius assemblies. If Pope Innocent the Third
will assemble in his own name, contrary to the Commission granted to Kings and
Princes, by express warrant from Gods own mouth; if, I say, contrary to Gods
command, after a continued succession in the right of Kings and Princes for
2400 years, he will usurp the right of calling Counsels, the Pope will not
be found Innocent, nor his assemblies lawful: for the Towne-clerke of Ephesus
could tell Dometrius and his fellows; If they enquire any thing, Acts 19.39.
concerning matters, it (must) be determined in a lawful Assembly.

The promises of Christ, no doubt, are many and gracious to his Church, but
they are annexed to a condition, (if they come together in his Name) the
condition then being once broken, the Obligation to the Church and Council,
becomes void, of none effect. It will not be amiss therefore to understand
what it is to assemble in Christ's Name, and then see whether the Church of Rome
has performed that second duty in her assemblies.

It cannot be denied, that they are said to assemble in Christ's Name, whom
neither respect of private gain induces, nor the ambitious desire of honor
inuiteth, nor the prick of hatred and envy incite and drive forward, but whom
the inflamed love of peace, and the fervent affections of Christianity impell,
and not the spirit of contention. Surely these conditions are requisite to
their right calling; and these were anciently performed in the first four
General Counsels, (to which our Church subscribeth:) but as their own
Cardinal Cusanus protested, that the authority of Councels does not depend upon
the Pope; so likewise their own learned Ferus professes, that In matters of
Faith, and things which concern the conscience, it is not sufficient for them
to say, We will and command, but you must consider in what manner the Apostles
dealt in their Assemblies: they came together in simplicity of heart, seeking
only Gods glory, and the salvation of others, Nos aliter conuenimus nempe cum
magna po^pa, nosque ipsosquaerimus, atque n^bis ^ollic^^ur, nihil nobis non
licere de plenitu dine potestatis, and quomodo spiritus sanctus eiusmodi
conuentus probare possit. Ferus super Acts 15.
no marvel therefore if the Spirit of God was in that Council: but (says
he) Nos aliter conuenimus: Our meeting is in another manner; namely with great
pomp, and seeking our selves, and promising to our selves license upon
fullness of power to do any thing; and this being so, how is it possible for
the Spirit of God to approve such assemblies. Here then we have our learned
Adversaries confessions, that two principal conditions anciently in use, are
both abrogated by the latter Councels; the one is, The Pope calls Counsels,
that has no right to call them: the other is, That they assemble in their own
name, and for their own end, not for the Catholic peace, and Christian
Charity. And thus much briefly concerning the authority of Calling Counsels.

Let us take a short view of Councels in all ages, and withal let us add to
the Popes unlawful Calling, the errors of Councels, the uncertainty of their
Canons, the manifest forgeries of ancient Decrees, the palpable and gross
suggestions of new devised Acts, with their senseless condemnation of true
Decrees and Canons, that make against their Romish Faith, and Trent Doctrine,
and tell me if these men have any cause or reason to equal Counsels with the
Scriptures, or to build upon them in matters of Faith, or to claim them all
for theirs, when by their own ensuing testimonies, they are doubtful which
are right, which are false, which are lawful, which are counterfeit. And
lastly, when they are not agreed amongst themselves, whether Councels rightly
called, are infallible, or stand subject unto error.

SECT. XV. Councels, which our adversaries pretend, as a chief bulwark of
their faith, give no support at all to the Romish Religion as it is proved by
particular objections made against several Counsels, in all ages by the
Romanists themselves.
Cardinal Bellarmine, who formerly told us, the Church of God might safely
subsist without Councels, gives us likewise to understand by way of prevention,
Libri Concilioru^ negligenter conseruati sunt, and multis vitiis scatent. Bell.
de Council. l. 3, c. 2.
that the Books of Counsels, being negligently kept, do abound with many
errors: and hereby we may guess what is like to be the doctrine of those
Counsels that are guilty of such errors; and what will be the issue of that
doctrine that depends upon such Councels. Whether errors have crept in by the
negligence of the keepers, I cannot tell, but sure I am, many general and
particular Councels have erred, many Decrees and Canons of Counsels, which are
produced for the Roman Religion, are acknowledged by themselves to be
spurious, and counterfeit: and many true Canons and Councels, which make against
their Trent faith, are condemned by our adversaries as fallible and erroneous,
as shall appear by their own several confessions in all ages, from the time
of Christ till the days of Luther.

The first Age, to 100 years.
In the first Age.] The Council at Jerusalem, gathered under the High Priest,
wherein Caiphas was President, Mark 14.
sought testimony against Jesus: and excommunicated those who confessed Jesus
to be Christ. Errauit in fide perniciosissime Caiphas cum v^iuerso Co^cilio cu^
iudicauit Iesum blasphemasse. Bellar. de Conc. auth. lib. 2. c. 8.
Bellarmine tells us, Before the coming of Christ, the Councels of the Jews
could not err; but (says he) Caiphas with the whole Council did err most
pernitiously, when they adjudged Christ a blasphemer. And this may serve for a
leading case, to show that Councels may err, as they have erred in the first
Age.

In the second Age. The 2 Age, Ann. 100. to 200.
] In the year 102, the Council of Antioch is cited by Gretzerus, by Turrian,
by Baronius, for the Worship of Images: yet neither Merlin, nor Crabbe, nor
Surius, nor Nicholinus, Come censura Patru^. page 237.
publishers of the Counsels ever mention it; and Binius who produces it,
does acknowledge to have received it from Baronius, and Baronius returns his
Author for the Jesuit Turrian, and Turrian professes that Pamphilus found it
in Origens Library. And this may serve to show, that some Councels are devised
to prove the Trent doctrine, and the rather, because worship of Images requires
Antiquity, and Consent of Bishops, to prove it an Article of Faith.

The 3 Age. Ann. 200. to 300.
In the third Age] In the year 258, the third Council of Carthage had
fourscore and seven Bishops; but says Binius: Huius Prouincialis
The Catholic Church does not receive the Decrees of this Council. Concilii
decreta non recipit Catholica Ecclesia. Bin. in marg. Council. p. 149.
And the reason is pregnant, This Synod touches the Popes Supremacy: for when
as Stephanus Bishop of Rome called himself Episcopus Episcoporum, The Bishop
of Bishops, Saint Cyprian and the whole Council opposed that new Title. And
this may serve to prove that some Councels rightly called, are discarded by
our adversaries, when they make against their Trent faith.

In the fourth Age] In the year 317, The 4. Age Ann. 300. to 400.
the Council of Sinuessa is pretended to consist of 300 Bishops, besides
Presbyters and Deacons; and this Council is cited especially for the Popes
Supremacy: yet Binius, the publisher of the Councels professes: Doctissimoru^
plurimi hac Acta spuria and nullius ponderis esse, validis sane argumentis
probare conati sunt. Council. Sinuess. Bin. p. 184.
that this Council Although it deserve great credit for the Martyrologies of
the Church, yet very many learned men account the Acts to be spurious, and of
no force and validity. And this may show the faith of their Supremacy is
grounded upon uncertain and doubtful Councils.

The first General Council of Nice was called in the year 325, and is cited
by Bellarmine in the 69 Canon, Bellar. de Vnct. li. 1. cap 4.
to prove Extreme Unction a Sacrament, and Mr. Heart says, This Council has
80 Canons, and in those Canons the Patriarchs are said to rule their subjects,
as the Pope is head of all the Patriarchs, like Peter. Yet 60 of these Canons
were denied by Alipius Bishop of Tagasta, by Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, by
Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, and by St. Austen, and the Council of
Africa, who allowed only twenty; and, Raynold. and Heart. cap 9. Diuis. 2. p.
575.
says Contius their Lawyer: Their bastardie is proved even by this, that no
man, no not Gratian himself durst allege them. And this may serve to show,
that some counterfeit Canons by their own confessions, are produced for their
doctrine of Faith and Sacraments.

The Council of Eliberis] In the year 328 decreed, Placuit picturas in
Ecclesia non debere. Canon 36. Suspicor in illo Canone imposturam Bar. An. ad
an. 57. nu. 121. Bell de Imag. l. 2. c. 9
That no Images should be set up in Churches: Baronius answers: I suspect
some iugling in this Canon. Bellarmine answers: It was a Council consisting
but of nineteen Bishops, and a Provincial Council, not confirmed, (by the
Pope) and it seems to have erred in other Decrees. Here one Cardinal seems
to allow the Council, but not the Decree against Images; the other disallowes
the whole Council as fallible, both in that and other Decrees. Howsoever this
may serve to show, that there were Protestant Bishops in those days, who made
public protestation against making and worshipping of Images, and yet neither
Canons nor Councels must be allowed, if they make against an Article of their
new Creed.

The Council of Millan was cited in the year 355, and was universal, and
consisted of three hundred and more Bishops: and yet this Council did err in
the cause of Athanasius: Dyonisius. Eusebius. Paulinus. Lucifer. Rodanus.
Zozom. l. 4. c. 8.
for (says Zozomen) Whereas 300 of the Western Bishops had consented that
Athanasius should be deposed from his Bishopric, there were only five
against fifteen score that withstood it.

The Council of Ariminum was cited in the year 360, and was universal, and
consisted of 600 Bishops: Multis paucorum fraud deceptis. Aug. contr^ Maxim.
lib. 3. cap. 14.
but (says Austen) Heretical impiety under an heretical Emperor assayed to
overthrow the truth, the multitude being deceived by the subtlety of a few.
And says Hierom: Nomine vnitatis et fidei infidelitas scripta est. Hier.
advers. Lucif.
In the name of unity and faith, Infidelity (was decreed) and written. And
these are Evidences, that general Councels have erred, and may err.

In the fifth Age] In the year 455, The 5. Age Ann. 400. to 500.
the general Counsel of Chalcedon was called; it consisted of 630 Bishops,
and decreed, Conc. Chal. Can. 28.
that the Church of Rome should have the primacy, because the city of Rome was
the Empire of the whole world. This reason was so unpleasing to Pope Leo at
that time and the Romanists in these days, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 17.
that C. Bellarmine co^plaines: It was the Decree of a great Council, but not
lawfully made, and therefore of no force and authority: for (says he) not
only the Popes Legates rejected that Decree in the Council, but Pope Leo
himself, who confirmed the rest of the Decrees, condemned it. And this may
serve to show that the reasons and decrees of 630 Bishops, are no decrees, no
reasons, if the Pope or his Legates do not allow them.

The 6. age Ann. 500. to 600.
In the sixth Age] The fifth General Council of Constantinople was called, in
the year 553, wherein both Pope Vigilius himself, Crak. def. Eccl. Angl. cap.
12.
and three Chapters of his Decrees, were condemned as heretical, and accursed.
Lege Liberati Breuiarium ca. 22. and Pont. ficale in vita Vigilij.
And this may serve to show, that the Pope may be an heretic, that a Counsel
is above the Pope, who have authority to condemn him or his Decrees, as they
find occasion; and that the Decrees of former Councels may be corrected by the
latter; and consequently, there is no certainty, no infallibility in Pope or
Councels.

In the seventh Age] The sixth General Council was called at Constantinople,
The 7. Age. Ann. 600. to 700.
in the year 681, and is pretended by Crabbe and Surius to have nine Canons,
whereof the seventh is cited by Bellarmine for Invocation of Saints, Bell de
fact. Beat. l 5. c. 19. and l. 2. de Confir. cap 40. Surius Candid. lectori.
yet their own Surius tells us: Those nine Canons are falsely ascribed to the
sixth Synod; yea, those Canons are false and counterfeit, Caranza Sum Conc. in
Council 6 Constant.
says Caranza. Again, this Synod condemned Pope Honorius for a Monothelite.
Put says Bellarmine, we may safely say, Tuto dicere possumus. Bell de Po^t.
lib 4. c. 11.
the Fathers did undeservedly reckon Honorius amongst heretics, being deceived
by false reports, and not understanding the Epistles of Honorius. Hence we may
observe, that sometimes an Article of Faith, (as namely, Invocation of Saints)
is confirmed by our adversaries, from the authority of a general Council,
when it is known and confessed by themselves to be counterfeit: and sometimes
the Pope himself is adjudged an heretic by a General Council, when as for
the honor of the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility, the whole Council must
be condemned. Lastly, if from the Decrees of this General Council, we shall
note the errors of Counsels in general: Albertus Pigghius a learned man
(says Canus) does demonstrate by many arguments, Canus loc. Theol. li. 5.
cap. 1.
that the Acts which bear the name of the sixth and seventh (General)
Councels, contain many errors.

In the eight Age] The second Council of Nic^, The 8. Age Ann. 700. to 800.
called in the year 788, and termed (the Seventh General Council:) pronounced
Anathema against Pope Honorius. What answer therefore can be made to this
Council? Bell. de Po^t. lib. 4. c. 11.
Bellarmine replies: This Council was deceived by the Presidents of former
Councels. This general Council then did not only err, but by this rule we
has no certainty, that other Counsels are free from error. And to speak
plainly and truly, this accursed Council, that by blood and usurpation first
set afoot the worship of Images: This Synod (says Vspergensis) was rejected in
the Council of Frankford, Vsperg. an. 793. and ^ig. de Act. 6. and 7. Syn. ad
Lectorem.
as utterly void, and not to be named the Seventh, nor any thing else.

In the ninth Age] In the year 867, The 9. Age. Ann. 800. to 9^0.
the Eight General Council of Constantinople decreed with the consent of 383
Bishops, that whomsoever Photius, Turrian. li. de 6. 7. and 8. Synod p 93
Patriarch of Constantinople did depose or excommunicate, the Pope might not
restore nor absolve; and whomsoever the Pope did depose or excommunicate,
Photius might not absolve nor restore. Touching this Synod, Bellar. de Conc.
auth. lib. 2. c. 11.
Bellarmine answers: This Council did err, because the Popes Legates did
contrary to the Popes instructions. He that shall read the Decrees and Canons of
a General Council, ratified and declared by almost 400 Bishops, would think
it strange, that they al could err in a point of faith, viz. touching the
Popes Supremacy; and it is no less to be wondered, that the Popes Legates,
(either through ignorance or wilfulnes) should so much digress from the Popes
instructions, as to determine things contrary to his command: but the truth is,
as the former Council (by the Cardinals confession) was led by the Presidents
of other Councels, to oppose the Popes Supremacy: so likewise this Counsel had
power and authority in their days, to create and confirm their Decrees and
Canons against Head and members, notwithstanding the Pope or his Legates had
imposed contrary instructions.

In the tenth Age] In the year 963, The 10. age Ann. 900. to 1000.
a Roman Council under Otho the Emperor was called, wherein Pope John the
twelfth was deposed, and Leo the eighth was substituted in his room. This Synod
(says Binius) was unlawful, Bin Not. in Conc. Romans sub Ottone. p. 155.
because the Bishops assembled without the Popes authority. And thus one
Counsel did err, being misled by the presidents of others; a second, for want
of good Instructions; a third, for want of a right calling: yet all tend to
this, rather to condemn all Councels of errors, then suffer the Popes
Supremacy, and an Article of Romish Faith, (which almost all Councels did
condemn) should be violated, and infringed.

The 11. age Ann. 1000 to 1100.
In the eleventh Age] In the year 1059, a Council at Rome was called under
Pope Nicholas the Second, Conc Romans sub Nich. 2.
where it was decreed: Not only the Sacrament of Christ's body, but the very
body of Christ, was handled, broken, and chewed with the teeth of the
faithful. This decree was thought very doubtful, and dangerous by the
Romanists themselves; insomuch as the Gloss upon Gratian gives this caveat:
Great de Conscer. d^st, 2. cap. Ego Berengarius.
Unless you rightly understand these words of Berengarius Recantation, you
will fall into a greater heresy then Berengarius himself. And hence we may
learn, that a Council confirmed by the Pope, (which Bellarmine says, cannot
err) decreed that doctrine of faith, which neither the Pope, nor his Church
dare avow for Catholic Doctrine at this day.

In the twelfth Age] In the year 1120, The 12. age Ann. 1100. to 1200.
the Council of Turon decreed, That the Eucharist given to sick folks,
Burchard. lib. 5. c. 9.
should be dipped in the cup, that the Priest might truly say, The body (and
blood) of our Lord Jesus Christ. Bellarmine says, Bellar. de Euch. lib. 4. cap
26.
that this Decree was amended: for in the third Council of Bracara, the bread
was forbidden to be dipped; and it is objected, that Christ did give it in
both kinds distinctly, the bread apart by it self, and the cup by it self,
although the Council did not thereupon conclude it should be given in both
kinds. Idem. Ibid.
Here we see Council against Council, and by Bellarmines testimony, neither
of both decreeing an Article of Faith according to Christ's Institution.

The 13. age Ann. 1200. to 1300.
In the thirteenth Age] In the year 1215, the Council of Lateran was called,
and many things (says Platina) were consulted upon, Venere multa tum quidem in
consultatione^, nec decerni tamen quicquid aperte potuit Plat. de vita
Innocent. 3.
but nothing plainly defined, by reason of some wars which Pope Innocentius
sought to compose, and died at Perusium. But Math. Paris, who was living at
that time, professes plainly, Conciliu^ illud generale qa more Papali gra^dia
front prima praesetulit in visum et sco^mam desiit. Math Par. Hist. Min.
That the same General Council, which made a great flourish at the first,
ended in ieasts and laughter, whereby all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Deanes, Archdeacons, and all comers to the Council were deluded. And hence
we may learn what certainty of faith the Romanists are like to have for
their grand point of Transubstantiation, (where it was first decreed for an
Article of belief) when as (by the testimony of their own Writers) there was
nothing plainly defined, and the whole Council concluded in ieasts and
laughter.

In the fourteenth Age] In the year 1302, The 14 age Ann. 1300. to 1400.
Pope Boniface the Eight called a Council at Rome, where he excommunicated
Philip the French King, and about the same time, the King summons a Council at
Paris, and therein appeals from the Popes sentence, and incites his Prelates
and Barons against him, Naucl. An. 1300. and Parir. Mas. in vita Bonif. 8.
and withal publicly declares, That the Pope was worthy to be deposed, for
heresy, for symonie, for murder, and other capital offenses. This is
witnessed by their own Nauclerus, and Papirius Massonus in the life of
Boniface. Here you may see Council against Council, the one contending for
the Pope, the other for the Emperor, the Bishops of Italy maintaining
Appeals to the Pope, the Bishops of France commanding Appeals to the
Council; the one withstanding the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the other
obeying it as an Article of Faith, yet both members of one body, and professing
one and the same Faith, under one Head, the Pope. And hence we may observe,
there is no Unity betwixt Head and Members, no consent among the Bishops, to
rely upon Councels.

In the fifteenth Age] In the year 1409, The 15. age Ann. 1400. to 1500.
the Council of Pisa was called by the Pope, but is now condemned by the
Inquisitors in their Catalogue of books forbidden: and the reason is given by
their own Authors, Gregory the twelfth, Index Expurg. Madrid. p. 22. Platin.
in Greg. 12.
and Benedict the thirteenth were deposed, as Heretics and Schismatiques: nay
more, when Gregory, (who was a true and lawful Pope by the testimony of
Binius) had commanded his Cardinals, Anton. 3. part. ca. 5. and Bin. in Conc.
Pisa. and Gobe. Pader. de hoc Conc. and exeo. Bin.
that they should not attempt it: they, not regarding the Popes Supremacy,
appealed from the Pope to a General Council. And hence we may observe, that
neither Council, nor the Popes Cardinals, received the Popes Supremacy for a
point of Faith, (as it is now taught and believed) for then certainly, as they
would not have opposed him, so they could never have deposed him. And as
concerning the validity of Councels, it is manifest, that as two Popes were
condemned by a Council, so likewise that Council (and the like may befall any
Council that tends to the prejudice of the Popes prerogative:) is rejected by
the Inquisitors with a Deleatur, not to be named amongst Counsels. Briefly,
there is no infallibility, no certainty in Councels, nor in their Decrees and
Canons; when they may be received or rejected at their pleasure, accordingly as
they make for the Pope and his doctrine or against it, as may appear by the
ensuing testimonies of this Age.

The Council of Constance] was called in the year 1414, by John the 23 This
Council (says Bellarmine, touching the first Sessions, where they define the
Council above the Pope) was rejected by the Council of Florence, Bellar de
Council. and Eccles. lib. 1 c. 7.
and the last Council of Lateran: but touching the last Session, (wherein the
Communion in one kind contrary to Christ's Institution) was decreed: Ab omnibus
Catholicis recipitur, Pope Martin the Fifth, and all Catholics receive them.
And herein, if you please, you may likewise credit their own Gregory de
Valentia, who affirms upon his credit, that the Decrees of the Council of
Constance, Greg. Analy. Cath. l. 8. c. 7.
have no certain authority, but those only which were approved by Martine
the Fifth.

The Council of Florence] was called in the year 1430, whereby it is
pretended, that the Christians of Armenia and India, consented to the Roman
Church: but Binius the compiler of the Councels tells v^^t is doubtful and
uncertain, Whether the Armenians continued at the Council of Florence; Bin.
Tom. 4 Conc. p. 503
or whether after the departure of the Grecians, and Armenians, there were some
other Sessions of the Council continued, which have not been recorded, or
whether there had been an other Synod gathered the same year. Here is
nothing but certain uncertainty in this Council.

The Council of Basil was called in the year 1431, and is reputed General,
yet it is neither generally approved nor received: For the Dominicans object it
was no lawful Council; the Minorites on the other side, answered it was true
and h^ly, and called the Dominicans Heretics for slandering the authority of
the Council: Iud. Viv. in Aug. lib. 20. de Civit. Dei c. 26.
(and says Viues) the matter had come to a shrewd pass, if Pope Sixtus had
not forbid that dispute any longer. And for a conclusion of this point,
Albertus Pigghius confidently affirms; Piggh. in Hierarch.
That both the Council of Constance, and Council of Basil erred shamefully:
they decreed against the order of Nature, against the manifest Scriptures,
against the authority of Antiquity, and against the Catholic Faith. Conc.
Constant. Sess. 4.
And if you require a reason how they fell into this shameful error, Conc.
Basil Sess. 33.
the reason is pregnant: They decreed the Council above the Pope.

Thus if we reflect upon the Decrees and Canons of Councels, many counterfeit
and spurious Acts are suggested and forged in behalf of their Roman Doctrine.
Aquin. in opusc. cont. errores Graecorum ad Vrbanum 4. Pont. Maximum.
The Council of Sinuessa is cited by Bellarmine, to prove the Pope above a
Council, yet this is condemned (says Binius) by many learned Writers. The
Council of Chalcedon is cited by Aquinas, to prove the Pope universal Patriarch
of the world; yet there is no such Decree extant in the Council. The Council of
Nice, in the 69 Canon is cited by Bellarmine, to prove Confirmation a
Sacrament, yet that Canon is rejected by Baronius. The Council of
Constantinople, in the ninth Canon is produced for Invocation of Saints; yet
this Canon is rejected as counterfeit (says Caranza.)

Again, look upon the true Canons and Decrees of Councels, if they be found
to make against the Roman faith and doctrine, they are rejected or condemned as
erroneous. The Council of Eliberis decreed against the making and worshipping
of Images: what says Baronius to this Council: I suspect some iugling in this
Canon. The Council of Pisa is condemned by the Inquisitors among the forbidden
books: why? the cause is evident, it touches the Popes Supremacy: for
Gregory the twelfth, and Benedict the thirteenth, were deposed, says Platina.
The Council of Laodicea is corrupted, and instead of Angels, they have
inserted the word Angles: why? the reason is pregnant: it forbids Invocation of
Angels. The General Counsel of Constantinople did err, and the Popes Legates
did contrary to the Popes Instructions; why? the reason is evident, the
Council decreed, that the Pope should not absolve whom the Patriarch did
depose. The Council of Constance is condemned of error, only in the first
Sessions: Why? they decreed the Council above the Pope. Again, their Canons
are received in the latter Sessions: Why? they decreed the half Communion
which is now received for an Article of Faith. And thus some Canons and
Councels are forged, some true and Orthodox are condemned, some Sessions are
approved by the Popes Legates, others rejected by the Popes Cardinals and
Prelates, insomuch it was rightly observed by Ludouicus: V^v in Aug. de Ciuit.
Dei l. 20. cap. 26.
Then the Counsels are of account with them, when they make for them, but if
they make against them, they make no more account of them, then of a Covent of
women, prattling in a common bath, or a Weauers Shop.

I proceed to the sixteenth Age, wherein the Grand and admired Council of the
Papal world; I mean the pretended General Council of Trent shall be examined.

SECT. XVI. The Council of Trent, which is the maine pillar, and last
resolution of the Roman Faith, is of small or no credit at all, because it was
neither lawfully called, nor free, nor General, nor generally received by the
Romanists themselves.
AVgustus Thuanus, a chief Senator and Counselor to the King of France, tells
us, that Pope Paul the third summoned a Council at Mantua, and from thence
translated it to Vincentia: and, because the Princes of Germany could not
agree upon the place, assigned Trent, a city seated upon the confines of
Germany and Italy, where this Council was called in the year 1546. This
Counsel then was called by the Popes usurped power, not by the Emperor, and
for that cause falls within the compass of Demetrius assembly, which wanted a
right and a lawful calling. But let us see with what esteem and authority
this Council is received in the Roman Church. Cardinal Bellarmine tells us: Si
tollamus authoritate^ praesentis Ecclesiae and praesentis Concilii, in dubiu^
reuocari possunt omniu^ aliorum Conciliorum decreta, et totu fides Christiana.
Bell. de effect. Sacra^ lib. 2. c 25.
If we take away the authority and credit of the present Church and Council
of Trent, the Decrees of other Councels, and the whole Christian Faith may be
called in question. This Jesuit, who first assured us, That the Church might
continue safe without Councels, (if occasion required) at least two thousand
years: now, without any regard to the sacred Gospel of Christ, professes, That
if the Roman Church and Trent Council were removed, the Faith of all
Christians would be endangered: and Campian his fellow Jesuit, as man ravished
with the fame of that Synod, proclaims to after ages: The elder that Council
waxes, the more it will flourish: and as a true Romish Proselyte cries out, to
the astonishment of poor Protestants: O good Lord, with what diversity of
people out of all Countries, with what choice of Bishops throughout all
Christendom, with what excellencies of Kings and Commonweales, with what
profound Divines, with what devotion, with what lamentations, with what
abstinence and fasting, with what flowers of Universities, with what knowledge
of strange tongues, with what sharp wits, with what study, with what endless
reading, with what store of virtues and exercises was that sacred place
replenished? This Council is like the great Diana of the Ephesians, that
carries the universal applause, let us look herefore into the lawfulness and
authority of this Council: for if it be of men, Acts 5.39.
it will come to naught, but if it be of God, we cannot overthrow it, lest
happily we be found even to fight against God himself.

First then, as this Council wanted a right calling of the Emperor, so likewise
it wanted a requisite condition to make it General: for that Council is truly
General, whereunto al christian States are summoned and assembled in his name;
and shall this be held the great Council of the Christian world, the chief
supporter of all other Councels, and the whole Christian faith, which was
confined to a small number, and some few Nations? Look upon the three
Patriarks of Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria, were they all present?
Look upon the Grecians, Armenians, Medes, Persians, Egyptians, Moors,
Aethiopians, were they summoned to this Council? do not these people believe in
Christ? have they not Bishops? did their Ambassadors come from all these
Nations to the Council? Nay more, were the Legates of the kingdom of England,
of Denmark, of the King of Swetia, of Scotland, and the Dukedom of Prussia
there present? Look upon the assembly of their Bishops, and it will appear
by their History of Trent, History of Trent lib 2 p. 140. Engl
that this General and great Council consisted but of forty three Bishops,
and some of those also were but Titular, as namely, Richard Pates, Bishop of
Worcester, and blind Sr Robert, Bishop of Armach; these had the bare titles of
Bishops, and were no Bishops at all; and two of those Bishops (says Illiricus)
were taken in adultery, Illyr. in Protest. contr. Conc. Trid.
the one stricken with a dart, the other taken in a trap by the husband, and
hanged by the neck out of a window, to be seen by all that passed by in the
street.

Binius the publisher of the Councels, gives us to understand, that the whole
number of Patriarks, Archbishops, and Bishops under Pope Paul the Third, who
gathered the Council, by the greatest account, came but to 62; from which if
we take the Titular Bishops, and those who through infirmity could not meet at
one and the same time, there could not be present above 43, both as Illiricus,
and as the History of Trent do witness: and must we say, or can we think,
that the whole Christian Faith, and decrees of all Councels must depend upon
the number of 62, if they were all allowed, and agreed together? And that which
is most remarkable, in the fourth Session under the same Pope, the points of
greatest moment were discussed and decreed by the number of fifty three
Bishops: then I say, the prime Articles touching the Canonical books of
Scripture, touching Traditions (then equalled to the Scriptures,) touching the
authentical Edition of scriptures, touching the Judge of all controversies in
points of Faith, were handled and resolved for Articles of Faith by those few
Bishops, whereas sometimes it is carried by a single voice or two, and so the
number of the whole, at most, is reduced to thirty.

It is true I must confess, that there were many other learned Divines
present, but it seems they were chiefly gathered for the instruction of those
Bishops; and (says Stella) If you will make answer, Quod si responder is quod
hi Episcopi secum ducant Theologos qui eos illuminent, vt contigit in sacro
Tridentino Co^cilio, in hac re quidem non possum me a risu temperare. Stell in
Lucam. 6. p. 184.
the Bishops bring with them learned Divines which may instruct them what to
say, what to answer, as it was used in the Council of Trent; yet in this I
cannot forbear laughter. Neither was the access unto the Council safe for
all those that were invited; neither was it free for all men to dispute and
argue the points of controversy freely. Pope Julius the third, after the death
of his predecessor Pope Paul, made a decree, That none of the Princes and free
Cities of Germany should have audience, except they would first vow their
obedience to the Council; and for that end and purpose, he published his
Breue. Erit Concilium, vt qui temere locuti sunt dicta recantaturi ve^i aut,
aut eoru^ inaudita causa in executione ita ordinataru^ Constitutionu^ haeretici
declarentur Breue Iuli^ 3. citat. a Caluino.
There shall be a Council, that they which have spoken rashly, either may
recant their sayings, or else without further hearing or receiving of the
matter, may be denounced and condemned for heretics, according to the
Constitutions already made. Here was plain dealing and short warning for every
man, either to resolve to subscribe to the Trent Doctrine, or else to be
proscribed for an heretic. The Bishops of Apulia did intimate no less in the
name of all the Bishops, Papalu^ Romanu^ adiutor ero ad defendendu^ co^tra
omnes homines, sic me Deus adiuuet, et sa^cta Eua^gelia. Ca. E N Extra delure
iurand.
That they were nothing else but the Popes creatures, and his bondslaues: for
there was an oath proposed severally to all, to be taken in this manner: I will
defend the Papacy against all men: So help me God, and his holy Gospel. And
as there was an oath proposed in behalf of the Papal doctrine, so likewise
there was special care taken, and caution given, Ne quum a^atui quo ^llius
Maiestati praeiud^^ium vllu^ fieret, si quis in hoc peccat Concilio pellatur.
Valor. in vita Marcel 2 Canus loc. Theol. li 12 c. 12. Extat.
that whosoever should speak against the Majesty of the Pope, should be
banished the Council. We have examples of both in this kind: Cornelius Bishop
of Bitonto professed openly in the Council, that Christ in his last Supper did
not offer up his (real) body and blood: but the Trent Fathers, (because it was
contrary to the Roman Faith) condemned and exploded him. Paulus Vergerius was
but suspected for a Lutheran, Sleid. comment. li. 21.
yet thereupon the Pope commanded him to depart the Council. Guilielmus
Venetus, a Dominican would prove the Council of Constance was above the Pope,
Valor. in vita Marcel. 2.
because the Council did depose him: but he was thought too lavish of his
tongue, and therefore was banished the Council. The Bishop of Chioza,
professed in the Council, Craken. p. 158.
that he disliked the Decree, which made Traditions equal with the
Scriptures: but he was expelled the Council. And as touching the Popes
Holiness, when a zealous and good Bishop had declared, Molin. Co^sil. de Trid.
Conc. nu. 22
that God in the Scriptures was termed Holy; and therefore it was honor
sufficient for the Pope to be called Holy, and not (most Holy,) the Bishop was
sent from Trent to Rome, and there the Pope grievously handled him for this
capital offense. Neither do I deny that there was safe conduct promised as
well to the Lutherans, as to those which were vowed creatures to the Pope and
his doctrine: but (says Fabritius) the learned Princes of Germany were kept so
far from the Castle of Disputation, that they could not be suffered to
approach to the entry of it. Fateor extensione^ etc. I grant (says he) there
was liberty extended to other Nations, but withal it is added, that the same
form of liberty should appertain to none others, but only to them that would
repent, and return to the bosom of the Church. If we look upon the Tenor of
the conduct, we shall find it was very doubtful, (and in truth it might well
be thought strange, that a free and General Council of all sorts of
Christians, which should meet for Gods glory, and Christian peace, should come
in fear and danger of their own safety:) for say they, History of Trent.
lib. 4 p. 341. and 343. Engl.
The holy Synod (as much as it can) grants public faith, and full security,
that is, safe conduct; but (says the History) the Protestants thought the
form of the safe conduct very captious, because as well in the Decree, as in
the Tenor, there was this clause of reservation, (As much as it can) when as no
man demands of an other, that which is not in his power to grant. To let
pass the like Conduct given to Hierome of Prague, and John Husse at the
Council of Constance, can they prove that there was free liberty of speech
granted, as it is in all public Consultations? Was there open conference and
dispute allowed about the controversies of Religion? was the Scripture
appointed to be Judge, or the plea being against the Pope, ought the Pope to be
plaintiff and Judge in his own cause? I confess, the Electors and Princes of
Germany being assembled at Newburg, in the Popes name, and by the Popes Legates
were summoned to the Council; but withal they returned this answer: Mirari se
etc. Epist. Reru^ gest. sub Ferd. ann. 1561. apud Scard.
They wondered upon what ground or reason, the Pope should be so bold, how he
durst proclaim a Council to them, and call them to Trent: And there they give
this reason for it; Because it was neither lawful, Craken. p. 156.
nor agreeable to Divine or Human equity, that the Pope should supply the
place of a Judge, when as both the dissension and ruin of the Church proceeded
from himself. Thus if we consider this Councels calling, it was by
usurpation, not of ancient right. If we respect the nature of it as it was,
General; many Kings and Princes were so far from allowing it, that they made
protestation against it: if we observe the number of Bishops in their
a^semblie, when the greate^^ points of controversy we^ handled and resolved,
there were but fifty three. If we look upon the free access, it was
doubtful, and limited to certain conditions. And lastly, if we respect a
free conference, History of Trent. lib. 2 p. 126.
The Pope made known by his Legates, that the Judges were tied to him by oath;
whereas the plea being against the Pope and his doctrine, he himself ought not
to be Judge. I conceive it was but a harsh proceeding, that how many, or how
great soever the differences were concerning Religion, yet there could be no
dispute, nor yet admittance to the Council, but by an enforced protestation,
and vowed obedience to the Pope and his doctrine; insomuch, their own Thuanus
gives us to understand, that the fault was not in the Protestants; for
notwithstanding they conceived their Conduct was not safe, yet they came to the
Council, and desired the Popes Legate to have liberty to dispute; and being
made known, that the Protestants were ready to make good their confessions,
which at that time they exhibited to the Council; The Trent Fathers were
greatly offended, Thua. hist. Tom 1. li. 9. ann. 1552.
neither could the Protestants have answer to their confessions, and therefore
they desired leave to be gone, which being easily granted them, they commended
their cause to the Emperors Orator, and so departed from the Council.

I will give you a short and general view of the actions in this Council.
Andraeas Dudithius an Ambassador, sent to this Council, from the State and
Clergy of Hungary, a man highly favored by Ferdinand, and Maximilian the
second, and a known Actor in this assembly, gives the substance of their
proceedings in few words very remarkable, and worthy of all men's reading.

What good (says he) could be done in that Council, Andr. Dudith. in Epist.
ad Maximil. 2. Caesare^ de Calice and Sacerdotum Coniugio.
which only numbered, but never considered the weightinesse of any opinion, if
either the cause or reason might have made the encounter; or if a few
assistants had but sided with us, the day had been ours, albeit the enemy was
very strong: but when only number fought the field, in which we fell short of
them, though our cause was never so good, we could not come off with victory:
to every one of us the Pope was able to oppose one hundred of his own; and if
a hundred seemed but a few, he could suddenly raise a thousand, and send them
to help their fellow Laborers: so that you might daily see servile and poor
Bishops, for the most part young men, and almost beardlesse, wasted with lusts,
hasten to Trent, hired and procured by the Pope to speak as he would have
them, unlearned men they were and simple, but for their impudency and
audacitie of much use: as soon as these had access to the Popes flatterers,
then did iniquity rejoice to have the upper hand, neither might any thing be
decreed, but what made for them, who made it their only Religion, to maintain
their Popes power and riot. One grave and learned man there was, Bishop of
Granado.
which could not away with such baseness; he as no sound Catholic, what with
fear and threatenings, and what with entreaty, was brought by the Council to
allow that which in heart he disavowed. In brief, it came to that issue, by
the dishonestie of them that were made and ordained for that purpose, that the
Council seemed to consist, not of Bishops, but of shadows, not of men, but of
Images, which like the statues of Daedalus, had no motion from themselves, but
were carried upon other men's shoulders. The Bishops for the most part were
hyrelings, who like a pair of country bag-pipes, unless they were still
blown, could make no music. The holy Ghost had not to do with that
Council, wherein was nothing but worldly wisdom, and that was wholly spent
in propagating the Popes immoderate and shameful Lordlinesse, from whom, as
from an other Delphos, they did wait for Oracles; and from him in a Carriers
clokebag was the holy Ghost sent, of which they so much brag to sit at the
stern of their Counsels: and, quod admodum ridiculum est, which is most
ridiculous, when there fell good store of rain, the holy Ghost could not come
unto the^ before the floods were abated: so it fell out, that the spirit was
not carried upon the waters (as we read in Genesis) but besides them. O
strange and monstrous madness, the Bishop like the people: No act or Decree of
theirs could be established, unless the Pope were made the first Author of that
Decree.

How truly this learned Bishop has deciphered the state and condition of that
Council, I leave to every man's judgment, sure I am, whilst many there
carried the business with craft and ambition, in those things which appertain
to Gods glory, there was more attributed to the Council of man, then to the
grace of God. Add to these testimonies, the protestation of Francis the French
King, who was so far from approving the Decrees of the Council, Rex pubice
in co conue^tu protestatus se illud neque pro ^ecumenico, neque pro legitimo
habere, sed pro priuato co^uentu etc. Innoc Gent Trid. Sess. 12. and Hist. of
Trent. lib. 4. p 319. Engl.
that he openly proclaimed, that for his part he neither held it for a
General, nor yet for a lawful Council, but for a private Conuenticle,
assembled for the ends of some private men; and that neither he nor his
subjects were bound to obey it; and that he would have this his Protestation
enrolled amongst the Decrees of that Council. Add to this the Protestation of
all the Reformed Churches, and diverse Christian Nations, who at this day
utterly disavow the Trent doctrine. Add to this the protestation of the
Ambassador to Charles the fifth, Illyr. in Protest. cont. Conc. Trident.
who made his declaration in like manner: I James Hurtado Mendoza, in the name
of the most mighty prince my lord Charles the Roman Emperor, by his especial
commission, and in the name of the Empire, and all other his Realms and
Dominions, do protest, that the Legates and Bishops which are at Bonenia, for
the most part bound to your Holiness, and wholly hanging upon your beck, have
no authority to make Laws, in cause of Reformation of Religion and manners.

I forbear to speak more largely of the politic proceedings, and the
doctrine of Faith created, and declared in this Council; The History of Trent
published An. 1629.
the former is accurately handled by the History of Trent, and the later is
fully confuted by our learned Chemnitius; Chemnitij examen. Conc. Trid.
and as touching Councils in general, let it suffice we have the testimony
of Cardinal Cusanus; Multu Concilia rite conuocatu errasse legimus Cusan.
Concord. Cath. lib. 2 c. 3. In fidei definitionibus errasse etia^ vniuersalia
sanctou^ Patrum Concilia comperimus. Pig. Hier. Eccle. lib. 6. c. 13.
Many plenarie Counsels rightly called, have erred, as we know by experience.
Let it suffice their own Albertus Pigghius gives his assent with us, that In
matters of Faith, General Councels have erred, as namely the Council of
Ariminum, the second Council of Ephesus, both were general, and both do
witness, that General Counsels lawfully called, may err. Let it suffice,
Panormitan, their chiefest Canonist and Proctor for Pope Eugenius, affirms
plainly: A Council may err, as otherwise a Council has erred, Panorm de
Elect and Electi potestate. significasti.
about marriage to be contracted betwixt the rauisher, and the ravished, and
the saying of Hierom, as being of the sounder opinion, was afterward preferred
before the Decree of the Council. And to prevent that common objection of the
Romanists, that the Church would fail in faith, if Councels should err he
gives this full solution to the question. Non obstat: Idem Ibid.
It hinders us little, if it be said, a Council cannot err, because Christ
prayed for his Church, that it should not fail. For though a General Council
represent the whole universal Church; yet to speak truth, the universal is
not there precisely, but by representation, because the universal Church
consists of all the faithful, and this is the Church which cannot err;
whereby it is not impossible, but the true faith of Christ may continue in
only one person. Therefore the Church is not said to fail, nor to err, if
the true faith remain in any one. And that no man might presume to rely in
matters of faith, either upon Fathers or Councels; St. Austen delivers it for a
safe and sure rule; Aug lib. 2. de Baptist. contr. Donat c. 3.
Whatsoever is found written in Scriptures, may neither be doubted nor
disputed, whether it be true or right: but the writings of Bishops may not
only be disputed, but corrected by Bishops that are more learned then
themselves, or by Councels, and National Councels by Plenary or General, and
even General Councels may be amended by the later.

My conclusion therefore shall be this, Since the true Acts and Canons of
Councels, which make against the Supremacy, against Invocation of Saint,
against Images, and the like, are adjudged spurious and counterfeit. On the
contrary, since diverse Canons and Decrees are devised for advantage of their
cause, and namely, to prove their Real Presence, their Sacrament of
Confirmation, their Sacrament of Extreme Unction, the Popes Supremacy, and
the like, which authorities are merely forged and counterfeit: since the Books
of Counsels being negligently kept, do abound with many errors, by the
testimonies of our learned adversaries, I say, to seek for the knowledge of
infallible Truth, or to search for the soundness of true saving faith in
General, or Provincial Counsels, is but Via Dubia, a doubtful and
uncertain way; it is Via Deuia, a wandering and By-way.

It rests for our Adversaries last and best refuge, to fly to the Sanctuary
of their Church: for in truth, whatsoever pretense is made of Scriptures, of
Fathers, of Counsels, yet if there be sent out a Melius inquirendum, for the
Author of their new Creed, and Trent doctrine, they must return a Non est
inuentus, and seek him only in the Church.

SECT. XVII. In the Roman Church, which our Adversaries so highly extol above
the Scriptures, there is neither safety, nor certainty, whether they
understand the Essential or Representative, or the Vertuall, or the
Consistoriall Church.
CAmpian the Jesuit, who formerly made his claim to all Fathers and Councels,
now in the name of the Church, insults against the Protestants in this manner:
Audito nomine Ecclesiae hostis expalluit. Campian. Rat 3.
So soon as the Adversary heard the Church named, he waxed wan and pale.
Indeed I confess, it would terrify a religious and sober minded man, to hear
such daily blasphemies uttered against the Majesty of Gods word, and to sound
out nothing but the honor and authority of the Church: who can but wax wan
and pale out of pity and charity, to hear the Church named, and see that she
has kept the name only, and lost her wonted nature? who can but wax wan and
pale, to see her spoiled and bereft of her Jewels and treasury of the sacred
Scriptures, and retain only the caskets and boxes, (the bare name of a
Church) where those Jewels lay? Look upon the best learned of the Roman
Church, and tell me if they will not astonish a true believing Christian, and
make him change his countenance, to hear such odious comparisons, betwixt the
Scriptures and the Church: In altiori genere (viz) in genere causae efficientis
atque adeo aliqua ex part formalis. Stapl Relect contro. 4 q. 4. ar. 3. and 9.
3. ar. 1.
The Church (says Stapleton) is an infallible foundation of faith in a higher
kind then the Scripture: for the Scripture is but a foundation in testimony
and matter to be believed; but the Church is the efficient cause of Faith, and
in some sort the very formal: and In Relect. princ fid. dog. cont. 4. q. 5.
nay more, if both of them be properly considered, and compared together, the
Church is a more noble subject then the Scripture: Eam Ecclesia authoritate^
esse -- quia et scripturas quoque ipsas laxa^di et consigna^difacultate^ etc
Idem Princip. Anal. Pio sensupieque dici potest, scripturas si de stituantur
ecclesiae authoritate non plus valere qua^ Acsopi fabulas Hos. li. 3. de autho
sacr. Scripturae.
yea, the Church has such authority, that she may set at liberty, or seal
up the Scriptures themselves: yea, says Hosius, a man may speak it in a good,
a godly sense, the Scriptures are of no more account, without the authority of
the Church, then Aesops fables.

Neither let this seem strange, that the Romanists insist principally upon the
authority of the Church: for he that shall look back, and observe how the
sacred Scriptures are condemned of Obscurity and Insufficiency; he that will
consider how the holy Fathers are censured, and rejected by them, as counterfeit
or erroneous; he that shall note the Decrees and Canon of Counsels condemned
as spurious, or superfluous; these things I say considered, it is no marvel
our adversaries fly to the Roman Church, Dicitis praecepto Christi obediendum
esse primo lo^o, deinde ecclesiae et si aliter praeceperit Ecclesia quam
Christus, no^ Ecclesia sed Christo obedie odu^ esse, certe in hoc est omnium
praesumptionu^ initiu^ qua^do iudicant particulares suu^ sensum indiuinis
praeceptis co^form^are^ qua^ vniuersa Ecclesiae. Nich. Cusa. ad Proem. Epist 2.
and for this special cause advance the name of the Church above all.
Cardinal Cusanus, by way of objection, puts the question to the Bohemians,
whether they were better obey the Word of God or the Church: You say, we must
first obey Christ's Commandments, and afterward the Church; and if the Church
command us to do otherwise then Christ commands, we must obey Christ, and
not the Church. It is true, that the Protestants rightly propose that question,
(which without all question) cannot otherwise be resolved: but hear what
answer he makes them: Verily, herein stands the beginning of all
presumption, when particular men think their own judgment to be more
agreeable to Gods commandments, Dicetu^ forsitan quomodo mutubuntur pracepta
Christi authoritate Ecclesia, vt tu^c sint obligatoria quando Ecclesia placu
erit. Dico nulla esse Christi pracepta nisi quae per Ecclesiam protalibus
accepta sint, Mutato iudicio Ecclesiae, mutatu^ est Dei Iudiciu^. Idem Epist. 3.
then the judgment of the universal Church: nay, he puts the question
further; Perhaps you will say, How shall Christ's commandments be changed by
the authority of the Church, that they shall bind us, when the Church shall
think it good? I tell thee (says he) there is nothing to be taken for
Christ's commandments, unless it be to be so allowed of the Church: when the
Church has once changed her judgment, Gods judgment is likewise changed.
Cardinal Hosius gives his consent with Cardinal Cusanus, and more plainly
resolves the question in few words: Quod Ecclesia docet expressum Deiverbum
est, et quod contra sensum et consensum Ecclesia docetur expressum Diaboli
verbum est. Hos. de expresso verbo Dei.
Whatsoever the Church teaches, is the express word of God; and whatsoever is
taught against the sens^ and meaning of the Church, (...) the express word of
the Devil. To say nothing of the doctrine of Devils, (viz.) the forbidding of
Meats, and Marriage, (foretold by the Apostle, and now fulfilled in the Church
of Rome,) I will give you an instance or two in the word of God, and the
doctrine of the Roman Church, that you may the better discern, whether the
Church changing her judgment, there be any variableness, or shadow of turning
with Christ, and whether the doctrine of the Roman church be not expressly
against the Word of God. Etsi Apostolus lingua intellecta preces velit
celebrari, tamen sancta^ Ecclesia^ iustissimis de causis co^tra statuisse
Bened. Mont. in 1. Cor. 14.


Touching Prayer in an unknown tongue, it is the confession of Benedict,
Montanus, a Parisian Doctor: Etsi Apostolus etc. Although the Apostle thought
good to have Prayer in a known tongue, yet the Church, upon good causes, has
decreed the contrary. Touching Adoration of Images, Licet in lege veteri
prohibita fuissent lege diuina imagines visibiles, nedum ipsius Dei nihilo
minus Ecclesia. Ioh. Rag. orat* in Conc. Basil. de Co^mun sub vtraque specie.
it is the confession of Johannes Ragusius, in his Oration at the Council of
Basil: Licet in Lege, etc. Although in the old time the visible Images of God,
yea and of his Saints were forbidden by the Law of God, and no liberty was
since granted either in the Old or New Testament, to make any such, yet (the
Church) taught by the holy Spirit, has not only permitted, but decreed and
ordained it. Touching the Communion in both kinds, it is the confession o^ the
General Council of Constance, Conc. Constant. Sess. 13. Conc. Trid. Sess. 5.
Can. 2.
and the Council of Trent, Licet Christus etc Although Christ did institu^ the
Sacrament in both kinds yet says the Trent Council he that shall say (the
Catholik^ Church) has not altered it for good causes, or that they err^ in so
doing, let him be accursed. These are special poin^ with them, and the denya^
of any of these, make a man heretic in the Church (...) Rome; yet by their ow^
confession are decreed wi^^ Non obstante. Notwithstanding Christ and his
Apostles taught the contrary. Observe then the difference betwixt the Gospel
of Christ, and the doctrine of the Roman Church; the Spirit of God denounced a
curse, both against men and Angels, that should teach any other doctrine, then
that they received from the Scriptures; the Church of Rome pronounces Anathema
against all those that do not teach, and believe the doctrine of their Church,
although it be different from the Scriptures.

I confess the name of the Church is honorable, and her credit singular; but
that which sticks with me, and as I conceive is worthy of all men's
observation; the name of the Church, which is so much magnified, and adored of
all Romanists, and Romish Proselytes, I say, that Roman Church, is neither
understood by the ignorant what it is, neither is it resolved by the learned
amongst them, in certain, what is properly meant and understood by it.

First then, we must know, as the Church has many parts to act; Ecclesia
Essentialis. Representatiua. Virtualis. Co^sistorialis Bell. de Eccles. li. 3.
c. 2.
so likewise the Romanists make her of four several sorts: The Essential
Church, and this (says Bellarmine) is a company of men professing the same
Christian Faith and Sacraments, and acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be the
chief Pastor and Vicar of Christ upon the earth. The Representative Church;
and this is an Assembly of Bishops in a general Council, representing the
whole body of the Church. The Vertuall Church; and this is the Bishop of Rome,
who is said to be the chief Pastor of the whole Church, and has in himself
eminently and vertually both truth and infallibility of judgment, and upon
whom depends all that certainty of truth which is found in the whole Church.
The Confistoriall Church; and this consists of the Pope and Cardinals, and is
termed by the S^rbonists, The Court of Rome. Curia Romana.
Touching these several acceptions of the Church, there are several and
different opinions. The Gloss upon Gratian put the first question, Quaero de
qua Ecclesia intelligas, quoa hic dicitur quod non possit errare. Res. Ipsa
congraegatio fideliu^ hic dicitur Ecclesia. Causa 24. q. 1. c. A recta.

Conciliu^ legitimu^ omniu^ consensu maxim proprie dici possit Ecclesia. Bell
de Conc. et Eccles. l. 1. c. 18 Per Ecclesia^ intelligimus Pontif. Romanum qui
pro te^pore Ecclesia nauicula^ moderatur, et Ecclesia^ Papa^ interpretantur non
abnuo. Desp. ca. 10 lib. 3. de verbo Dei. Greg. de Val. disp. Theol. To^. 1.
disp. 1. q. etc.

Apud mother nos maxim importat hoc nomen Ecclesia quemadmodum hoc Ecclesia
Romans vrbis dudu^ obtinutt, cuius ministri et Presidentes sunt Papa et
Cardinales ipsius, qui iam ex vsu quodam obtinuerunt dici Ecclesia. Defens.
pacis part. 2. cap. 2. Cerem. li. 1 Sect 8 c. 6.


and thus resolves it: I would know what Church you understand when you say, It
cannot err. I answer, It is the congregation of the faithful, that is here
meant by the Church. To the second, Bellarmine replies: A lawful Council, by
the most general consent is most properly termed the Church. To the third,
Gretzerus the Jesuit makes this confession I deny not, but by the Church we
understand the Bishop of Rome for the time being, who guides the Ship of the
militant Church: and Gregory de Valentia, by the Church we mean her Head,
that is to say, the Roman Bishop in whom resideth the full authority of the
Church. To the fourth, Marsilius Patauinus gives his free assent: that the name
of the Church is of great consequence amongst the modern Writers, whose
Ministers and Presidents are the Pope and Cardinals, which now by use and
custom have at last obtained to be called the Church: and of this Church the
Pope himself has made this declaration, Ye shall be the Senators of my
city, and like unto Kings, the very hooks and stays of the world, upon whom
the very door of the Church Militant must be turned and ruled. Now amidst
these different opinions, it must needs seem questionable, to which of these
Churches a poor ignorant soul (who desires satisfaction in matters of
Religion) should address himself: if he require judgment of the Essential
Church, there is little comfort, and less assurance to be had from them, for
they consist most of the ignorant and common people, and have chiefest need of
instruction themselves: besides, it is impossible to know the judgment of all
Christians, (who make the universal Church) in all or any particular points of
Religion. If he appeal to Counsels, their right calling is uncertain, their
Decrees and Canons are doubtful, for many of them are adjudged by themselves
erroneous, many spurious and counterfeit: If he would consult with the Pope and
Cardinals in their Consistory, it is a journey too costly and tedious;
besides, it will appear they are subject unto error.

It rests then that we examine the infallibility of particular Churches, and
in particular that we enquire whether the Roman church be that Church which
we are commanded to hear and obey, by the authority of the Scriptures.

SECT. XVIII. The most common Plea of the Romanists drawn from the
Infallibility, Authority, and Title of the Catholic Church, is proved to
be false, vain and frivolous.
TO give the Church of Rome her due, let us take a brief suruay of her first
foundation, and let us fee what privilege did ancienly belong unto her, and
what authority she claims at this day. First, the Apostle St. Paul in his
Epistles to the Romans, congratulates with them, and sends them this
greeting: Romans 1.7.
To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints: he testifies
further with prayer and thanksgiving, Verse 8.
that their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole world: nay more, he makes
an earnest request to God, that he might see the members of that Church, and
impart Spiritual gifts unto them, to the end they might be established. These
testimonies of the Apostle were special Caracters of an eminent and glorious
Church (although in truth; there is not so much as this name of a Church given
to the Romans in all the Scriptures, The church at Babylon elected. 2. Pet.
5.13.
(unless they will allow the Church at Babylon to be the Church of Rome:) and
here was a probable assurance of continued stability and perseverance in the
Faith in all Ages: but behold the same Apostle, which did so much glory in
behalf of their Catholic Faith, which gave God thanks for them; which,
without doubt, prayed for the continuance of that Faith: Verse 9.
( For God is my witness (says he) without ceasing I make mention of you
always in my Prayers.) As if he had foreseen by the spirit of Prophecy,
they would glory in their own worth and merits: shortly after, in his eleventh
Chapter of the same Epistle, gives them this special Caveat: Be not high
minded, but fear: and withal gives a special reason of that Caveat. For if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed also lest he spare not thee,
behold therefore the bountifulness and severity of God; toward them that
have fallen, severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continune in his
goodness; otherwise also thou shall be cut off. This Doctrine of the Apostle
does trench so far into the present estate of the Church of Rome, that the
Rhemists forbear their Annotations upon this place, for the truth is these
last words. Thou also shall be cut off, Do plainly intimate, that the Church
of Rome from the time of the Apostles had a possibility of falling, and
consequently was but a particular Church: for so it befell the Church of
Jerusalem, and much more (says the Apostle) may it befall the Church of Rome.

Let us compare the testimonies and promises in behalf of the Roman Church,
with other particular and famous Churches in the time of the Apostles, and see
whether those promises did more largely extend to the faith of the Roman
Church, then to other Churches: St. Paul (writing to the Thessalonians, terms
them by the name of the Church) he gives this large testimony in their
behalf: These. 1.8.
From you sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia,
but your faith which is toward God is gone forth into all places, that we have
no need to speak any thing: yea more, he gives them a kind of assurance for
the perpetuity of their faith; The Lord is faithful, 2 Thessalonians. 3 3
and will establish you, and keep you from all evil: yet this Church is
fallen away, and has lost her first faith. The Ephesians are termed by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.15
The Church of the living God, the Pillar and ground of truth. And for this
Church the Apostle makes this confession: Ephesians. 3.14 16.
I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant
you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inner man: yet we see this Church which was the ground and pillar
of truth, and for which the Apostle earnestly prayed for, is rased to the
ground, and utterly fallen from the truth. The Corinthians are termed by Saint
Paul, 1. Cor. 1.2.
The Church of God called to be Saints. And this Church is farther witnessed by
the same Apostle, that she was rich in all things through Christ, in all kinds
of speech and knowledge, and that she was not destitute of any gift: yea, he
delivers confident in behalf of that Church, that God would establish them
unto the end, even the day of the Lord Jesus Christ: yet soon after some of
them denied the Resurrection, they fell from the truth, and are now subject to
the Turk. If then the Church of the Thessalonians, of the Ephesians, of the
Corinthians, (touching the outward face, and visibilitie of the local
Churches) if they are all fallen, notwithstanding such fair testimonies and
large promises in their behalf, (which also were accomplished in the Elect)
what stabilitie could the Church of Rome promise to her self, which had not so
much as the name of a Church, but was threatened upon the breach of a condition,
that they also should be cut off? Whether the condition be broken or no, I
will not here dispute: but this I may safely say, If the Jews being the Lords
peculiar people, and the natural branches, were broken off, how much more the
Church of Rome, being but a wild Olive branch, might be cut off from the
faith of Christ? No doubt the Spirit of God foresaw, that the Romanist would
glory in the name of the Church, and advance that name above his word; and
therefore the word of God gave not so much as a name of a Church, nor promise
of infallibility and perseverance unto it, but a special caveat to put them in
mind not to be high minded. I say therefore to the Romanist, as St. Hierom
sometimes said to Pammachius and Oceanus: Quisquis es assertor novorum dogmatu^
quaese te vt parcas Romany auribus, parcas fidei quae Apostolico ore laudae
tur; cur post quadi inge^tos annos docere nos niteris, quod antea nesciuimus,
cur profers in medium quoth Paulus and Petrus edere noluerunt, vsque ad hu^c l^e^
si^e ista doct^ina nund Christianus fuit Hieron. ad Pammach. and Oceanu^.
Thou who art a maintainer of new doctrine, whatsoever thou be, I pray thee
spare the Roman ears, spare the Faith that is commended by the Apostles
mouth, why go thou about now after 400 years, (I may say 1400) to teach us
that Faith which we before never knew? Why bring thou forth that thing that
Peter and Paul never uttered? Evermore until this day the Christian world has
been without this Doctrine.

But observe the cunning of our Adversaries, they do as much glory of the
Apostles testimony, (that the Roman Faith was published through the world)
(as if the ancient, and the now Roman faith were all one:) And to prove an
infallible Succession in their doctrine, they pretend, that St. Cyprian, a
blessed Martyr, did witness to the world, that the Roman Church could not
err, and consequently the Trent doctrine is the ancient faith of Christ and
his Apostles.

St. Cyprian (says M. Bishop) tells us, that Perfidiousnesse and falsehood in
matters of Faith, can have no access to the Church of Rome: so that by the
Apostles confession, they challenge an eminent Visibilitie, and by this ancient
Fathers testimony, they claim an assured stabilitie in matters of Faith. If
these things were true, I should crave pardon of Cyprian, not to believe him,
because the Apostle teaches me to believe the contrary: but the truth is,
this testimony so often alleged by our adversaries, makes nothing for their
purpose; for if Cyprian say that Infidelity cannot come to the Romans, whose
faith was praised by the Apostles mouth, then can none of the people of Rome
err, because the faith of them all was praised by the Apostles mouth: but the
truth is, this holy Father speaks not there of matters of faith, nor of the
stabilitie of the Roman Church, (although most Romanists so translate it and
apply it) but of the tumultuous and disorderly courses of certain lewd persons,
who being censured by the Bishops of Africa, fled to the Bishop of Rome for
protection of their cause, and thereupon vpbraideth them, that they came to Rome
with lies and tales, which could find no admittance, nor harbor there,
Nauigare audent et -- a schismaticis et profanis literas far, nec cogitare
eos esse Romanos quorum fides Apostolo praedicante laudata est, adquos persidia
non potest habere accessum Cypr. lib. 1. Epist 3.
when as they might well understand, that the Romans were men whose Faith was
commended by the Apostle, Et ad quos perfidia non potest habere accessum: unto
whom perfidiousnesse could have no access; that is, they would give no ear to
their perfidious and calumnious suggestio^s. This therefore, I must needs say,
is unfaithfulness and perfidiousnes in the Church of Rome, wilfully to
misapply those things which make nothing for them.

I proceed from the infallibility of the Church to the authority of it,
wherein you shall likewise observe, the Romanists do insist especially upon
that known confession of St. Austen: Ego vero Evangelio no^ credere^ nisi me
Catholicae Ecclesiae co^moueret authoritas. Aug. contr. Ep. Fund. cap. 5.
I should not have believed the Gospel, except the Authority of the Church
had moved me thereunto. But I pray, what do these words concern the Roman
Church? why should they be applied rather to the Roman, then to his own
Church in Africa, or our Chuch in England? (for he speaks not of the Roman
Church, or any particular Church, but of the Church indefinitly.) Moreover,
their own Canus professes, Canus loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 8.
that St. Austen had to do with a Manichee, who would have a certain Gospel
of his own admitted without further dispute: In this case (says he) St.
Austen puts the question: What if you find one, which does not believe the
Gospel? what motive would you use to such a one to bring him to your belief?
I for my part (says he) should not have been brought to embrace the Gospel,
if the Churches authority had not swayed with me. (...) re^ Cy^ Epi^
And from hence also Bishop Canus draws this sound conclusion. The faith of
the Gospel is not founded upon the authority of the Church. This Exposition of
their Romanist is agreeable to our belielfe: for we profess, that the first
outward motive to bring men to the knowledge of the Scriptures, is the
authority of Gods Church. Hooker Eccles. Polit. lib. 3.
If I believe the Gospel (says Hooker) yet is Reason of singular good use,
for that it confirms me in this my belief the more: If I do believe as yet,
nevertheless to bring me to the number of believers, except reason did
somewhat help, and were an instrument which God does use to such purposes,
what should it boot to dispute with infidels and godless persons for their
conversion and persuasion in that point.

He therefore that shall conclude from St. Austens doctrine, (which he
professed in the name of an heretic) let him receive his answer from the same
Father, when he makes his confession as a true Catholic: Ex veritatis ore
agnosoo Ecclesiam participem veritatis. Aug. in Psalm. 57.
By the mouth of God which is the truth, I know the Church of God which is
partaker of the truth. But as it happens sometimes, that he who has fallen
into the hands of an unskillful Physician, is loath afterward to commit
himself even to a good one: Aug. lib. 6. Confess. c. 4
So was it in the state of my soul (says Austen) which could not be healed
by believing, and for fear of believing false things, it refused to be cured
by true ones. And in the Chapter following, whilst he was yet a Manichee, he
makes this humble confession: Thou, Lord, Idem Confess. l. 6 c. 5.
did persuade me thus, I say not that they were blameable who believed thy
Books, which thou have grounded by such authority throughout almost all the
nations of the earth, but that they indeed were blameable who believed them
not; and that no ^are was to be given to any, if peradventure they should say
to me: How do thou know that these Books were imparted to mankind by the
Spirit of that one God, who is true in himself, and most true, when he
speaks to us; for that is the very thing it self, which is especially to be
believed. Thus St. Austen the Catholic, interprets Austen the Heretic:
After his conversion to the truth, the blessed Spirit did persuade him, that
there was no ear to be given to those men which made such doubts and
questions (as are daily made in the Church of Rome) viz. How do you know the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? but as the Samaritans believed that Christ
was the promised Savior upon the report of a woman, yet afterward when they
heard him themselves, they professed they believed him for his own sake, and
not for the woman's report: So likewise this holy Father, first conferred with
flesh and blood, as the most known and familiar means to introduce a saving
knowledge; but after he had received the Spirit and word of truth, he, like
the Samaritans, believed the Gospel, not for the Churches sake, but for Christ's
own authority, and his Gospels sake.

The Authority of the Church is rightly compared to a Key, which opens the
door of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture: now when a man has
entered and viewed the house, and by viewing it, likes it, and upon liking,
resolves unchangeably to dwell there; he does not set up his resolution upon
the key that let him in, but upon the goodness and commodiousnes which he sees
in the house. I omit diverse Expositions of the learned Romanists, touching this
saying of Austen: Durand. l. 3 Did. 24 q. 1 Diedo. de Eccl. Script. and dogm.
lib. 4. c. 4. Ge^s. de vita spir. Animae. lect. 2. Coroll. 7.
Durand, Driedo, and Gerson tell us, That those words of Saint Austen had
relation to the Primitive Church, which both saw Christ's person, and his
miracles, and heard his doctrine. Aquinas says, Augustinus de Ecclesia vt
causa praeponente, non vt fundamento fidei loquitur A quin. in 2 2. quaest. 2.
art 7.
that St. Austen spoke of the Church as an ouerruling cause, but not as a
foundation of Faith. And for a conclusion of this point; The mind of the
faithful believer does not rest in the judgment of the Church: for (says
Stapleton) Although the Church by reason of her Ministry and Mastership
received of God, Stapl. lib. 3. de author. Scrip. c. 12.
does cause us to believe, yet the reason wherefore we believe, is not the
Church, but God speaking within us, and witnessing his truth unto us by his
holy Spirit. Thus briefly touching the authority of the Church: now I proceed
to our adversaries claim touching the Universality of it.

Lessius the Jesuit tells us, The Church of Rome, Sola Ecclesia Romana eique
adhaerens multitudo Ecclesia Catholica, etc. Less. in Consult. Consid. 6.
and that Church only and the multitude adhering to it, is the Catholic
Church, the Religion of this Church is Catholic, the faith is Catholic, the
doctrine is Catholic, and their followers are termed Catholics. What is
properly understood by the Catholic Church, St. Austen delivers in these
words, Non haec, aut illa, It is not this Church, Toto orb diffusa. Aug. de
rudibus Catech. c. 20.
or that Church, but the Church dispersed throughout the whole world: Maiores
nostri Catholica^ nominarunt vt ex ipso nomine ostenderent quia per totum est.
Aug de Unit. Eccles. cap. 2.
and from hence, Our Ancestors named the Church Catholic, that by that name
they might demonstrate the Universal. If then the Church of Rome can prove
their Church Universal, there would be an end of all controversies: for we
profess our selves to be members of the universal Church, we say that
Church can neither err totally, nor finally; and we willingly grant, that out
of that Church there is no salvation. But certainly this last Tenet does
strongly euince, that the Roman Church is not Universal, for Saint Stephen,
and St. James, and others suffered Martyrdom, and were saved in the Church of
Jerusalem, and in the Church of Antioch, before the Church of Rome was ever
heard of; and they were all members of the universal Church. But let the
Church of Rome claim what title or prerogative she list, she is in danger to
fall upon a Rock: for if she confess that she is a particular Church, she
stands subject unto error; if she assume the title of Universal, she is
altogether invisible: for Universal sentitur non videtur: That which is
Universal, is understood, not seen. It is the Article of our Creed: I believe
the Catholic Church: and, Hoc enim veraciter dicitur credi quod non potest
videri. Greg. Dial. 4. c. 4.
that is truly said to be believed which is invisible, says Gregory. And
that the world may know the Romanists are Nominals, such as vaunt of the name
of Catholics, as the Donatists did in the Primitive Church, when they want the
nature of the thing it self, their own Waldensis, who well understood how to
make a difference betwixt the particular Roman, and the Universal Catholic
Church, tells us: Wald. de doctr. Fidei. lib. 2. art. 2. cap. 19.
The Church whose faith never fails, according to the promise made to Peter,
is not any particular Church, as the Church of Africa, nor the particular
Roman Church, but the Universal Church, not gathered together in a General
Council, which has sometimes erred; but it is the Catholic Church dispersed
through the whole world, from the Baptism of Christ unto our times, which
does hold and maintain the true Faith, and faithful testimony of Jesus.
Neither was this the particular opinion of one private man, but many Bishops,
and learned Doctors did profess publicly in the Council of Ferara: Quacunque
facultate Romana Eccles. praedita sit, universally Ecclesiae inferior sit.
Council. Ferar. Sess. 10
With whatsoever power the Church of Rome is endued, yet it is inferior to the
Universal Church. And if we require a cloud of witnesses, behold both
Princes, and Cardinals, and Bishops in the great Council of Basil, resolved,
and declared; Ecclesia Romana non est vniuersa, sed est de vniuersalitate
corporis mystici Council. Basil. in Appendice.
That the Church of Rome is not Universal, but a part of that universal
mystical body of Christ, as appears by Gregory: Therefore for as much as it
is a member of the said body, it is not, neither can it be, the Head of the
same body, since there is a difference betwixt Head and members.

Thus if we look for Infallibility, it is not found in the Roman Church: If
we look for the Authority of the Church, it is inferior to the Scriptures,
unless they say, the Scripture is under the Church, as some say the Sun is
under a cloud, when it is above it. If we look for Universality, the Roman
Church is but a member, and no sound member of the Universal. Let us therefore
examine in particular, where, or in whom we shall find this Church, which
does assume those great and glorious Titles to her self.

SECT. XIX. The Church which our Adversaries so much magnify amongst
themselves, is finally resolved into the Pope, whom they make both the Husband
and the Spouse, the Head and the Body of the Church.
SAint Matthew tells us, that our Savior Christ gave charge to Saint Peter, as
well as to the rest of his Disciples, that if any dissension did happen which
they could not well reconcile among themselves, they should tell the Church. If
Saint Peter himself was commanded to tell the Church, and the Pope be St.
Peter's Successor, it would somewhat trouble a doubtful Recusant, how to
understand and believe the Pope for the Church: for if Christ had taken Peter
for the Church, it is not probable, he would have bid him tell the Church; for
that had been all one as to bid the Church, tell the Church: Yes, Postremo
dicere Ecclesiae, id est, sibi ipsi Bell. de Council. author. lib. 2. cap. 19.
(says Bellarmine) the Pope ought to tell it to the Church, that is, to
himself. I take not upon me to answer this learned Cardinal, but I dare
avowe, that this Exposition of Scripture is not according to the Article of his
faith, with the uniform consent of Fathers: Howbeit, by this solution of Dic
Ecclesiae, we are informed where, and in whom we may find the Roman Church.

Gretzerus the Jesuit puts the question touching the Pope, and returns his
answer in this manner: Ais tertio interpretatur Ecclesiam Papa^ non abnuo,
quid tum? Gretz. def. c. 10. l. 31. de verbo Dei.
Thou say they interpret the Church (the Pope;) I grant it, what then? yet
we may doubt of his sentence: for how can we be certain that he erres not?
Yes (says he) from these sayings, I will give thee the keys, etc. The gates
of Hell shall not prevail etc. Whatsoever thou bindest, shall be bound, etc.
But who shall judge of the sense of these places? How shall I know those things
are spoken of the Pope? From Ecclesiastical Tradition, from the consent of our
Elders, from the Suffrage of all Antiquity, from the Text it self, if there
be brought no perverse or preiudicate opinion against it: to conclude, whether
thou will or no (thou shall believe it) from the Popes own Sentence and
determination. To this Church then lies an appeal from Scriptures, from
Councels, from the Essential Church; and for that cause Cardinal Bellarmine
proclaims it as the Popes Champion, Bellar. de Council. author lib. 2. cap. 17.
Nos defendimus, We maintain that the Pope is simply and absolutely above the
universal Church, and above General Counsels: and as great men sometimes
love to be soothed up in their greatness, and are led with opinion of their
Parasites, to believe that for a truth, which is but a suggestion of
falsehood: so it came to pass touching the Popes power in these latter days;
they did so much atatribute to his Authority, and Infallibility derived from
Peter, that Cardinal Zabarella rightly observed, and ingenuously confessed;
They have made the Popes believe, Persuaserunt Pontificibus quod omnia possunt,
and sic quoth facerent quicquid liberet etiam illicitet, and sint plusqua^ Deus.
Zabarella.
that they might do all things whatsoever they listed, yea notwithstanding
they were things unlawful: and thus, (says he) they have made him more then
God. Bishop Begnius in the last Council of Lateran, speaking to Pope Leo,
cries out in admiration of his Holiness. Ecce venit Leo: Behold, here comes
a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, Te Leo beatissime saluatore^
expectauimus, apprehende scutum etc Council. Later 5. Sess. 6. in orat. Begn. ad
Leon. 10.
behold he has raised up a Savior, which shall deliver the people of God
from the hand of the destroyer. Thou art he, O most blessed Leo, whom we have
expected as a Savior, take up thy sword and buckler, and arise in our defense.
And thus by degrees, first Vox populi, the common people, by admiring his
greatness, then Bishops and Cardinals by their flattering suggestions, have at
last ascribed infallibility of Judgment to his Authority, (which I am verily
persuaded never Pope did believe in himself) and hereby they have advanced him
above Fathers, above Councils, above the Church; and now at last made him the
whole Church, in so much that some of his own side are not ashamed to profess,
Beard. Mot. 6. vide in Jewel. p. 49.
that the Pope may dispense against the Apostles, yea, against the new
Testament upon good cause, and also against all the precepts of the Old.
Syluester Prierias, Master of the Popes palace goes further, he gives us to
understand, that the authority of the Roman Church, Quicu^que no^ innititur
doctrinae Romanae ecclesiae, ac Romani Pontificis, tanqua^ Regulae Dei
infallibili, a qua etiam sacra Scriptura robur trahit et authoritatem,
hereticus est. Sylu. Prier. contra Luther.
and of the Bishop of Rome, is greater (then the authority of Gods Word) and
thereupon he concludes, Whosoever leans not to the doctrine of the Roman
Church, and of the Bishop of Rome, as unto the infallible Rule of God, of which
Doctrine the holy Scripture takes force and authority, he is an heretic. And
for a further confirmation of this belief, Gretzerus the Jesuit makes this
conclusion: Id solum pro verbo Dei veneramur ac suscipimus, quoth nobis Pontifex
ex Cathedra Petri, etc. Def c. 1. l. 1. de Verbo Dei. p. 16.
We do receive and reverence that only for the Word of God, which the Pope
as supreme Master of the Christians, and Judge of all controversies, does
determine in the Chair of Peter. Now if it happen that some Proselyte of a
tender conscience, should make some scruple, whether the Pope ought to be heard
and obeyed, when he is a murderer, a Sorcerer, and a wilful subuerter of the
truth, (as some Popes have been) Hosius their Doctor, wishes them not to
trouble themselves with such idle curiosities. Judas ne sit an Petrus, au
Paulus Deus atte^di non vult, sed solu^ hoc quoth sedet in Cathedra Petri -- de
cuius ore legem requirere iussus est. Hoc solu^ spectari vult. Hos. in Confess.
Petricouien. ca. 29.
God will never have thee consider (says he) whether the Pope be a Judas, or
a Peter, or a Paul; it is sufficient only that he sits in Peter's chair,
that he is an Apostle, that he is Christ's Ambassador, that he is the Angel
of the Lord of Hosts, from whose mouth thou art commanded to require the Law.
This thing only Christ would have thee to consider. Again, admit a Council, a
whole congregation of men should make a doubt whether the Pope may err, and by
reason of that scruple, would not readily obey him: Cardinal Bellarmine by way
of prevention, Si autem Papa erraret, praecipiendo vitia vel prohibendo
virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, et virtutes malas nisi
vellet contra conscientia^ peccare Bell de Pont. li. 4. c. 5.
gives them this lesson: If the Pope should so far forth err, as to command
vices, and forbid virtues, the Church were bound to believe that vices are
good, and virtues are evil, unless she will sin against her own
conscience. Here is an implicit faith commanded; let the Popes doctrine be
true or false, if the Romanists will resign up their senses and understanding
to this Vertuall Church, (which is the Pope) they shall have a Priest and
Cardinal for their Tutors; but by their leave, they may make shipwreck of
their faith, by being their Disciples. I proceed from an implicit faith to a
blin^ obedience; and therein I will give you a remarkable example from another
Schooleman, who above all things does honor and commend a blind obedience to
the Church (that is, to the Pope.) Gregory de Valentia tells us of an Italian
Merchant of Placentia, who reasoned and resolved with himself in this manner:
I hold it is better to profess the Roman Religion, Laurent. disceptatio
Theolog. page 5.
then the Lutheran; First, because I can briefly learn the Roman faith: for if
I say what the Pope says, and deny what the Pope denies; and if he speak, and
I hearken unto him, this alone is sufficient for me: but if I should be a
Lutheran, I must learn a Catechism, I must search the Scriptures, which in
truth I cannot intend, when I must look after the Ships of Italy, and my
Merchandise beyond the Seas. You have heard the reason why this Layman did
dislike the Protestants Religion, and what was the rule of his Roman faith, now
hear what judgment this learned Schooleman gives concerning this Merchant;
Deu^ nihil habiturum: God (says he) will have nothing to lay to the charge of
this man at the dreadful day of Judgment. To say nothing of this presumption,
I pray God that Pagans and Infidels who knew not Christ, arise not up in
Judgment against them that teach such doctrine: for whereas all men by the
Apostles rule, should be ready to give an account of their Faith, and must be
judged by the Word of God; this man by not knowing the Scriptures nor the
articles of his faith, but only for intending his Merchandise, with a blind
obedience, and an implicit faith, shall be free both from guilt and punishment:
and no doubt, from this general belief, of the Popes authority, and
infallibility, the saying of Gregory the 13. is verified: D. 40 Si Papa in
Annot.
Men do with such reverence respest the Apostolical See of Rome, that they
rather desire to know the ancient Institution of Christian Religion from the
Popes own mouth, then from the holy Scriptures; and they only inquire what is
his pleasure, and accordingly they order their life and conversation.

He therefore that will appeal to the Bishop of Rome, to Rome let him go; but
woe to the Recusants of England, and other countries remote from Rome, which
cannot hear the Church, being so far distant from him: nay, woe to them at
Rome, that live in his Sea; for how can they hear him if he never preaches?
But withal, most miserable is the condition of the hearer, notwithstanding he
should preach: for his own Cardinal assures us, that if his Holiness teach
not the whole Church, Bell lib. 4. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 14.
he is in as much possibility to err, as Innocent the eight was when he
permitted the Norwegians to celebrate the Eucharist without wine. Thus from the
multitude of believers, which is the Essential Church, we are sent to the
Council, from the Council, which is the Representative Church, we are sent
to the Pope, which is the Virtuall, and now at length being arrived at the Pope
Consistory, his Cardinal gives us to understand, that a man may return happily
as wise as he went, but withal intimate^ (...) us, that there are no^ oracles,
^o infallible doctrine to be learned from his mouth, unless he will first
declare by public decree, that he intends to preach to the Universal Church,
Besides, how the Vicar of Christ should be the Spouse of Christ, how a
particular member of the Church should become a Universal Head of the Church:
how Papa, the Pope, anciently a Father, should become the Church, which is
always a Mother, it is a mystery unsearchable, and past finding out: for sure
I am, if the Pope be the Church, let them pretend whomsoever they will for
their Father, they can have no Church except Pope Ioane for their Mother.

It remains then, that in the next place we examine the certainty of that
faith, which must be learned from the Pope: for if the Pope have not
Infallibility of Judgment, then is he not that rule of faith, then is he not
that Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth; and consequently
miserable is the condition of those poor Christians, that rely upon his
opinion, as upon the infallible Doctrine of the Church; and first I will
proceed to the Popes Succession in doctrine and person, and compare the
doctrine of the ancient Bishops of Rome with the Popes of these later times,
that thereby we may discern, whether the Popes Infallibility be privileged
by his Chair, or whether the ancient Roman faith be successively derived from
the ancient Bishops of Rome, to the Popes of these latter ages.

SECT. XX. The Church which is finally resolved into the Pope, wants both
Personal and Doctrinall Succession, as appears by several instances and
exceptions, both in matters of fact, and matters of faith.
HOsius the Romanist tells us for certain, Hos in Co^fess. Petricou. c. 29.
that if we reckon all the Popes that ever were from Peter until Julius the
third, there never sat in his Chair any Arrian, any Donatist, any Pelagian,
or any other that professed any manner of Heresy. The reason of this as I
conceive is delivered by Card. Cusanus: Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae, vniuersa
Catholica Ecclesia ad Petri Cathedra^ conglobata a Christo nu^quam recedit.
Cusan. ad Bohem. Epist 2.
The truth cleaves fast to Peter's Chair; the whole universal Catholic
Church is rolled up to Peter's chair, and shall never depart from Christ. I will
not take upon me to examine the Pope, in what Office, in what religion, in
what piece of his life he has succeeded Peter: but that you may know,
(howsoever the Popes faith is annexed to the Chair) he has err^^, and is
subject to error as ^e is Pope, I will compare the doctrine of the ancient
Bishops of Rome, with the faith of the later Popes, and the later Popes Decrees
and definitive Sentences, with their flat contradictions, and contrary Decrees
amongst themselves, whereby it shall appear, that the later Popes have not
only erred in disclaiming the decrees of their Predecessors, but have
digressed wholly from the ancient Roman Bishops, both in faith and manners, and
withal they want that Infallibility, that personal, and doctrinall
Succession, which they so much magnify amongst themselves.

Anacletus Bishop of Rome in the year 103, decreed, that after Consecration,
Did. 1. Episcopus and 2. Peracta.
all present should communicate, or else be thrust out of the Church, for so
(says he) the Apostles did set down, and the holy Church of Rome observes.
On the contrary, at this day it is made lawful for the Priests to receive
alone, the people only gazing and looking on; and withal Pope Julius the
fourth has decreed in the Council of Trent: Conc. Trid. Canon. 8. Sess. 22.
If any shall say, that Masses, in which the Priest alone does communicate,
are unlawful, and therefore ought to be abrogated, let him be accursed.

Leo the Great, Bishop of Rome in the year 440, speaks of the death of Martyrs
in this manner: Leo. Epist. 81.
Although the death of many Saints has been precious in the Lords sight, yet
the death of no innocent person has been the propitiation for the world, that
the righteous received crowns, but gave none, that of the fortitude of the
faithful, have grown examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness: that
their deaths as they were several persons, were several to every of
themselves, and that none of them by his death, paid the debt of any other man;
because it is only our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all were crucified, all dead,
all buried, all raised again from the dead. On the contrary, Haec opinio
reprobata est a P^o 5. Pontifice, et a Gregorio 13. Bell. de Indul. lib. 1 cap.
40.
Pope Pius the 5, and Gregory the 13, both condemned, (says Bellarmine) the
Divines of Lovaine, and others, who defended, that the sufferings of the
Saints, cannot be true satisfactions, but that our punishments are remitted
only by the personal satisfactions of Christ. Nay more (says he) If the
sufferings of Saints may not be applied to us, to free us from the punishment
due for our sins, lest they should seem to be our Redeemers, then certainly
we our selves cannot redeem those punishments by our own labors, Idem ibid.
Resp.
lest we also should seem to be our own Redeemers. But Pope Julius the
fourth, and the Council of Trent, (says the Cardinal) most plainly teach the
contrary.

Gelasius Bishop of Rome, in the year 492 professes, and declares for an
Article of his belief: In the Sacrament is celebrated an Image, Gelas. cont.
Futych. and Nest.
or semblance of the body and blood of Christ, and there cease not to be the
substance or nature of bread and wine. On the contrary, Pope Innocentius the
Third, decreed it for an Article of faith in the Council of Lateran, with a
Firmiter credimus: We steadfastly believe, Lib. 1. Decret. cap. Firmiter
credimus.
that the body and blood of Christ are truly contained in the Sacrament of the
Altar, the bread being transubstantiated into his body, and wine into his
blood, by the divine power* so that there must be really, verily, and
substantially present, the natural body and blood of Christ, which was
conceived of the Virgin Mary, and which is ascended into Heaven.

Touching the Communion in both kind, the same Gelasius proclaimed to the
communicants of his time: Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur. Gelas. de Consecr. Did. 2 Co^perimus.
Either let them receive the whole Sacrament, or let them be driven from the
whole: for the dividing of one and the same Sacrament, cannot be done without
great sacrilege. On the contrary, in this latter age, Pope Martin the Fifth,
has decreed it with the consent of a whole Council: Conc. Constant. Sess. 13.
If any shall obstinately maintain, that it is unlawful or erroneous, to
receive in one kind, he ought to be punished, and driven out as an Heretic.

Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, about the year 600, publishes his
instruction for the people touching Images: Epist ex Regist. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Let the children of the Church now dispersed, be called together, and taught
by the Testimonies of the Scriptures, that nothing made with hands may be
worshipped. And withal concludes: If any will make Images, forbid them not;
but by all means let him avoid the adoration of them. On the contrary, in this
later age Pope Pius the fourth declares it for an Article of Faith: I most
firmly avouch, Bulla Pij 4. Art 9.
that the Images of Christ, and the Mother of God always a Virgin, and other
Saints are to be had and retained; and that due honor and veneration is to
be given to their Images. Again, touching the use and sufficiency of the
Scripture, Sect 13.
touching the Real presence, Private Mass, Communion in both kinds, Merit
of works, the Popes Supremacy, and the like: Gregory is flatly opposite to
the Popes of these later times. And that you may yet further hear, that the
Popes have no Infallibility in their Determinations and Decrees, you shall find
likewise, that the later Popes do not only vary from the Faith of the
Ancients, but also differ amongst themselves, and contradict each other in many
substantial points of their own doctrine.

Pope Caelestine the Third, in the year 1191, published a Decree, Alph. aduers
haeres. lib. 1. c. 4.
that of married persons, if one fall into Heresy, the Marriage is dissolved,
and the Catholic party is free to marry again. Neither (says Alphonsus)
was this error of Calestine such as ought to be imputed to negligence alone,
that we may say, he erred as a private man, not as Pope: for this difinition
of Caelestine was extant in the Decretals which I my self have seen and read.
On the contrary, Pope Innocentius the Third, his immediate Successor decided
the case, and confessed that one of his Predecessors, (which says the Gloss,
Decret li. 4. de diuortijs Quanto. Praedecess.
was Caelestine) had decreed otherwise, whose resolution was in the old
Decretals, and it was evil that Caelestine said.

Pope Gregory the Ninth, in the year 1227, proclaims it to the world, Greg.
Ep ad Germ. Archiep. Constant. apud M Paris. in Henr. 3.
The not knowing the Scriptures, by the testimony of truth it self, is the
occasion of errors, and therefore it is expedient for all men to read or
hear the same. On the contrary, Pope Clement the Eighth, forbids all the
common people, yea ^id Regulars also, to read or retain any vulgar
Translation of the Scriptures, without license of their Bishop, or Inquisitor:
and there he gives the reason flatly opposite to the Tene^ of his Predecessor:
Azor Inst. Moral. part. 1. l. 8. c. 26.
Because the common use of Scripture is found by experience to be rather
hurtful then profitable.

Pope Nicholas the fourth, in the year 1288 declared in his Decretall, Sixti
Decr. lib. 5. tit. 12.. Exijt.
that To renounce the propriety of all things, not in special only, but in
common also, is meritorious and holy, which Christ taught by Word, and
confirmed by Example, and the first Founders of the Militant Church derived to
others by pattern of their Doctrine and Life: On the contrary, his Successor
John the 22. published and declared, Extrauag. ^ohn 2 tit 14 Cum inter
nonnullos.
that It is Heretical, to affirm that Christ and his Apostles had nothing in
special, nor in common.

Pope Martin the fifth, in the year 1431. in the grand Council of Basil,
Conc. Basil Sess. 33.
decreed the Council above the Pope: Pope Eugenius the fourth, Bell de Eccles.
and Council. l. 1. c. 7.
his immediate Successor, condemned that Session, and declared the Pope to be
above a Council. And, that which is most remarkable, those Romanists which
condemn the Translation of our Bible (as if the latter Translation did
contradict the former) shall find, The first Bible was printed at Rome 1590
the second, 1592.
that Pope Sixtus Quintus published in the year 1590, and commanded to be read
and followed upon such pain (...) as are mentioned in his Breue; D. James his
Apol. of Bellu^n Papale p 27.
within two year after was rejected by hi^ Successor Pope Clement (...) 8. as
a Translation erroneous, Acta prioru^ Pontificum sequentes Pontifi^es aut
infringunt, iut omnino tollunt, nihil enim aliud isli Pontificuli cogitabant,
quam vt nome^ et dignitatem ma^oru^ suorum extinguerent. Plat in Stephan. and
in Romano.
and opposite to the Truth. And thus says ^^tina, The latter Popes, either
vi^lat, or utterly repeal the Decrees of their Predecessors* For the little
petty Popes ha^ no other study to busy themselves withal, but only to
defuce the name, and dignity (...) the former Popes.

First then, we may observe, that the ancient Bishops of Rome, published and
declared the same faith and doctrine, which the Protestants teach in the
fundamental points at this day. They commanded Priests and people to
communicate together, contrary to the doctrine of Priua^ Masses: they taught,
that the Sacrament was a semblance of Christ's body, and that the substance of
bread did remain after consecration, contrary to the Faith of
Transubstantiation: they commanded the cup to be given to the lay people,
which the later Popes forbid at this day: They condemned the Worship of Images,
Merit of works, and the Popes Supremacy; all which doctrines are received by
the later Popes and councels, and declared with Anathema's, to be believed as
Articles of faith.

Thus we see the house divided against it self, Heu Domus antiqua qua^
dispari dominaris Domino.
the later Popes repealing the Acts of the former, and both contradicting each
other. Now how the house should stand which is divided against it self; how
the Pope should be the Rule of faith, and yet dissent from the faith of his
Predecessors: how the Pope should be the Pillar and ground of Truth, and yet
his Truth opposed and contradicted by his Successors, I may well conceive it
may be A mystery of Babylon, Revel. 17.5.
but I profess I cannot understand it. Briefly and truly I may say of the
Popes in these later ages, They have succeeded their predecessors as Caiphas
succeeded Aaron, or as sickness succeeds health, or as darkness succeeds
light; and from these few examples in Faith and Doctrine, I will conclude with
the saying of St. Ambrose: Non habent Petri hareditutem, qui Petri fidem non
habent. Ambros. de Paenit. l. 1. c. 6
They have not the succession of Peter, that want the faith of Peter.

I proceed to the Popes Succession in person, which (although it be of no force
and authority, by the testimonies of our adversaries, unless there be also a
right succession of doctrine in the same Church) yet I will give you some few
instances and observations of their own Writers, that the uncertainty of
their Succession may more easily be discovered by their own confessions.

Gratian the Compiler of the Popes Decrees, well understood, that the Popes
succession would be interrupted, if his faith and doctrine should be compared
with Peter's; and therefore for more certainty, (by transposing the word Faith
into Scate) has appropriated the right Succession to the Sea of Rome, Petri
haereditatem non habent, que non habent Petri sede^. Great. de Poenit did. 1.
c. Potest.
in these words: They have not the Succession of Peter, that want the Seat of
Peter. To let pass these forgeries, it is strange to see what shifts the
Romanists do use, to make good the lineal descent of their Popes. Rather then
they will want authority of Scriptures to prove Peter's being at Rome, they will
confess that Rome is meant by that Babylon, Annot. upon the Rhemish Testament.
1. Pet. c. 5. v. 13.
which is spoken of in the 16 and 17 of the Revelation, which without doubt is
the Seat of Antichrist. Besides, they are not agreed among themselves, whether
Linus, or Clemens, or Cletus, Quida^ post Petru^ immediate ponunt Clementem, vt
Tertullianus et Hieronymus, alii post Petrum ponunt Linu^, and postea Clemente
in etc. Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 5
or Anacletus succeeded Peter, if he were at Rome. Neither can they well
resolve, whether the Pope should succeed St. Peter, or St. John^ for St. John
lived 33 years after St. Peter (says Baronius) so that the succession must
be either derived from St. John the suruiuour, or else the Pope, who
immediately succeeded St. Peter, must be greater then an Apostle, during the
time of Saint John's suruiuourship.

Quae tu^ facies sanctae Romans Ecclesiae qua^ foedissima cum Romae dominare^tur
potentissimae aeque ac sordidissimae meretrices, quoru^ arbitrio mutare^tur
seeds, darentur Episcopi, et quoth horrendu^ et nefandu^ est intruderentur in
sede^ Petri earu^ Amasii, Pseudopontifices, qui non sint nisi ad consigna^da
tempora in Catalogo Pontificum scripti. Baron Annal. in ann. 912.
But admit that St. Peter was at Rome, admit the ancient Bishops of Rome did
rightly succeed Saint Peter, yet What was the face of the Roman Church (says
Baronius) and how most filthy did it appear, when the most impotent and base
Queanes bare all the sway at Rome, changed Sees, and gave Bishoprics a^ at
their pleasure; and which is most abominable, and not to be named, intruded
their Paramours into Peter's Chair, false Bishops, whose names are written in
the Catalogue of Popes, only to note and design the times.

To pass by the two and twenty Schisms in the Papacy, wherein it was
questionable betwixt the Pope^ and Anti-Popes, who were the true Successors of
Peter. To let pass the vacancie in the Papal Sea for many months and years,
during which time the Pope fare at Auinium, and left the Sea of Rome. Their
own Genebrard confesses, there were fifty Popes irregular, Apostatici,
Apotactici. Genebr. Chron l 4.
disordered and Apostaticall. And Bellarmine tells us, at the Council of
Constance, Bell de Ro^. Pont. li. 4. c. 14.
there were three Popes, neither could it easily be resolved, which of them
was the true and legitimate Pope. Dubious Papa habetur pro non Papa. Bell. de
Council. l. 2. cap. 19.
And (says he) A doubtful Pope stands for no Pope. If then there were false
Popes by Baronius confession, if Apostaticall Popes, by Genebrards confession;
if doubtful, and consequently no Popes, by Bellarmins confession; what
certainty, what assurance can these men have of the Popes personal Succession?

It was a pertinent and full answer made to a Jesuit, by an acute and learned
Doctor of our Church, touching the personal succession of D. Featly in his
answer to a Jesuit touching personal Succession.
the Pope: If by Bishops you understand rightly consecrated, and canonically
elected and invested, Pope Pelagius the first was not so: for he was not
ordained by three Bishops. Pope Hildebrand was not so, who held the Papacy by
an Imposture: nor Syluester, who aspired to it by Magic: nor Eugenius, who
was first promoted by faction, and afterward held it in despite of the
Council of Basil. Again, If by true Bishops, you mean Orthodoxall Bishops,
and preachers of the the truth, Pope Liberius was not such; for he was branded
with the note of Arianisme by St. Hierome, and Pope Damasus. Pope Honorius was
not such; for he was condemned for the heresy of the Monothelites in three
General Counsels, confirmed by three Popes. John the 23. was not such, who
was charged in the Council of Constance with the denial of the immortality of
the Soul, and the life to come, and for that and other blasphemous crimes was
deposed by the Council.

Alphonsus a Castro, was an obedient servant to the Pope, Qua^uis credere
teneamur ex fide veru^ Petri successorem esse supremum totius Ecclesiae
pastorem, non tamen tenemur eade^ fide credere Leone^ aut Clementem esse veru^
Petri successore^, quoniam no^ tenemur ex fide Catholica credere eorum
que^libet rite et canonice fuisse electum. Alph. lib. 1. contr. haeres. cap. 9.
yet would he by no means allow that every Pope had Infallibility in a
right line of succession from Peter: For admit (says he) that we are bound to
believe out of Faith, that the true successor of Peter is the supreme Pastor
of the Universal Church, yet we are not bound to believe with the same faith,
that Leo, or Clemens, is the true Successor of Peter, because we are not bound
to believe it, as a point of faith, that either of them had a right and
Canonical election. The reason as I conceive, why this Succession in person is
become so doubtful and uncertain amongst themselves, is partly grounded upon
their own Councels, and their Popes Decrees: Conc. Flor. in Decret. Eugen.
for the Council of Florence declared, that the intention of the Priest did
ordeine the Sacraments, and consequently if his intention did fail at the time
of Consecration, the Sacrament of Orders was utterly void, and the Priests
Ordination and Succession for want of intention, was of no effect, and as
touching the Popes Decrees, Julius the second above 120 years since, published
and declared by his Bull, (which all Cardinals, at the entrance of the
Conclaue, are sworn to observe) That if it happen the election of the new
Pope be made and done, Bulla Iulij 2. in lib. Constit. Pont. Constit. 1. and
Novus Homo.
either by him that is chosen, or by any other of the College of Cardinals, by
the heresy of Simonicall contracts, giving, promising, or receiving any goods
of any kind, or by making of any other promise, or obligation of what kind
soever, whether it be done by themselves, or others by a few, or by many, that
not only the election, or assumption so made shall be from the very moment
void and of none effect, but that safely and lawfully they may hold, esteem,
and eschew him as a Magician, an Ethnicke, a Publican, and an arch-heretique.
Now if any man make a question, whether the Pope can commit any Simonie or no,
let him take his answer from the Popes creature: Thomas Aquinas tells us, Papa
potest incurrere vitium Simoniae sicut et quilibet alius. 2. 2. q. 100.
that the Pope may incur the sin of Simonie as well as any other. Besides,
the Popes Bull would never have said (If any Pope happen to be chosen
Simoniacally) if they had not believed that the Pope might commit Simony. On
the other side, if it be demanded what Pope in these latter times is guilty of
that crime, their own Treatise entitled, Novus Homo, The new Man, does
plainly manifest, that Sixtus Quintus did climb into the Chair by foul
Simony; and that since the death of Gregory the thirteenth, his predecessor,
there has not been any true Pope, rightly and Canonically elected.

He who was sometimes a Pope, proclaimed to the world by his public Writings:
Aeneas Syl. de Ghost. Conc. Basil. lib. 1.
Of the Popes of Rome, we might show forth very many examples, that they have
been found either heretics, or else defiled with other vices.

But it shall suffice for a conclusion of this point, the ground of Peter's
succession is doubtful, the Popes Infallibility derived from Peter, is
uncertain, and consequently, the Romanists have but a Moral and coniecturall
knowledge for their Rule of faith. I call Bellarmine himself to witness the
truth of this assertion. Ius successionis Pontificum Romanorum in eo fundatur
quoth Petrus Romae sede^ suam etc. Bellar de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 1. Ratio
successionis ex facto Petri. Ibid. c. 12.
First, the right of Succession in the Popes of Rome, is founded in this (says
the Cardinal) that Peter by Christ's appointment, placed his Seat at Rome, and
there remained till his death. So that the reason of Succession has his
beginning from the fact of Peter. From hence there will arise two questions;
the one, whether the Lord did command Peter to make his Sea at Rome: the other,
whether the Pope did rightly succeed Peter, Non est improbabile Dominu^ aperte
iussisse vt Petrus sede^ sua^ Romae figeret. Bell. de Pont. lib. 2. c. 12. Non
est de fide, divino et immutabili praecepto, Romae sede^ Petri esse
constituta^, est tamen probatissimum, et pie credendum. Bell. de Po^t. lib 4 c.
4. Forte no^ est de iure diuino Romanu^ Pontificem Petro succedere. Idem ibid..
Observandum.
if he were at Rome. For resolution of these points, the Cardinal makes these
several answers: First, It is not improbable, that our Lord did plainly
command Peter to make his Seat at Rome, yet this is no matter of Faith, nor
yet of a divine and unchangeable precept, but it is most probable, and it is
piously to be believed. To the second he answers: Peradventure it is not (De
Iure divino) from divine right and authority, that the Pope succeeds Peter,
yet it does appertain to the Catholic (Roman) Faith.

Thus by Bellarmines confession, it is but probable and piously to be believed,
that Peter was at Rome, and made his Seat there: and therefore at the best it
can be but probable, that the Pope should succeed Peter in that Sea. Besides,
there is no necessity to believe it: for (says he) it is no point of Faith;
and withal, if Christ gave any such precept, yet it may be changed. Again, if
the Pope do succeed Peter, it is but with a Peradventure, it may be so, and it
may not be so: for (says he) it is not of any Divine right or command,
although it belong to the Catholic Roman faith. Add to these the
uncertainty of their pastors Intention in the ordination of their Priests, the
uncertainty of their Simoniacall contracts, which make void their election,
the known and condemned heresies of Popes in the Roman Sea, with the
uncertainty of Peter's being at Rome, on which all the succession of person and
doctrine does depend: and tell me, if the Popes infallibility, which is
grounded wholly upon probabilities, can be the Rule of faith; tell me, whether
the Pope or his predecessors have had an undoubted succession in doctrine and
person; tell me, whether to neglect the most safe and sure rule of Scriptures,
and to follow this moral and coniecturall faith, be not Via dubia, a
doubtful and uncertain way, and Vid Deuia, a wandering and By-way.

SECT. XXI. The Infallibility of the Popes Judgment, which is made the Rule
of Faith, to determine all Controversies, is not yet determined by the learned
Romanists amongst themselves.
TO lay a sure Foundation, that this Papal building may be strong and
immovable, Hostiensis, Papa and Christus faciunt vnum Consistoriu^, etc. Extr.
de Translat Prael. C. Quanto Ab.
by way of prevention, gives us to understand, that the Pope and Christ make
but one Consistory, so that (sin excepted) to which the Pope is subject, the
Pope in a manner can do all that God can do. He might more truly have added,
that the Pope can do more then God can do: for God cannot lie (says the
Apostle.) Howsoever, the Pope in this is much beholding to this Cardinal; for
(without this exception of sin) the Pope could not have been Antichrist,
since he must be The man of Sin. Neither is this man different in opinion
from his fellow Romanists: for Cornelius Bitonto pronounced openly in the
Council of Trent: Conc. Trid. sub Paulo 3. Orat. Cornel. Ep. Bitont.
Who will so unjustly weigh things, but he will say, the Pope is the light that
comes into the world? Thus the Cardinal has equalled him with God the
Father, (excepto peccato:) and the Bishop has given him the proper attribute
of Christ: and that an Infallibility might be granted him, Salmeron the
Jesuit proclaims it for a certain truth: Tom. 1. prolog. 9. princ. 5. Can.
1. c. 1. ad Hier.
The Lord promised his Spirit to Christ's Vicar, and the successor of Peter, and
by his authority he determines all matters of Faith. So that from these
several assertions, we may confidently affirm, that either the Pope has the
Office of the holy Ghost given him, to lead him into all truth; Revel. 13.5, 7.
or certainly There was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies, to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them. First
therefore let us examine upon what ground the Popes infallibility may be
proved, and whether it be received as a doubtful opinion, or as an Article
of faith. Touching the first, according to their several fancies, Non Cathedra
facit Sacerdore^, sed Sacerdos Cathedra^. Chrysostom.
the Romanists have devised several reasons: some pretend, that the truth is
annexed to the Chair, as if Christ had prayed for his Tribunals, Courts, and
Consistories: others derive it from the example of Caiphas, who being High
Priest by virtue of his office, rightly prophesied of Christ, and consequently,
Qua^do Deus voluit etia^ matu^ immentum rationabiliter loquutu^ est Nec ideo
admoniti sunt homines in deliberationibus suis etiam Asinina expectare
consilia. Aug Epist. 58.
the Pope cannot fail in Judgment. A witty argument, no doubt, and available
for the Devil himself; for by the same reason, the Devil may conclude, that
he has also the Spirit of God, for he testified of Christ: I know thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. Now the Apostle does witness accordingly:
that No man can say the Lord Jesus, but in the spirit of truth. 1 Cor. 12.
He therefore that shall read in the 11. of John, that Caiphas did not speak
of himself, but as High Priest, was guided by the spirit of prophecy: let him
take his answer from Saint Matthew: Math. 26.
that Caiphas himself the very same year, being high Priest, did publicly
and Iudicially pronounce our Savior a blasphemer; and I think none will say,
that this judgment of his proceeded from the holy Ghost, unless he will say,
when the Pope speaks the truth, he does it unawares, like Caiphas, when his
heart and purpose was bent to overthrow the truth. There are others that
confess the Pope may err as man, but not as Pope, as if his Manhood and his
Popedom had two capacities, and were in two distinct persons. Plato a heathen
Philosopher did note it as a thing ridiculous, that one in his days did
maintain: Plato de Repub. lib. ^^thuasm.
A Magistrate could not err as Magistrate, nor Prince as Prince. And their
own Alphonsus a Castro, scoffs at the Dominicans, Eos non vereri coram ^opulo
iactare et dicere qui semel habitum illius Ordinis susceperit, non posse in
fide errare and deficere. Alph. lib 1. de haeres. cap 9.
for that they were wont to brag before the people, that those which have once
used the habit of their Order, could not err, nor fail in faith. Shall we say
then that this new Divinity was learned from some old Philosopher, or that the
Pope is chosen out of the Order of Dominicans, which have the gift of
Infallibility?

Glaber Rodolphus, who was living in the time of Benedict the Ninth, tells us,
that Benedict was chosen Pope at ten years old: shall we say then, that this
child had infallibility, and could not err? or must we believe the Truth
was annexed to his Chair? and that he was able to guide the whole Church, and
direct a whole Council, when he knew not the principles of Religion? Again,
what shall we say of heretical and wicked Popes, who have neither Faith nor
Religion? If we peruse the Council of Basil, Eugenium contemptorem sacroru^
Canonum, pacis et veritatis Ecclesiae Dei perturbatorem notorium etc. Conc
Basil. Sess. 34. Baron ann. 985. n 1.
we shall find Pope Eugenius condemned and deposed for a despiser of the holy
Canons, a Symonist, a forsworn man, a man incorrigible, a schismatike, a man
fallen from the faith, and a wilful heretic. Boniface the seventh, (says
Baronius) was a very villain, a Church-robber, a savage thief, the cruel
murderer of two Popes, and the invader of Peter's Chair. John the 13 was
accused and detected in a Synod of Bishops, Sigon reg. Ital lib. 7. ann. 963.
for murders, adulteries, incests, periuries and other vices of all sorts.
Alexander the sixth, Match. de Princ c. 18.
gave his mind to nothing but villeny, and fraud, Mart. Pol. ann. 986. Platin.
in Syluest. 2.
whereby to deceive men. Syluester the second, leaving his Monastery, betook
himself wholly to the Devil, by whose help he gate the Popedom, upon
condition, that after his death he should be the devils both body and soul.

Must we believe these Popes were guided by the holy Spirit, and led into all
truth? that the truth was annexed to their Chair, and not to their Persons?
must we acknowledge (for what virtue we know not) that these Bishops were the
Virtuall and total Church? were these the right successors of Peter in faith
and doctrine? or shall we say they erred as men, but not as Popes, they erred
in their Palace, but not in their Consistory; they erred in matters of fact,
but not in matters of Faith. These things are so groundless in themselves,
that they rather deserve laughter, then an answer; Aliud stans, Aliud sedens.
they are riddles without sense, that a man, and not a Pope; in a stool, not
in the Chair; in a company, not in a Council, may fail^, and not err; wander,
but not go astray; miss the truth, but not do amiss. Cardinal Cusanus was
so far from the belief of this new doctrine, that he ieasted at Pope
Eugenius, and under that pretext, derided the Infallibility of the Pope.
Quomodo potest Papa Eugenius dicere hoc veru^ esse. si ipse velit et non
aliter. Cusan. de Concord. Cath. lib. 2. cap. 29.
How can Pope Eugenius (says he^) tell this is true, if he will have it so,
and not otherwise, as though the inspiration of the holy Ghost were wholly at
the Popes command, to breath only where he will have him?

It is confessed on both sides, that Christ is the Way and Truth, and by his
word he has prescribed a sure and an infallible rule to find out the truth: If
the Scripture were but a partial rule, yet by Bellarmines own confession, it
is the most certain, Scriptura ^egula credendi cerrissima tutissimaque est
Bell. de Verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.
and most safe rule of faith. Now ^et us see what is the most certain rule of
the Roman ^aith, and on what assured means their proselytes may ^est
satisfied, and infallibly ^nstructed for the salvation ^f their souls. Suarez
the ^esuite tells us, It is the Catholic truth, Veritas Catholica est
Pontificem definientem ex Cathedra esse Regula^ Fidei, quae errare non potest,
qua^do aliquid authentice proponit vniuersa Ecclesia tanqua^ de fide, etc.
Suarez de Tripl. virt. Theol. Sect. 8. disp. 5. de reg. page 214. Censeo esse
rem de fide ce^ta^. Suar. ibid p. 214.
that the Pope defining in his Chair, is the rule of Faith, which cannot err,
that is, when he does propose any thing authentically to the universal Church,
to be believed (...) a divine faith: and thus (says he) all Catholic Doctors
teach in these days; and I think it (...) be a thing certainly to be
believed. This Jesuit maintain^^ the Infallibility of the Pope yet speaks but
( as he thinks and withal tells us, It is the Catholic doctrine of these
times, when as he should have proved it by ancient Records, that it was the
Catholic doctrine of all ages: For there is no man living, let him be Papist
o^ Protestant, if he be a man of ^nderstanding, but will hol^ it most
requisite, and absolutely necessary, that the rule of faith should be declared
by Christ and his Apostles, by Catholic Traditions, by General Councels, by
the consent of Fathers, and the whole Christian world, and certainly, if the
Popes Decrees and conclusions be that rule of faith, they ought to be confirmed
by all those testimonies, since on his judgment both Councels, and Bishops do
depend; but especially, since the error of the Pope is (adjudged) to be the
error of the Universal Church.

Again, he that delivered what he thought was the Catholic doctrine of these
times, touching the Popes Infallibility in general, tells us of an other point
at that time questionable, (viz.) Whether it was to be believed as an Article
of faith, Idem ibid. page 218.
that the or that particular Pope were (...) true Pope: This doctrine (says
he) I taught at Rome affirmatively, in the year 1585: but withal professes,
that many at that time thought otherwise. He that proclaimed it to the world,
that the Popes definitive sentence in his chair, was the rule of Faith,
withal professes, that within these few years it was not resolved, whether
this or that particular Pope might err or no. And as it was observed by a
judicious and religious Gentleman, M Noy of L. Inn.
(for I shall gladly acknowledge any thing that I received from any man) this
later question produced a new Quaere, viz If the Pope were not a true Pope, and
Canonically elected, then that person which worshipped a Saint canonized by
that Pope, commits flat Idolatry, by reason the Saint wants his right
Canonization, for want of the Popes true and Canonical election. Many such
doubts (said he) were moved touching this Rule of Faith, which neither the
Jesuit was able to resolve, nor the Church had as yet determined. He that can
but spell, and put these things together, would fear and tremble, to think he
has no better assurance of his salvation, then a doubtful, uncertain
questionable and vrresolued way to guide him into the paths of saving
knowledge. And that the world may know the Rule of Faith, (which ought
generally to be received De Fide, of all the faithful) is altogether
doubtful in the Roman church, I have summoned 12 of the Popes disciples to
deliver their several opinions, concerning the Popes Infallibility; but how
they concur in witnessing the truth of this Doctrine, I leave it to be
judged.

Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 6.
1. Bellarmine] It is probable, that the Pope, not only as Pope cannot err,
but as a private man, cannot fall into Heresy, or hold any obstinate opinion
contrary to the Faith.

2. Albertus Pigghius. Piggh. de Eccle. Hier. lib. 6. c. 13.
] The Judgment of the Pope is more certain then the Judgment of a General
Council, or else the whole world.

3. Hosius. Hos. lib. 2. cont. Brent.
] Be the wickedness of Popes never so great, it can never hinder, but that
this promise of God shall ever be true; The Popes shall show thee the truth of
Judgment.

4. Johannes de Turrecremata. Ioh. sum. de Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 112.
] It is better to rest upon the sentence of the Pope, which he delivers out of
Judgment, then the opinions of whatsoever wise men in matters of Scripture:
for even Caiphas was a High Priest, and although he was wicked; yet he
prophesied truly.

5. Siluester Prierias] Whosoever leans not to the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, I'tier contr. Lutherum.
and Bishop of Rome, as unto he Infallible rule of God (of which doctrine the
holy Scripture has taken force and authority) he is an heretic.

Episc. Bitont. Conc. ex Romans 1. cap 14. Romae habit.
6. Cornelius Mus] I must ingenuously confess, I would give more credit to one
Pope in matters of faith, then to a thousand Augustines, Hieromes, or
Gregory's, etc. For I believe and know, the chief Bishop in matters of faith
cannot err, because the authority of the Church in determination of things
belonging to faith, is resident in that Bishop; and so the error of that
Bishop should come to be the error of the universal Church.

Thus the great Mountains were in labor, and at last appears Ridiculus Mus:
This man cares neither for Fathers, nor Counsels; he knows the Pope cannot
err, and he is a man of experience: You may believe him, for he was a
Preacher at twelve years old, (says Sixtus Senensis:) but there are six more
of the Popes sworn servants; they are Legales homines, and crave audience,
having the said power and jurisdiction with the rest, only they say they
cannot flatter, they must and will speak the truth in this, howsoever the
rest be divided from them; and first concerning the first of the second rank.

7. Alphonsus de Castro] We doubt not, Non dubitamus an hareticum esse et Papam
esse coire in vnu^ possint. Non enim credo esse aliquem adeo impudentem Papae
assertatore^ vt ei tribuere hac velit, vt nec errare, nec interpretatione
sacraru^ literarum hallucinari possit, cum constet plures Papas adeo
illiteratos esse vt Grammaticam penitus ignorent, qui fit vt sacras literas
interpretari possint? Alphonsus aduers Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 4.
whether one man may be a Pope and an heretic both together: for I believe
there is none so shameless a flatterer of the Pope, that will grant him that
prerogative, that he can never err, nor be deceived in expou^ding the
scripture, seeing it is well known, that diverse Popes have been so palpably
unlearned, that they have been utterly ignorant of their Grammar, and
therefore how can they be able to expound the Scriptures?

8. Lyra. Exhoc patet quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus ratione
potestatis vel dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel saecularis, quia multi Principes,
et su^mi Pontifices inuenti sunt Apostataffe a Fide Lyra in Math. 6.
] Hereby it appears, that the Church stands not upon men, in consideration
of their power or dignity Ecclesiastical, or Temporal: for many Princes and
Popes have proved Apostata's, and strayed from the Faith.

9. Arboreus.] The Pope may err in Fai h; and he seems to me to be in a
foul error that thinks otherwise: surely they do but flatter the Bishop of
Rome, Papa infide^ errare potest, et tota mihi aberrare videtur qui aliter
sentit, assentatur fane Romano Pontifici qui faciunt eum immunem a lapsu
hareseot and schismatis. Thesoph. lib 4. cap. 32.
that make him free from falling into Schism, or heresy.

Neque aliquem sua dignitas ab increpationibus tutu^ reddit, quae Petrum no^
reddidit, multosque alios eodem praditos gradu, vt Marcellu^, quoth Diis lib^sset,
vt Calestinum quoth cu^ Nestorio haretico senti^et. De Donat Consta^tini. Persona
quaelibet singularis de Ecclesia cuius^unque dignitatis etiamsi Papalis,
circundata est infirmitate et deuiabilis est, vt fallere possit and falli.
Gerson. de examinat doctr. Consid. 1.
10. Laurentius Valla] No man's dignity does defend him from controulment: for
Peter was not so defended, nor many others that were advanced to that degree,
as Pope Marcellinus, in that he offered sacrifices unto Idols, and Pope
Caelestinus, in that he agreed with the heretic Nestorius.

11. Gerson.] Every one of what degree soever in the Church, although he be
Pope himself, is compassed with infirmities, and subject unto error, and is
in possibility of deceiving, and being deceived.

12. Erasmus. Siverum est quoth quidam asseuerant Romanum Pontificem errore
iudicali no^ posse vnquam errare, quid opus generalibus Conciliis? quid opus in
Conciliu^ accersere Iuris consultes? ac theologos eruditos, si pronu^tian labi
no^ possit? cur datus est apellationi locus? vet ad Synodum, vel ad eunde^
rectius edoctum postea qua^ semel de causa pro^u^tiauit Pontifice^? quorsum
attinet Academia^ in tractandis fidei quaestionibus distorquere, cum ex vno
Pontifice quod veru^ est, ^^diro liceat? Imo qui fit vt Pontificis huius
decreta ^um illius pugna^ Decretis? Eras. Annot in 1 Cor. 7.
] If it be true which some said, that the Bishop of Rome can never err
Iudically, what need General Counsels, why are men skillful in the Laws, and
learned in Divinity, sent for to Counsels? If he pronouncing cannot err,
wherefore lies there any Appeal from the Pope to a Council, or to the Pope
himself being better informed? To what purposes are so many Universities
troubled with handling questions of Faith, when truth may be had from his
mouth? Nay, how comes it to pass, that one Popes Decrees are found contrary
to an other?

The learned Romanists are all vowed servants to the Pope; but they give not up
their verdict concerning the Popes Infallibility, by reason they agree not in
certain amongst themselves, and the reason as I conceive of this their
disagreement, is the want of good evidence, and pregnant testimonies given to
the Inquest in the Popes behalf: for it is observed by a Reverend D. Feilds
Append. to the 3. Book. c. 26 p. 340.
Divine, That the Infallibility of the Popes Judgment was so far from being
a thing resolved of in the Church of God before our time, that Stapleton
confesses of these times, It is yet no matter of Faith, but of opinion only;
because so many famous and renowned divines have ever holden the contrary, as
Gerson, Almaine, Occam, almost all the Parisians, all they that thought the
Council to be above the Pope, Adrianus Sextus, Durandus, Alphonsus a Castro,
and many more. And it was likewise published and declared, within these two
hundred years, by their own general and graund Council of Basil, Vniuersalis
Ecclesia sape obedientiam Romany Pontificibus subtraxit, Marcellino,
Anastatio, Liberio, Iohanni 12. Benedicto 9. Benedicto 13. Iohanni 23 -- Certum
est Papa^errare posse, sape experti sumus et legimus Papam errasse. Epi. Synod.
Council. Basil.
that the universal Church did oftentimes withdraw her obedience from the
Roman Bishops, as namely from Marcellinus, Anastasius, Liberius, John the
twelfth, Benedict the ninth Benedict the thirteenth, and John the 23: and
(there the reason is given) because it is certain, the Pope may err, and this
(say they) we have read and seen by experience.

These things being advisedly heard and considered, I have again consulted with
the Foreman of the Inquest, (who would have it piously to be believed, that
the Pope cannot err:) what should become of those that yield obedience to the
Pope, when he may err and teach false doctrine; or how shall a troubled mind
learn the Law from his mouth, when he never preaches? To this the Cardinal
replies: Bell. de verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 5.
It is not material whether you hear the Pope or no, when as there are
Teachers in your own Parish, who may inform you. And thus from the Essential
Church, to the Council, from the Council to the Consistory of Cardinals,
from the Consistory to the Pope, from the Pope we are sent at last to the
Bishop or Priest of the Parish; and this is Via Dubia, a doubtful and
uncertain way, and this is Via Deuia, a wandering and By-way.

SECT. XXII. The Church, upon which the learned Romanists ground their Faith,
is no other then the Pope: and the Church, upon which the unlearned Romanists
do rely, is no other then their Parish Priest.
TOllet the Jesuit observing, that difference of opinions might breed some
distraction in the Church, and scruples in the minds of the ignorant, resolves
with what safety the Romish Proselytes may rely upon their Priests doctrine:
Si rusticus circa articulos credat suo Episcopo propoue^ti aliquod dogma
haereticu^ meretur in credendo, licet sit error, quia tenetur credere donec ei
constet esse contra Ecclesiam. Toll de Instruct Sacerd. lib. 4. cap 3.
If one believe (says he) his Bishop or Prelate preach contrary to the
Faith, thinking, that it is so believed by the Church, such a one shall not
only not sin, but also in believing that falsehood, shall perform an act
meritorious. The belief then of the Romish doctrine, does not consist
altogether in the truth of it, but in the faith of the believer: for let it be
true or false, if it be received with an affected ignorance, and a blind
obedience, the party shall be safe, as it were by fire; that is, as they
elegantly understand it, shall go through the fire of Purgatory to heaven.

Cardinal Cusanus, has given his voice with Cardinal Tollet, that it is the
safest and surest way to rely upon the Priest as Ruler of the people, without
further inquiry of the truth: and thereupon he cries out with admiration, as
if he would astonish his Disciples with the name of the Church: Qua^ firma est
aedificatio Ecclesiae, quia nemo decipi potest etiam per malu^ praesidentem. Si
dixeris Domine obediui tibi in praeposito, hoc tibi sufficient ad salutem, tu
enim per obedientiam quam facis praeposito, que^ Ecclesia ^olerat, decipi
nequis etia^si praeceperit alia qua^ debuit: praesumit enim ecclesia de illa
sententia cui si tu obedieris magna erit me^ces tu^. Obedeen^^^t ^tur
irr^^tionalis est co^ su^m^ta obedientia et per fectissima, scil. quando
obeditur sine inquisitione rationis, sicut tumentu^ obedit domino suo. Cusan.
Exist lib. 2. and lib. 6.
O how strong is the building of the Church* for no man can be deceived, no not
by an evil Bishop, if thou say unto God, O Lord, I have obeyed thee in my
Bishop; this shall suffice thee unto salvation: for thou can not be deceived
by thy obedience, that thou yeeldest to the Bishop, whom the Church suffers,
although he command thee other things then he ought to do: for the Church
presumes his sentence to be good; which sentence if thou obey, thy reward
shall be great. Obedience therefore without reason, is a full and perfect
obedience, that is, when thou obeyest without inquiring of reason, as a horse
is obedient to his Master.

The Bishop or Priest then is the man we must obey and believe (for his lips
preserve knowledge, and his tongue will tell no lies,) but what if he fail in
his doctrine? what if he err in his opinion? are we sure he does ever
deliver the constant Tenet of his Church? Admit then Saint Bernard were alive;
and if a poor ignorant soul should come unto him, and demand of him, whether
he think it possible for a man to keep the Commandments; will he say, that
a man may keep them, for the Church teaches so, Bernard in Can. Sermon. 50.
when as he himself confidently affirms; Therein thou shall yield unto us that
the Commandments neither have been fulfilled by any man in this life, nor
indeed can be. Admit that Thomas Aquinas were alive, and one of his disciples
should desire to be resolved, what worship to give an Image, would he tell him,
it must be worshipped with Dulia, an inferior honor, when as himself
protests, Quod eade^ reuerentia exhibeatur Imagini Christi, vt ipsi Christo.
Aquin. p. 3. q. 25. art 3.
that the Image of Christ is to be honored with the same honor that Christ
himself is? Admit that Cardinal Caietan were alive, and one should desire to
know whether the Books of Macabees were canonical Scriptures, would he teach
they were Canonical, when his fellow Canus professes, Canus li. 2. loc.
Theol. cap. 11.
he was so far from teaching it, that he maintained the contrary? Look
upon the grand and fundamental point of Transubstantiation, if a Romanist will
consult with the Priests and Bishops of these late ages, it will appear, there
could be no certainty for an ignorant lay man to build his faith upon the
resolution of his Priest or Prelate. As for instance in this particular point:
If a lay Papist had required satisfaction of Bishop Fisher, Whether the
doctrine of Transubstantiation was grounded upon the authority of the
Scripture; it is presumed, he would have answered according to his own
writing: Roffens. contr. Capt. Babylonica^ c. 10. N. 8. and O.
Non potest per vllam Scripturam probare: It cannot be proved by any (place
of) Scripture. If he had appealed from the Bishop to a Court of Cardinals,
Cardinal de Aliaco would have told him, Patet quod ille modus sit possibilis,
nec repugnat rationi nec authoritati Bibliae etc. Pet. de Alliac. in 4. Sent.
q. 6. Art. 1. Caier. in 3. part q. 79. Art 1.
The manner which supposes the substance of bread to remain, is possible;
neither is it contrary to reason, nor the authority of the Scriptures Card.
Caietan would have told him, That part which the Gospel has not expressed,
we have received expressly from the Church: viz. the conversion of the bread
and wine into the body and blood of Christ. Card. Bellarmine would have told
him, It is not altogether improbable, that there is no express place of
Scripture to prove it, Bellar. de Euch. lib. 3. cap. 23.
and it may justly be doubted, whether the Text be clear enough to enforce
it. Again, admit an ignorant lay man would require the judgment of particular
Priests in former ages; Bertram a Priest would have told him: Bertr. of the
body and blood of Christ. ann. 1623.
In respect of the substance of the creatures, look whatsoever they were
before Consecration, they are even the same after. Bellar. de Euch. l. 5. c. 15.
Peter Lombard and Aquinas would have told him, that the Sacrament of the Altar
was a commemoratiue sacrifice, because it communicated the effects of the real
killing of Christ. Ante Lateranense Co^cilium non fuit dogma fidei. Scot. in 4.
Sent. did. 11. q. 3.
Scotus would have told him, Transubstantiation was not believed as a point of
faith, before the Council of Lateran, (about 400 years ago. Durand would have
told him, The material part of the consecrated bread was not converted.
Durand. 4. d. 11. q. 1. and Bell. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 13.
All these were Priests, and members of the Roman Church: they were Defenders
of the Roman Faith in their times; they declared by their Writings and
Instructions to the people, that doctrine which was altogether different, if
not flatly opposite to the Tenet of the now Roman Church. And from hence it
will follow, that either the Roman Church does want that Unity in points of
Faith, (which they so much magnify amongst themselves) or otherwise it is an
unstable, and a doubtful way to rely upon the instructions of his Bishop or
Priest for the assurance of his right belief. Moreover, that the Cardinals and
Bishops maintained a different doctrine from their own Church, it will appear
by the several confessions, and confutations of their own Churchmen. Touching
Bertram, Bellar. de Script. Eccles. Tom. 7 p 121.
(Bellarmine says) Paschasius Ratbertus living at that time, wrote a book
against him, and confuted his error. Touching Peter Lombard and Aquinas,
Bellarmine tells us, Bellarm. de Euch. lib. 5. cap. 15.
They were not careful of that which is now in question, viz. the daily
renewed real sacrificing of Christ. Touching Scotus, their own Suarez tells us,
Suar. in 3. Tho. Euch. disp. 5. sect. 2.
he was to be corrected for his opinion of the Sacrament. Touching Durand,
Bellarmine professes, That saying of Durand is heretical, Bellar. de Euch.
lib. 3. cap. 13.
although he is no heretic, because he is ready to submit to the judgment
of the Church. Thus for want of that sure rule of faith, which is squared by
the Word of God, both Priests and people rest doubtful of the issue and their
success in controversy, 1 Cor. 14.8.
and if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself unto
the battle? (says the Apostle.)

It is no difficult matter to run through all ages, and all points in
difference betwixt us, and to show that many Priests and Bishops, who lived and
died members in the Roman Church, taught different doctrine from the now Roman
faith. This way therefore is certainly uncertain; and this was easily
discovered by their Superiors, insomuch that Stapleton, by way of prevention,
prescribes this direction for the common people: Non quid sed quid loquatur
fidelis populus attendere debet -- Ordinarius Ecclesiae Doctor audiendus est
non indicandus. Stapl. princ. fid. doct. contr. 4 lib. 8. c. 5. and 9.
They must not intend what is spoken, but attend to him that speaks, for he
is to be heard, and not judged. And because through such blind obedience, and
implicit belief, it might be thought a poor lay man will not be able to
render an account of his faith, the Rhemists proclaim it for sound and
Catholic doctrine, that if an ignorant Papist be conuented before the
Commissionere for his Religion, he shall appeal only to the Roman Church,
and his own Church shall sufficiently warrant his belief: Rhem. Annot. in
Luke 12.11.
He says enough, and defends himself sufficiently, say they, when he
answers he is a Catholic man, and that he will live and die in that Faith,
which the Catholic Church throughout all Christian Countries has, and does
teach, and that his Church can give a reason of all the things which they
demand of him. How poor an Apology he makes for his Religion that says, he
is a Catholic, and thinks to be saved by another man's faith, who does not
understand? Saint Peter who is pretended to be the Popes predecessor, taught
the Catholics of former ages an other lesson: 1. Pet. 3.15.
Be ready (says he) always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of that hope that is in you with meekness and fear.

But observe the policy of the Church of Rome, they pretend that Ignorance is
the Mother of Devotion, and therefore (say they) it will be sufficient for the
lay people to believe the Priest, and to rest upon the authority of the
Church, and for that purpose, Bellarmine instructs his Disciples, that the
learned must labor, and search out the mysteries of Religion, but the ignorant
may sit and take their ease: The oxen did plow and labor, Roues araba^t et
asinae pascebantur iuxta eos, docet per boues significari homines doctos, per
asinas homines imperitos, qui simpliciter credentes in intellige^tia maiorum
acquiescunt Bell. lib. 1. de Iustif. c. 7
(says Gregory) and the asses fed by them: By the oxen (says the Cardinal)
are meant the learned Doctors of the Church, by the asses are meant the
ignorant people, which out of simple belief rest satisfied in the
understanding of their Superiors. I will not apply the Cardinals
illustration, for I speak not this out of scorn and disgrace, but out of shame
and pity, to see the poor ignorant soul, not only abused in the name, but
in the nature of that thing, which concerns the salvation of his soul.

Canus their own Bishop of Canaries, professes openly, that it was the
custom of unlearned men of Saracens, of Pagans, of Heretics, Canus loc.
Theol. lib. 12. cap. 4.
to receive the blind and senseless opinions of their Sects, without judgment
and examination. And Espenceus tells us, Espenc. in 2 Timothy 3. Number. 17.
It was the Colliers faith, who being demanded what he believed, made answer,
he believed what the Church believed, and the Church believed what he
believed. Is not this the practice of the church of Rome at this day? Are they
not fully persuaded, that without deep ignorance of the people, it is not
possible for their Church to stand? do they not in this point particularly
urge these and the like Scriptures* Obedience is better then sacrifice: Hear
the Church: The Priests lips preserve knowledge, and the like: How fitly, may I
say, prophetically does St. Hierome reflect upon the Priests of these latter
times, wherein they chase the people from the Scriptures, and suffer them
utterly to know nothing: Nolint discipulos ratione aiscutere, sed se
Praecursores sequi. Hier. in Esaias lib. 9 cap. 30.
These men (says he) challenge unto themselves such authority, that whether
they teach with the right hand or the left; whether they teach good things or
bad; they will not have their disciples with reason to examine their sayings,
but only for to follow them being their leaders. And certainly herein they
much resemble the Jews, who as Lyra reports, had that conceit of their great
Rabbis, in so much they made it their open profession, Respo^dendu^ est
quicquid hoc modo proponitur, etiamsi dicant dextra^ esse sin: stra^. Lyra in
Deuteronomy. ca. 11.
Whatsoever they say unto us, we must needs receive it; yea, although they tell
us the right hand is the left. And this is the active authority the Bishop or
Parish Priest does exercise toward the people; and this is the passive
obedience, with an implicit faith, the people submits unto the Priest. Give me
leave therefore to speak unto the Roman Bishop, or Parish Priest in the words
of St Austen the ancient Father: Aug. contr. Epist Manich c. 5. and Athanas.
Tom 2 in Sermon. contr. eos qui iubent simpliciter credere quae ipsi dicunt.
Vsque adeo me stultum putas etc. Do thou think me such a fool, without
reason rendered, I should believe what you would have me, and what you dislike,
I should not believe? Shall I believe without judgment or reason? shall I not
inquire, nor consider, what is, what may be, what is profitable, what is
decent, what acceptable to God, what suitable to Nature, what agreeable to Truth?

Since then no humane authority can be the Rule of faith, since there can be
no certainty, no infallibility found in any particular Priest or Bishops,
(for particular men may err,) I will conclude with that safe and infallible
rule which St. Chrysostom gave to the Christians of his time: Let us not have
the opinions of many, but let us, search the things themselves: for if it be
not absurd for us, not to believe and give credit to others in receiving of
moneys; but that we will reckon and tell it after them; why do we, in matters
of greater moment, simply and in good faith follow the opinions of other men,
especially, seeing we have the most exact balance, square and rule of divine
Scriptures for the auouching of any authority. Obsecro et oro vos omnes vt
relinqua it is quidna^ huic vel illi videatur, d^que his a Scripturis haec omnia
in quirite. Chrysostom. Homil. 13. in 2. C. l.
I request therefore, and beseech you all, to leave and forsake what seems
good to this or that (particular) man, and of these matters search ye all
things by the Scriptures. And thus briefly I proceed from the doctrine of Papal
Infallibility, unto the grand point of the Visibility of the Church.

SECT. XXIII. Eminent and perpetual Visibilitie is no certain Note of the
true Church, but the contrary rather, as is proved by Instances from Adam to
Christ.
THe Materials which hitherto have been brought, have been employed only to
the laying the foundation of the Church, wherein I must confess I have been
somewhat long, and yet not without reason: for we all know, that a good
foundation being once laid, the whole frame stands the more sure. Now as
Foundations are not very conspicuous till the building be reared higher: so
likewise in succeeding Ages, when the whole building was coupled together, and
became a glorious Temple in the Lord: yet, eminent and perpetual Visibilitie
was no sure Note of the true Church, as shall appear both by particular
instances, from the time of Adam to the coming of Christ, as also by the
testimonies of learned Romanists, who in part were witnesses of a latencie and
obscurity in their own Church.

I speak not this to decline the Visibilitie of the Church; for their own
Ioachim Abbot above (400) years since tells us, Ann. 1195. Ioach. Abbot in
Reu. p. 2.
that The whole Congregation of Saints shall be hidden, for so shall the Elect
of God being wise, be wise unto themselves: so that they shall not presume, to
practice openly, because that darkness shall prevail: not that they shall
leave to animate and exhort the faithful in secret, but because they dare not
adventure to preach Public by: And Bonauenture another Schooleman, who lived
in the Age following, Ann. 1260.
gives the reason how such obscurity may befall the true Church, insomuch as
it can hardly be discerned by the true members amongst themselves. Bonauent
lib. 1. Did. 1
The Church (says he) may be hindered from our sight, three manner of ways;
First, Propter defectum organi, for want of a fit organ, if the eyes of our
body, or mind, be wanting: Secondly, Propter defectum voluntatis, for want of
will; when our affections are so deprived, that we will not see it, though it
be visible: Thirdly, Propter defectu^ luminis, for want of light: So in the
time of Persecution, and Arrianisme it did not then visibly appear. Now if our
Adversaries would reflect upon themselves, and examine their own thoughts,
they should find that either their affections are wandering, or their will
wanting, or their opinions forestalled, or else it would prove no such hard
matter for them to discover an ouerspreading Schism in their own Church, with
a long and grievous Persecution in ours, which caused this obscurity. This did
Gregory de Valentia well perceive, and thereupon he advised his Proselytes to
be wary and quick sighted, Diligenter animaduerti debet, non sic accipiendu^
esse quod dicimus, Ecclesiam esse semper conspicua^, quasi velimus ea^ omni
tempore dignosci posse aeque facile. Nouimus enim etc. Greg. de Val Annot fid.
lib. 6. cap 4.
in discovering and finding out the true Church: For (says he) when we say
the Church is always conspicuous, this must not be taken, as though we
thought this might at every season be alike easily discerned, for we know
that sometimes it is tossed with the waves of Errors, Schisms, and
Persecutions; that to such as are unskillful, and do not discreetly weigh the
circumstances of things and times, it shall be very hard to be known. That
this doctrine may the better appear, let us look back to the first Ages, and
we shall see in what state the Church began, and how it continued in changes
and alterations, and became more and less visible in all Ages, till the days
of Christ and his Apostles.

Before the Law we find in Adam with whom the Church began, that being in
Paradise full of the blessings of God, and having a Freewill to all good, lost
at once both himself and it: And as the power of his will, and the faculties
of his Understanding, were ecclipsed by his fall, Aliquando in solo Abel
Ecclesia erat et expugnatus est ^ fratrema lo et perdito Cain, ^li quando in
solo Henoch Ecclesia erat, et tra^slatus est ab iniquis: aliquando in sola domo
Noe^ ecclesia erat, et pertulit omnes qui diluuio perierunt, et sola arca
natauit in stuctibus and euasit ad ficcumi aliqua^do in solo Abraham ecclesia
erat es quanto pertulit ab iniquis, nouimus in solo filio fratris eius Loath et
in domo eius in Sodomis Ecclesia erat, et per tulit Sodomorum in^quitates.
August. in Psalm. 128.
in not regarding the voice of God, So did his fall foretell, that the best
Churces in their most flourishing State, had a possibility of falling into
darkness and obscurity, if they neglected the Word of GOD. Now we must
know, as this number was small at the beginning, so it was subject to
Persecution: The Church (says Austen) was sometimes only in Abel, and he was
slain by his wicked brother Kayne; sometimes it was solely in Henoch, and he
was translated from the ungodly; sometimes it was in the sole house of Noah,
and he swomme in the waves; sometimes in Abraham, and his family, and he
suffered of the wicked; sometimes it remained in sole Lot and his house, and he
was vexed by the Sodomites.

Again, the Church was under a cloud when Tobias went alone to Jerusalem and
served God, and all the rest worshipped the Calfe in Nepthali. The Church
doubtless was under a cloud in the time of Achas and Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 34 31.
when those Kings made the Temple to be shut up, when Vrias the High Priest
placed a a Pagan Altar in the Temple. The Church doubtless was under a cloud
when the good King Josias called for a Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 29 6, 7.
and made a covenant to perform the words which were found in the House of the
Lord, so that there was many times a cloud of errors that darkened the true
Church, when there wanted a cloud of witnesses to testify her truth.

In the kingdom of Israel under Ahab, 1. Kings 21.
the greatest number were Idolaters. In Ieremies time the Priests and Prophets,
Ierem. 7.4.
which were the chief in authority, were false teachers, and yet (like the
Romanists in these days) they cried out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord. 1 Kings 19.14.
In the time of Elias, there was a general Apostacy in the Church of Israel,
insomuch that he being a Prophet could not discern it: so that a visible and
illustrious Church may appear to be the true Church, when she bears but
the visor, and title of a true Church, and the Church of God may so lie hid,
that the principal members, yea and eminent Pastors themselves may be
ignorant where to find it: for God has not tied his Church to a visible
company, that are known to all to be true professors at all times, neither has
he commanded a Register to be kept of their names, that he might call the
Church after their names: for if any should call for the names of professors in
all ages; nay, if any one should demand but the name of any one of those seven
thousand which never bowed to Baal, and were unknown to the Prophet himself,
it would seem a mystery unsearchable, and a man past finding out.

Neither was this backesliding, or falling away in the Church caused for want
of Gods promises, for they were gracious and far exceeding those promises to
the Church of Rome. The Prophet tells us, that the glory of God did sit
between the Cherubins in the Sanctuary, and God had promised that there should
be his seat, and yet the Priests did corrupt it with superstition, and God left
the place without any Holiness. He extends his promises further: I will walk
(says he) in the midst of you, I will have my Tabernacle amongst you for ever;
my name shall be in Jerusalem, I have sanctified it that my name may be there
for ever: yet of this Church, to which so many promises were annexed, the
Prophet complains: Esaias 56.10, 11.
The watchmen are become blind, they do no good, they are dumb dogs, they are
shopheards that cannot understand. Now as you see the Extent and promises of
his Church were large, so you must know, they were all always annexed to a
condition: If you be my people, if you serve me, if you walk in my
commandments, if you ask counsel at my mouth; agreeable to the answer of the
Prophet Osea: Osea 4.6.
Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee, that thou shall be
no Priest to me; seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children.

Now as you have heard the Law was perished from the Priests, and Counsel from
the Ancients, (as if there had been a second deluge of People and Pastors:) so
now the earth shall bring forth her increase, that is, (as Hierom expounds it)
the blessed Virgin, which comes of the earth, shall bring forth the blessed
fruit of her sanctified womb, that what was lost by the first Adam, might be
repaired by the second: and surely it was high time to rectify the ancient
Doctrine; (for the leaven of the Pharisees had almost sowred the whole lump:)
neither does Christ defer the time by reason of his minority: for at 12
years old he disputes with the great Rabbis in their Synagogues; but
observe what entertainment they gave him: He calls for a reformation of life
and doctrine: they replied, he would destroy the Temple; he urges and lays
open to them the Scriptures; they plead their own Traditions; he discouers and
shows unto them their false glosses; they answer, he had a Devil: he
preached to them of the kingdom of heaven, they accuse him for speaking
against the Majesty of Caesar: yet this Church of Jerusalem, if you regard
Antiquity, they were descended from Abraham; if Calling, they were Priests and
Scribes; if Place, their Temple was the LORDS House; if Councels, they had
solemn Assemblies and meetings: but if I should demand, where or in whom was
the true Church before Christ's coming, (as our adversaries question ours
before Luthers) they may answer, the Jews had a visible Church in regard of
Gods promises; Simeon. Anna. Joseph and Mary. Zachary and Elizabeth.
but I dare promise for them, they can give us the names of a very small number.

Compare then the church of Jerusalem, and the Church of Rome together; the
Church of Jerusalem had her Priests, and Caiphas the High Priest, and
Sacrifices, and Counsels, and a Temple, and Traditions, and Moses Chair, and
the Oracles of God: The Church of Rome has her Priests, her Sacrifice of the
Mass, her Caiphas, the Pope that is guided by the Spirit of prophecy; she
has her Temple, Traditions, and Peter's Chair; and last of all, (because it is
least with her in request) she has the Gospel of Christ. Now when we call upon
the Church for a reformation of doctrine, they answer, Their Church is
Catholic, and cannot err: we lay before them the word of God for a Rule to
examine their Doctrine: they answer, the Word is not sufficient without the
help of their Traditions: we show them their false glosses in Exposition of
the Scriptures, they answer, that it is the right of their Church to judge of
the true sense of the Scriptures. But if we shall demand of them where, or by
whom all their twelve new Articles, published within the memory of man (by
Pope Pius the 4,) were received and believed as Articles of Faith before the
Council of Trent, I am more then confident, they shall not find so many
professors of that Faith and doctrine at Luthers coming, as there were true
believers in the Church of Jerusalem at Christ's coming. And for the better
manifestation of this Tenet, I will begin from the time of Christ and his
Apostles, and briefly relate the courses, and changes, the Visibilitie and
obscurity, the alteration and long wished for Reformation of the Roman Faith
and Doctrine in all ages, till the days of Luther.

SECT. XXIIII. The latencie and obscurity of the true Church, is proved by
pregnant testimonies of such who complained of corruptions and abuses, and
withal, desired a Reformation in all ages, from the time of Christ and his
Apostles, to the days of Luther.
2 Thessalonians. 2.7
IN the First age, the Apostle St. Paul gives us to understand, that the
Mystery of iniquity began to work. And St. John tells us of dangerous
Heretics in his time, 1 Job. 2.19.
saying, They went out from us, but they were not of us. Now, as Iniquity did
closely work, so likewise Error began to spread it self; insomuch, as both
those who were called, and those also who were chosen by Christ, did err
grievously, both in manners and doctrine; and through their fall, followed a
latencie and obscurity in the true Church. Judas erred in Manners being
called, when through couetounes he betrayed Christ: The Apostles erred in
Manners, being chosen, when they forsook Christ. Nay more, the Elect Apostles
erred in Doctrine, when they thought the Kingdom of Christ to be earthly and
not heavenly: Acts 1.6.
for When they were come together they asked of him, saying, Lord will thou at
this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? They did Imagine his Kingdom
to be like the Kingdoms of this world, presently to come, not after to be
looked for; proper to Israel, not common to all Nations by virtue of the
Promises: Nay more, when they had received the Holy Ghost in a greater measure
from heaven, Peter (says the Text) went not the right way to the Gospel;
Galat. 2 14.
John would have worshipped an Angel once or twice: Reu. 19.10. and 22.8.
The Apostles and Brethren who were in Judea, thought that the Word of God was
not to be Preached to the Gentiles. Acts 11.2.
These Examples do sufficienty witness, that the Elect and Chosen of God may
take a fall, but fall away they cannot, and their errors in doctrine and
manners foretell a possibility of failing, and consequently, an obscurity in
the true Church: and hereupon their own Panormitan concludes: Possibile est
quod vera fides remaner^t in vno solo, atque ita veru^ est dicere quod fides
non deficit in Ecclesia. Hoc patuit post passionem Christi, n^m fides
rema^serat tantu^ in beata virgin. Extr. do Elect. Significast. Alb.
It is possible that the faith of Christ may remain in one alone, and so it is
true to say, Faith failed not in the Church, this thing appeared in Christ's
passion, for then Faith remained only in the blessed Virgin: And with him
consents Nicholaus Clemangis, The Church (says he) may by Gods grace maine
in a woman alone, as it is reported to have remained in the blessed Virgin, at
the time of Christ's Passion. In s^la potest muliercula per gratia^ manner
Ecclesia, sicut in sola Virgin te^pore passionis mansiffe fertur. Clemang.
super Mat. generalis Council.
Thus in the College of Christ there were but twelve, and scarce twelve; in
the Council among the Jews, there was but one Iosepth of Arimathea, that
stood for Christ: there was but one Gamaliel in the Council of the Pharisees
that stood for the Apostles: So that the number of true believers was but
small, which did visibly appear, even at that time when the Church was most
glorious, and therefore Eminent and perpetual visibility is no certain Note
of the true Church.

Ann. 100. to 200.
In t^^ second Age, Egesippus tells us, Quod ad ea usque tempora Ecclesia pura
and incorrupta permanserit Virgo in locis obsuris and caliginosis etc. Niceph.
lib. 3. cap. 16.
The Church remained a pure Virgin unto Traians time, which was 110 years
after Christ: for (says he) such as indeauored to corrupt the perfect Rule,
and sound Preaching of the Word, if there were any such, did hide themselves in
secret and obscure places: but after the sacred company of the Apostles was
come to an end, and that the generation was wholly spent, which by special
favor had heard with their ears the heavenly wisdom of the Son of God,
then the conspiracy of detestable error, through the deceit of such as
delivered strange doctrine, took rooting; and because that none of the
Apostles suruiued, they published boldly with all might possible, the doctrine
of falsehood, and impugned the manifest and known truth.

In the third Age, Ann 200. to 300.
there arose a great contention about the keeping of Easter, when as Victor
Bishop of Rome went about to Excommunicate all the Churches of Asia, from their
Communion, as not sauouring aright. And at this time the heresy of Artemon,
(who affirmed Christ to be a mere man) daily increased. Those heretics (says
Eusebius) were many, Eusebius. lib. 5 ca. 25.
and they corrupted the holy and ancient Scriptures, without any reverence;
they rejected the Canon of the ancient Faith, they were ignorant of Christ, not
searching what the holy Scriptures affirmed. And St. Cyprian makes a grievous
complaint of the Apostacy in his time from the Christian Faith, as appears by
diverse passages in his book De Lapsis.

In the fourth Age, Ann. 300. to 400.
Eusebius testifies as an eye witness: We saw the Church overwhelmed to the
ground, Sacras aedes precibus dicatas e sublimi in solum fundamentis ipsis
conquassatis deiectas, diuinas and sanctas Scripturas medio foro in rogum
impositas, Ecclesiarum Pastores hos in latebras, hic illic se cum ignominia
abdentei, illos non sine dedecore prehensos et ab hosti bus ludibrio expositos,
oculis nostris aspeximus etc. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 2.
yea the very foundations themselves dug up, the holy and sacred Scriptures
burnt to ashes in the open Market place, the Pastors of Churches, some
shamefully hid themselves here and there, some others were ignominiously taken
and derided of their enemies; and thus it was commanded by Proclamation, by the
Emperor Dioclesian, the Churches should be razed to the ground, the holy
Scriptures should be abolished, and the Pastors throughout all Parishes should
be imprisoned. Here we see the Church was driven into straights and corners,
till the time of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, about 300
years after Christ; but you shall likewise observe, that no sooner did this
good Emperor appear as an eminent part of the visible Church, but Arrius the
grand Heretic sowed his wicked Heresies, Ingemuit totus orbis et Arrianu^ se
esse miratus est. Hier aduers Luciferium.
which Like a Canker so spread it self, that the Ship of the Church (says
Hierom) was almost suncke, and the whole world groaned and wondered at it self,
that it was become Arrian. And with this holy Father agrees the complaint of
Vincencius Lyrinensis, Vincent. Lyrin c 6.
The poison of the Arrians did not infect a little portion, but in a manner the
whole world; insomuch that all the Latin Bishops, partly by force, and partly
by cunning were intrapped, and had a kind of mist cast before their eyes. And
when the Arrians did vaunt of the multitude of believers, as if Amplitude and
Splendour had been certain marks of the true Church. Gregory Nazianzene makes
this Quaere: (...). Nazian. in Orat 11. ad Arrianos.
Where are those men which define the Church by a multitude, and despise the
little flock? And as touching the perpetual and eminent visibility of the
church, it was so far from his knowledge, that he professes, by reason of
the scarcity of true believers in his Church, They were often termed the Arc
of Noah, Persaepe Arca Nee vocati sumus, vt qui soli orbis vniuersi diluvium
effugissemus. Greg Nazian. orat. 12.
as those who only were escaped drowning in the flood. In like manner, when
Constantius an Arrian Emperor, had objected the multitude of his Arrian side,
and the paucitie of Catholic Professors on the other, Pope Liberius returns
the Emperor this answer: Non refer numeru^ esse magnu^ aut paruum. Nam etc.
Salm tract. 23. in verba Luc.
It mattereth not whether the true professors be more or fewer, for the Church
of the Jews was once reduced to the number of three. Now there is no man will
deny, but there were many excellent and famous lights of the Church in this
Age, yet by reason of Persecutions, it was so much darkened and obscured, that
the holy Father Athanasius (who had a fellow-feeling of the persecuted members
in the Church) puts the Question and resolves it. Quae nunc Ecclesia libere
adorat? siquide^ si pia est, periculosa subiacet, si alicubi pii et Christi
studiosi -- vt magnus ille Propheta Elias absconduntur. Athan ad solit. vita^
agentes.
What Church does now freely serve Christ? For if it be godly, it is exposed to
dangers, if there be in many places, faithful servants of Christ, (as in all
places there be many) they, like the great Prophet Elias, are secret and hide
themselves in dens and caves of the earth, or wandering up and down remain
in the wilderness. And without doubt, the latencie and obscurity of the true
Church was such, Mo^tes mihi et sylua, et lacus, et carceres, et voragines su^t
tutiores. Hilla^. cont. Auxent.
that St. Hillarie professes, at that time it was not to be sought in houses,
I rather reckon (says he) hills, and woods, and prisons, to be places of
more safety, for in those, either the Prophets abiding of their own accord,
or forced thither by violence, prophecy by the Spirit of God. And from these
few instances, it may plainly appear, that eminent and perpetual Visibilitie
is no sure and certain Caracter of the true Church.

Ann. 400. to 500.
In the fifth Age, St. Austen tells, the Church was like a City upon a Hill, Ipsa
est enim ouis quae perierat, ipse Pastor mons est, ouis ergo in humeris eius
ciuitas est in mo^te. Aug Sermon. de Tempore. 218.
but that City upon the hill (says he) was the sheep which was lost and went
astray: and the shepherd is the hill, and the Sheep upon his shoulders, is
the City upon the hill. And thus the true members of the Church may wander
like stray sheep, till the Shepherd find them, and bring them home to the
company of the faithful. Moreover, he that termed the Church, a City upon a
hill, in his time well understood, that it was not visible at all times, that
is to say, in a great mist, or in the night time: yea, on the contrary he tells
us, Epist. ad Vincent Epist. 80. ad Hesych. Enarrt. in Psalm. 10. De Bapt. co^t.
Donat. lib. 6. c 4.
The Church shall be sometimes obscured, and the clouds of offense may shadow
it. Sometimes it shall not appear, by reason of the unmeasurable rage of
ungodly persecutors. Sometimes, it is like the Moon, and may be hid, yea so
obscured, that the members thereof shall not know one an other. And howsoever
in St Austens time the Church was very glorious and flourishing, yet (under
correction of better judgments) I do conceive he did extol the visibility of
the Church, because the Donatists at that time did appropriate the Church
wholly to their own Faction, excluding all other Churches but their own in the
South of Afric. For the truth is, by reason of the multitude of Heretics at
that time prevailing, it could not choose but be much darkened and obscured,
when as himself makes mention of fourscore and eight several heresies in the
Church. Aug. de Unit. Eccles. ca. 2. and 16.
Besides, both Austen and Chrysostom, who were living in this age, tell us,
That the Heretics did so abound in multitude, and they had such outward marks
of the truth in Traditions, in Fathers, in Councels, in Miracles, under the
very name and Title of the Catholic Church, in outward show and semblance of
the true Church, that there was no way left to find the true Church, Nisi
tantu^modo per Scripturas. Chrysostom. Homil. 24.
but only by the Scriptures. And Saint Chrysostom alluding to the desolation in
the Temple in the latter days, advises his profelytes, Idem in 1. Cor. Hom.
36.
to fly to the mountains of the Scriptures. And as touching the Discipline of
the Church, he complains, that She was like a woman which had quite lost her
modesty, and did bear certain badges and tokens of her former felicity; and
being utterly bereft of her treasure, kept the empty caskets and boxes of the
precious things she had before. And although in this age the Church (since the
Apostles time) was most flourishing, yet it was not so conspicuous as any
earthly Kingdom, Bell de Eccles. lib 3. cap. 13.
(as Bellarmine would have it:) for at this time St. Hierome likewise
complained of an Heretical tempest rising in the countries of the East,
Haretica in his prouinciis exorta tempestas naue^ plena^ blasphemiaru^ intulit
portui -- et Romanae fid^i purissimum fonte^ coeno lui^osa promiscuere
vestigiae. Hier. ad Princip. Marc. Epit. Tom. 1.
carried a ship of blasphemies into the haven of Rome, -- and unclean feet did
mingle with mud, the most pure fountain of the Roman faith: yea he tells us
further, The faith of the Apostles was violated in most things, the Priests and
people were drawn into the same consent, and the Bishop of Rome was abused by
simplicity, and Marcella, a poor widow did first openly resist it. And this
may briefly serve, to show that in the first and best ages, eminent and
perpetual Visibilitie was no sure and certain note of the true Church.

In the sixth Age, Ann. 500. to 600.
Pope Vigilius secretly favored Seuerus and Anthemius, two Heretics, who
refused the faith established in the great Council of Chalcedon. Liberatus,
who was living at the same time, gives us to understand of his writing to the
Heretics in this manner: I signify to you, Liberati Breuiarium cap. 22.
that I have held, and do hold the very same faith which you also do hold. No
man must know that I write these things unto you: but your wisdom must think
it best, to have me in suspicion before all others, that I may with more ease,
work and bring that to pass which I have begun. Pontificale in vita Vigilij.
This Vigilius (if we may believe their own Pontifical) was a false witness
against his predecessor Pope Syluerius; he sought undue means to remove him,
and to place himself; he kept him in prison, and sterued him for hunger, he
gave a great sum of money to procure the Popedom to himself. He killed his
own Notary, he killed a young man, being a widows son; and of these and
other crimes being accused before the Emperor, he caused him to be drawn by
the neck round about the City of Constantinople, and cast into prison, where
he was fed with bread and water. And hence we may observe, that if the Pope of
Rome be the Virtuall and total Church, if he be that Rule of Faith, upon
whose infallibility the whole Christian world must rely in matters of
belief, (as the Church of Rome teaches) then certainly the Church at this
time was driven into great straights, when as the Head of the Church, or rather
the total Church fell into dangerous heresy; and consequently, eminent and
perpetual Visibilitie can be no sure Note of the true Church. But as it was
rightly observed by Isidorus Pleasitota, the declination of the true Church
from the Apostles time, was caused through the distemperature of the Head; and
thereupon he makes this ingenuous confession: Isid. lib. 3. Ep. 408.
In the days of the Apostles, and afterward, when the Church flourished, and
labored of no disease, the divine Graces of God went as it were in a ring
round about it: -- but afterward it grew diseased, and was troubled with
faction, then all those things fled away, not through his carelessness and
negligence that first enriched her, but through their naughtiness that
governed not things as they should have done.

Ann. 600. to 700.
In the seventh Age, Johannes de Molinis tells us, In Speculo Carmelit. cap 6.
from the time of Heraclius the Emperor, after the year 600, the day inclined
toward the evening, and the Church having been in an eclipse set in the West,
and became almost deficient. And Gregory himself complains, Greg. Ep. 4. l.
1. Iud. 9.
that the Ship of the Church was in danger of shipwreck. Nay more; Diabolus
ita valde in qui busdam necessaris Ecclesiae membris dentes figit -- vt omne
(quod absit) citius ouile dilaniet. Greg. lib. 4. Ep 36
The Devil (says he) so strongly fastneth his teeth in the necessary members
of the Church, that unless by Gods grace the provident company of Bishops
join together, he will soon destroy the whole flock of Christ. Flens dico,
gemens denuntio, I speak it with tears, Quia cum Sacerdotis ordo intus
cecidit, foris diu stare non potuit.
I tell it with sighs of heart, seeing the Order of Priesthood is fallen
within, it cannot now stand long without. The chief reason of this complaint
was caused by John Bishop of Constantinople, who at this time assumed the Title
of Universal Bishop; and as new Lords are commonly said to make new Laws, so
from and after this time, many alterations succeeded in Faith and Manners, both
in Head and members of the same house.

Thus we have heard in the first age, The mystery of iniquity began to
work: In the second, there was a conspiracy against the Truth: In the third,
Heretics arose and assaulted her: In the fourth, the Church was darkened by
the multitude of Heresies: In the fifth, she was most flourishing in her
members, but known only by the Scriptures: In the sixth, the Head of the Church
was divided by heresy from the body: In the seventh, there was a declination
toward the West, and consequently there followed a darkness and obscurity,
more or less in succeeding ages.

Now as you have heard complaints against heretics and persecutors that
invaded the ancient Church in her first and best ages: so likewise you shall
observe, there followed corruptions and errors in Doctrine and Discipline,
whereby Obscurity became the proper mark of the true Church almost in all
ages, till the days of Luther.

In the eight Age, Paulus Diaconus calls to the Christians of that time, to
awake and listen unto him: for, (says he) You have buried in contempt and
oblivion the word of God, Wolph. Tom. 1.203.
you have made the Temple a den of thieves, and instead of sweet melody, you
resound blasphemies against God himself; and therefore very shortly the
universal Catholic City will fall to ground. And Venerable Bede calls to
them of his time, Nec sine lachrymis rem lachrymis dignam co^temple^tur quantu^
Ecclesiae flatus ad petora quotidie vel vt mitius dica^ ad infirmiora gere^da
deuol uatur. Bed ii 4 in S^m cap. 2. p. 30^
to behold the lamentable estate of the Church: Neither (says he) let them
behold it without tears, which is worthy to be lamented, in that it is grown
worse and worse, or to speak more favorably, it is at least fallen into great
infirmities And Charles the Great makes this general complaint touching the
doctrine and Doctors of the Church: Carolus Magnus de Imag. in Praefat.
The Priests laying aside all sound and wholesome doctrine, and little
regarding that of the Apostle, (If an Angel preach other doctrine, let him be
accursed) they transgress the commandments of the Fathers, and bring into the
Church such doctrine as was never known to Christ and his Apostles.

In the ninth Age, Arnulphus Bishop of Orleance, an eye witness of those
times, professed openly: There is made a departure, not only of Nations, but
of Churches, the Man of Sin now begins to be discovered, Religion is
overthrown, and the service of God is contemned by the chief Priests
themselves: and that which is more, Rome it self, now almost left alone, is
departed from her self.

Ann. 900. to 1000.
In the tenth Age, Christ (says Baronius) lay asleep in the Ship of the
Church; Bar. Tom 10. ann. 912 number. 8. and ann. 900. Sect 1.
and which is worse, there was not any found amongst his disciples, who awaked
our Lord, all of them being in a snorting sleep. It was the age next to that,
wherein the Devil was let loose, Infaelix dicitur hoc saeculu^ exhaustu^
hominibus ingenio et doctrina claris, sieve etiam claris Princitibus et
Pontificibus. Geneb. Chron. Vbr. 4.
That unhappy age (says Genebrard) which was exhausted both of men for wit and
learning, and of worthy Princes and Bishops. In this time, says Wernerus,
Christian faith began much to decline from her first virilitie, when as in many
Christian provinces, neither the Sacraments, nor Ecclesiastical Rites were
observed. And Ioachim Abbot, complains, Est et alia sicus quae malidictione
praeuar^cationis exarnit, Latina Ecclesia sieve n^^icula Petri. Morn. etc.
that the Latin Church was another Fig tree dried up, which did bear naught
else but temporal leaves, and bid her self under the Title of the Church, to
the shame of the Pope and his Sea.

In the eleventh Age, Ann. 1000. to 1100.
Who will let me see the Church before I dye (says Bernard) as in the days of
old, Bernar in Cant. Sermon 33.
when the Apostles did cast forth their Netts, not to take silver and gold;
but to take souls: There creeps (says he) an ougly Rott, at this present,
through the whole body of the Church, yea, the wound of the Church is inward,
and past recovery. And a Canonized Saint of the Romish Church, Morn de Eccl p
^^2. Virgo ^ Mathilda.
tells them of that Age, The Church of Rome which of long time did revolt from
Christ secretly, was near revolting from him openly. And in the Reign of
Henry the first, Ann. 1100. inseratur.
The Church of Leodium sends forth this complaint: In time past I was wont to
Interpret, Fulke in Rhem. Testam. p 892.
that Peter by Babylon did signify Rome, because at that time it was confused
with Idolatry and filthynesse, but now my sorrow does interpret unto me,
Plerique omnes boni, iu^i, aperti, ingenu^, simplices, tum imperiu^ Antichristi
coepisse quod ea quae Christus seruator no fle^ tot ante annos praecixerat,
euenisse te^pore cernebant etc. Auent. de Tyrannide Pontificis.
that Peter calling the Church together in Babylon, foresaw by the Spirit of
Prophecy, that confusion of dissension wherewith the Church at this day is rent
in pieces. And says Sigebert, All good men and just, and honest, and ingenious
men, held that the Kingdom of Antichrist was then begun, because they saw
the accomplishment of those things which our Savior had so long time foretold.

In the twelfe Age, Ann. 1100. to 1200.
Honorius of Authun in France openly cries out; Verte te ad ciues Babiloniae et
vide, veni h^c ad supercilii montes vt cuncta possis cernere aed ficia damnatae
ciuitatis -- verte te ad Cleru^ et in uenies ibi Bestia tentortum Dei seruitiu^
negligu^t, sacerdotium per inunditiam postuunt, populum per simulatione^
seducunt, omnes Scripturas ad sal^te^ pertinentes ab dicant etc. Honor. August
in Dialog. de Praedest and lib. Arbitr. Mat. Paris in Hent. 3.
Turn thee to the Citizens of Babylon, and see what they are, ascend to the
top of the Mountain, from whence thou may behold all the buildings of
that damned City: consider the principal persons there, and thou shall find
the Sea of the Beast: In the Clergy thou shall find the Beasts Tent, for they
neglect the service of God, pollute his Priesthood, seduce his people, reject
all the Scriptures which belong unto Salvation. And Matthew Paris describes the
state of the Church of England under Gregory and Innocent: In those days Faith
waxed cold, and scarsely seemed to sparkle, being almost brought to ashes,
Religion is become base and vile, and the Daughter of Sion is a bold faced
Harlot without shame. He further complains, that the Monks and Friars of that
Age did wholly neglect the Preaching of Gods Word, and for that cause he
pretends there was a devised Epistle sent from Hell to the holy Fraternities,
Math. Paris in Will Conquer.
Wherein Satan and all the company of Hell, did s nd thanks to the whole
Ecclesiastical Order, that whereas in nothing they were wanting to their own
pleasures, they suffered by their neglect of Preaching, such a number of souls
under them to go to hell, Lat. abbots and Bishops. p. 383.
as no Ages past had seen the like. And Robertus Gallus, reputed a famous
Preacher in those times, amongst certain visions of his own, shows us, That
in those days there was scarce any blood or life remaining in the members of
the Church, when as the Doctrine which is the soul and life of the Church,
Oraba^ flexis genibus erecta facie ad coelu^ iuxta Altar Sancti Iacobi
Parisiis etc Robertus Gallus.
was altered and decayed: I did pray (says he) on my knees, with my face
toward heaven, near to the Altar at St. James at Paris, on the right hand,
and I saw in the air before me the body of the only high Priest, clad in
white Silken robes, and his back was toward the East with his hands lifted up
toward the West, Morney. Mist. of Iniqu. pa. 401 or. 434.
as Priests usually stand while they say Mass, I did not see his head, and
beholding wishly, whether he were altogether without a head or no, I saw his
head lean, and withered, as if it had been all of wood; and the Spirit of the
Lord said, this signifies the state of the Roman Church.

Ann. 1200. to 1300.
In the thirteenth Age, Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, complained of many errors in
the Church, Innocent. 4. in Math. Paris. in Henr. 3.844 and 847. and 848.
and sought for a reformation, and for that cause, we may read (in Matthew
Paris) the Pope resolved to Excommunicate and accurse him: but this Bishop
withstood the Popes Bulls, and for his courage in that good cause, was termed
Romanorum malleus, the Hammer of the Roman Church; neither did he oppose those
abuses alone, but the Cardinals at that time withstood the Pope in his
behalf, and affirmed, that the things wherewith he charged the Pope, were
most true, and thereupon they answered the Pope, it was not safe for him so to
proceed, lest a tumult should follow, especially (say they) seeing it is
known, there must be a departure from us, and a forsaking of the Roman See.
Petrarch who well understood the Doctrine of those times, in his Latin
Epistles which are full of wisdom and gravity, tells them: Noui expertus,
etc. I speak of my knowledge, Noui expertus vt nulla ibi pietas, nulla
charitas, nulla fides, nulla Dei reuerentia.
in the Pope and his followers there is neither Faith, godliness, nor Truth;
the Popes Chair is the Chair of lying, that is, a defection, a revolt, an
apostacy of people which under the Standard of Christ rebel against Christ,
and fight for Satan, they esteem the Gospel for a Fable, and the promises of
the life to come for lies. About the same time, Michael Cecenas General of the
Order of Franciscans, affirming the different opinions of different Members in
the same Church, Mich Cecenas contr. Tyrannid. Papae.
proclaims, There were two Churches, the one of the wicked sort flourishing,
in which the Pope reigned; the other, of godly and good men, and this Church he
presecuted.

In the fourteenth Age, Ann. 1300. to 1400.
Occham a learned Schooleman makes this complaint: Alas the time, of which the
blessed Apostle prophesied, when men will not suffer wholesome doctrine, etc.
This Prophecy is altogether fulfilled in our days: for behold, there are many
that pervert the holy Scriptures, deny the sayings of the holy Fathers, reject
the Canon of the Church, molest, persecute and bring into bondage, and without
mercy torment and afflict even unto death, them that defend the truth: so that
we may rightly say of our times, Occham. procl. com. err. Johan. 22.
that which Daniel long since pronounced, Iniquity is gone from Babylon, from
the Elders and Judges which seemed to govern and rule the people: for many
that should be Pillars in the Church of God, and defend the truth even unto
blood, cast themselves headlong into the pit of Heresies.

Ann. 1400. to 1500.
In the fifteenth Age, Gerson the Chancellor of Paris bids you open your eyes,
Gers declarat defect. virorum.
and see if the Houses of Nuns be not Stews of filthy Harlots, if the
consecrated Monasteries be not Faires, Markets, and Innes; Cathedral Churches,
dens of thieves, Priests under pretense of mayds, keep harlots: consider
whether so great variety of pictures and Images be fit, and whether it occasion
not Idolatry in the simple: look upon the number and variety of religious
Orders, the Canonizing of new Saints, though there be too many already, as
Bridget of Swetia, Charles of Britain; the feasts of new Saints more
religiously kept, then those of the blessed Apostles: enquire if there be not
Apocryphal Scriptures, and prayers in process of time, either of purpose, or
of ignorance brought into the Church, to the great hurt of the Christian Faith:
consider the diversity of opinions, as the conception of Marie, and sundry
other things. Again, in his Consolatory tract of Rectifying the Heart, amongst
many other considerations, he complains, There is intolerable superstition
in the worshipping of Saints, innumerable observations without all ground of
reason, vain credulity, in believing things concerning the Saints report in
their uncertain Legend of their lives, superstitious opinions of obtaining
pardon and remission of sins, by saying so many Pater nosters in such a
Church before such an Image, as if i^ the Scriptures and authentical writings
of holy men, there were not sufficient direction for all acts of Piety and
Devotion, without these frivolous addititions: nay, which is worse, see if
these observations in many countries and kingdoms of the world, be not more
urged then the Laws of God, even as we shall find in the Decrees and
Decretals, a Monk more severely punished for going without his Cowle, then
committing Adultery or Sacrilege, and more grievously corrected in going
against one of the Popes Decrees, Ide^ de Directione cordis Consid. 29. etc.
then offending against the divine precepts, and the Gospel of Christ. This
learned Author was Director of the Council of Constance, and there complained
of 75 exorbitant abuses and errors that were crept into the Roman Church, but
found no amendment; nay more (says he) We must not look for a Reformation
in things that concern Faith and Religion, or doctrine, or manners, except the
Secular powers do seriously take it in hand. Experto creed, Experto creed, etc.
Idem in Dial Apologetico.
Believe me in what I say, I have tried it, dispute no more of it, speak not
to deafness it self, thou shall never be heard. Lastly, when he found there
was little hope of reducing Religion to the former purity of the Primitive
Church in Christ's time, yet he wished at least a restoring of the ancient
Faith in the Fathers time; Ecclesia si non ad statu^ Christi et Apostoloru^,
saltem ad statum Syluestri resti tuenda. Gers. de Council. Gener. vnius
obedientiae. In diebus istis in ore cuius libet bonum fuit argumentu^, tenens
tam de forma qua^ materia, Hic est Frater, ergo est mendax. Walls. Hist. Angl.
in Rich. 2. p. 281.
and (says he) If the Church may not be reformed according to the state^ it
was in the time of Christ and his Apostles, yet at least it should be brought
to the state it was in the time of Syluester, which was about 300 years after
Christ. To let pass the observation of Tho. Walsingham, that in those days it
was the common argument in every man's mouth: He is a Friar, Ergo a liar. At
this time Aluarez Pelagius wrote a Book De Planctu Ecclesiae, of the Churches
complaint, wherein he tells us, The Church which in her Primitive state was
adorned of her Spouse with many royal graces, Aluar. de planctu Eccles l. 2.
art. 5. lit. Aleph.
was clouded and ecclipsed with the black mists of ignorance, iniquity and
error. In like manner, Et prasertim quoth magis prodigiosum est Pontificibus qui
suas Traditione^ diuinis long mandatis anteponunt Clem. de Corrup. Eccles.
statu. ca. 14. and 26
Nicholaus Clemangis, Archdeacon of Baieux, wrote a Book of the corrupt estate
of the Church, wherein he complains, The study of Divinity was made a
mocking stock* and which was most monstrous for the Popes themselves, they
preferred their own Traditions far before the Commandments of God. What
do thou think (says he) of the prophecy of the Revelation of St. John:
do thou not think, that in some sort it belongs to thee; thou art not grown
so shameless as to deny it: consider therefore of it, and read the damnation
of the Great Whore, sitting upon many waters, there contemplate thy worthy
acts, and thy future fortune. Abusiones quoque Paganica and superstitiones
Diabolica ta^ multa Romae quoth diuinari been non possu^t. Camer. de Squaloribus
Romans Eccles. p. 34.
Cardinal Cameracensis wrote a Book De Squaloribus Romanae Ecclesiae,
touching the Deformity of the Roman Church, (which book is to be seen in the
Library at Westminster) wherein amongst many other complaints touching the
Roman Church, he tells us, That Pagan abuses, and diabolical superstitions
were so many at Rome, that they could not well be imagined: C^mer. de Reform
Ecclesiae.
but (says he) as there were seven thousand which never bowed to Baal, so it
is to be hoped, that there are some who desire the Churches Reformation: and
accordingly it happened: Consil. Pisan Sess. 20.
for Pope Alexander the Fifth, in this age, and in the year 1411, Dixit quod
ipse volebat vacare circa reformatione^ Ecclesia etc.
promised solemnly to intend a Reformation; and for that purpose to assemble
the most learned of all nations, and at the Council of Senes, 1423, the
proposition of Reformation was revived, but withal, it was adiourned de die in
diem, and the Reformation is not yet come.

In the sixteenth Age, Ann. 1500. to 1600.
Hieronymus Sauanarola, a Dominican by Profession, and for his Doctrine, and
sanctity of life, termed a Prophet, was examined with tortures (says
Guicciardine) for inueying against the Clergy, and Court of Rome, Upon which
examination a Process was publishd to this purpose, that he was not moved
thereunto out of any evil intent, but this one thing he only respected, that
by his means a General Council might be called, wherein the corrupt manners
of the Clergy might be reformed, Guicciard. lib. 3. in fine
and the degenerate state of the Roman Church (as far forth as was possible)
might be reduced to the likeness of that it was in the Apostles time, or those
that were nearest unto them: and if he could bring so great and so profitable
a work to effect, he would think it a far greater glory then to obtain
the Popedom it self. Comin. lib. 8. cap. 2.
And Philip de Comines gives us likewise to understand, that he told the
French King, Charles the eight, He should have great prosperity in his voyage
into Italy, and that God would give the sword into his hand; and all this, to
the end he should reform the corrupt state of the Church, which if he did
not perform, he should return home again with dishonor, and God would
reserve the honor of his work to some other, and so (says he) it fell out.
This holy man thirsted for a Reformation, He complained against their
Communion in one kind, against Justification by Works, against the manifold
Traditions and Constitutions of their Church, against the Popes Supremacy; and
withal, proclaimed that the Roman Church taught not the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and this was counted to him for Heresy, and for this he was
first hanged, and then burnt.

About this time, there was likewise written by Doctor Vicelius a Book called
Methodus Concordiae Ecclesiasticae: Vicelius.
Wherein he complains also, of Traditions contrary to the word of God, he
calls for the translation of the Bible, and wished the Service were delivered
in a known tongue, he complained of the worship of Images, of Prayers to
Saints, of Purgatory as a doubtful opinion, he wished that Priests and people
should rather marry, then live loosely as they do: and for these, and the like
Articles, wherein he desired a Reformation: Index. libr. prohib. de Sandoual.
Madril. 1612.
his Book is condemned inter libros Prohibitos, among the Books prohibited,
and certainly the errors both in Doctrine and Discipline, were grown to that
height, insomuch as Erasmus professes, it was commonly argued in the Schools:
Whether the Pope might not abrogate that which was decreed in the Apostles
Writings, Eras. Annot in 1. Tim. 1.
Whether he might ordain any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
Whether he might create a new Article of the Creed, Whether he had greater
power then Peter, or equal, Whether he might command Angels, and take away
Purgatory altogether, Whether he were a mere man, or God, or participat of
both natures with Christ, Whether he were more merciful then Christ was,
seeing it is not read that Christ called any man out of the pains of
Purgatory. Six hundred things (says he) of that sort were disputed and
published in great volumes, by great Divines, especially famous for profession
of Religion, and these things in the Schools of Divinity were seriously
handled, And without doubt, abuses were grown so exorbitant in the Church;
that Machiauell Protested, The Kingdom of the Clergy had been long since at
an end, if the reputation and reverence toward the poverty of Friars had not
borne out the scandal of the Bishops and Prelates.

Amidst these manifold errors and corruptions in the Church, arose Martin
Luther, and desired a Reformation, as his predecessors had done, and at that
time things were in so bad estate (says Guicciardine) that the blood of Christ
was profaned, Guicciard. hist. lib. 13.
the power of the keys was made contemptible, and the redemption of souls out
of Purgatory, was set at a stake at dice, by the Pardon sellers, to be played
for. This was so notorious, and visible to the world, that by the testimony of
their own Historian, there were that year many meetings at Rome, to consult
what was best to be done. The more wise and moderate sort wished the Pope to
reform things apparently amiss, and not to prosecute Luther* This reformation
was long before wished for: (as we see by the complainants in their own
Church,) neither did Luther (as some pretend) oppose the errors of the Roman
Church out of any prepensed malice: Tem. 7. Wittemb. 22.
for We plainly and expressedly profess (says he) as our Books do
witness, that if they would not constrain us to Articles openly impious and
blasphemous, we would defend them in other things.

Nec prodiit solus Lutherus etc. Alp. a Castre ep. Nuncup. ad Phil 2 Hisp.
Regem.
Neither came Luther alone (says Alphonsus) such is the unhappiness of this
age, but guarded with a great troop of Heretics, who seemed to look for him,
that afterward they might fight under his banner: for presently Philip
Melancthon, Faber, Capeto, Lambertus, Conradus, Pelican, Andreas, Osiander,
Martin Bucer, entered their names in his Book, and many other in process of
time, in great numbers, inserted themselves into his family. And as it is
observed by their learned Cassander, the Church Doctrine and discipline was so
far out of order at his coming, and before, that many learned Writers
published and declared their long wished for Reformation of the Church.

Thus briefly in the Apostles times you have seen the glorious rising of the
Sun; in the ages following, the Sun at highest: from after 600 years, you
have seen the Sun toward setting. In the first age she was like the Moon in
the first quarter, and daily increasing: in the ages following she was in the
full, in succeeding ages she was in the wane. In the first age, she was like
the Star that appeared in the East, and guided the Wisemen; in the ages
following, the Fathers were the fixed stars, and gave light in the midst of
Heresies; in the latter ages there were Stellae erraticae, wandering stars
that fell from heaven, such as St. John speaks of, Priests and professors,
that left their faith, (their first habitation.) And thus we see there is one
glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars, and to all
these the Church is rightly compared by Saint Austen: Ecclesia est Sol, Luna,
et Stellae, qua^do Sol ob scurabitur, et Luna no^ dabit luce^, et Stellae
cadent de coelo, Ecclesia non apparebit impiis vltra modu^ saevientibus. Aug.
Ep. 80.
The Church is the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars; and as the Sun
shall be darkened, and the Moon not give her light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven: so the Church shall not appear, by reason of persecution, and
worldly security: then the power of heaven shall be moved, and they that seem
to shine in grace, shall fall, and those that are most strong in faith, shall
be troubled.

These things premised, we may rightly infer for a conclusion of this point,
that there was always a remnant of true believers in the bosom of the Roman
Church, who resisted the Papacy, and noted the abuses: neither were they
ignorant lay men, or an illitterate sort of Priests, but they were Bishops, and
Cardinals, and learned Pastors, that complained of the latencie and obscurity
of the true Church: they longed for a Reformation in Doctrine, and Discipline,
they wished that the true Religion might be restored to her first Integrity,
the Church to her ancient liberty, her Faith and Doctrine to the Primitive
sincerity; and for this cause, a continual voice and lamentation was made by
many of her children, and she would not be comforted, because they were not
such as she first bred them. From these and the like testimonies, (who
constantly and continually wished a Reformation in Faith and Manners) we may
certainly conclude, that eminent and perpetual Visibilitie is no certain Note
of the true Church.

I proceed in the next place, to show that there was a kind of necessity, for
the latencie and obscurity of the true Church, especially in the later ages,
because it was foretold by Christ and his Apostles in the first Age.

SECT. XXV. The aforenamed corruptions, and most remarkable declination of the
Church of Rome in the later ages, was foretold by Christ and his Apostles in
the first Age.
AS the complainants have made known unto us, that there was an Apostasy, a
falling away from the truth in the later ages, so likewise you shall observe,
that they told nothing of the defection in the Church, which was not foretold
by Christ and his Apostles, at that time, when the Mystery of Iniquity began
to work; whereby you shall see, the one foretells, the other answers; the
Apostles spoke of errors and heresies that were to come; the complainants tell
you of errors and heresies, that in their days were come, vt impleretur, that
whatsoever was foretold, might be accomplished. Now, that the Church of Rome
has fallen from her first purity, that she is that Church at which the
Prophecies long since pointed, and is now fallen, that the Pope is that Man of
Sin, that sits in the Temple of God, which was forespoken, and that there is
not, neither can be any other Church to which the Prophesies can fitly agree,
I will compare the Romish Doctrine with those Prophesies, that her Tenets in the
Church may appear to the Evidence of things foretold, and her doctrine may
appear to be the accomplished Revelation of St. John's Revelation.

First then let us examine, (by way of question and answer) Whether the Church
of God has not fallen from her first sincerity more or less in all ages.

How comes it to pass, that the Pope of Rome assumes to himself the fulness of
power, and is advanced above the kings of the earth (which are called Gods? I
have said you are Gods Psalm. 82.6.
) It was foretold: The Man of Sin shall be revealed, which is an Adversary, ^ Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.
and is exalted above all that is called God, and that is worshipped, so that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

How comes it to pass, that there are such lying wonders, and false miracles
wrought in the Church of Rome in these latter times? It was foretold: Math. 13
14
The son of perdition shall be revealed, whose coming is by the effectual
working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2 9
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.

How comes it to pass, that the Shepherd of the flock is become the wolf,
and the chief Pastors teach perverse doctrine, to make Proselytes of their
own? It was foretold: After my departure, Acts 20.29.
grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock, and shall
speak perverse things, to draw Disciples after them.

How comes it to pass, that the common people are given to believe fables, and
read Legends in stead of Scriptures? It was foretold: 2 Timothy 4.1.
The time will come when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having
their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them a heap of
Teachers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given to
Fables.

How comes it to pass, that the Church of Rome makes a distinction of meats,
and forbids Marriage unto Priests? It was foretold: In the later times some
shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.
and give heed to the spirit of error, and doctrine of Devils, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.

How comes it to pass, that Indulgences and Pardons are granted for money, and
made the treasure of the Church? It was foretold: There shall be false teachers
among (...) by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and through covetousness shall with fained words make merchandise of you.
Reu. 18.3.


How comes it to pass, that the number of the faithful are so few, that at
all times they cannot easily be discerned? It was foretold: Luke 18.8.
When the Son of man comes he shall not find faith upon the earth. 2 Thessalonians.
2.3
Again, The day shall not come except there be a falling away first, and that
man of Sin be revealed.

How comes it to pass, that the Devil has seduced the people in these latter
aages? It was foretold: When a thousand years are expired, Revel 20.7.
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go to deceive the people
in the four quarters of the earth.

How comes it to pass, that the Church of God, (which is termed a City upon
a hill) should be obscured, and scarcely discerned in these latter ages? It
was foretold: Revel. 12.6.
The woman fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God,
that they should feed her there.

How comes it to pass, that in the time of peace and security, errors were
brought in by the enemy of the Gospel? It was foretold: While the husbandman
slept, Math. 13.25.
there came the enemy, and sowed the tares among the wheat: and the enemy was
the Devil.

Lastly, how comes it to pass, that we have made a departure from the Church
of Rome? Vt impleretur: that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken, Reave.
18.4.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

And certainly, all these sayings are come to pass, that not one jott of his
word should pass not fulfilled, so that we see not any things fulfilled in
the Church of Rome, which were not foretold; neither was any thing foretold,
but in the fullness of time shall be accomplished.

SECT. XXVI. The Conclusion of this Treatise, showing in sundry particulars,
the certainty and safety of the Protestant, and the uncertainty and danger
of the Romish Way.
THe Philosopher tells us, that Truth and Falsehood are near neighbors, and
the outmost posts of their doors are both alike; yet their way is contrary:
for the one leads unto life, the other unto death. If we shall inquire further
how to distinguish the house of Truth from the house of Error, he gives this
Character. The door of Falsehood is painted and beautifully adorned, but the
door of Truth is plain and homely; and hereby it appears, that many times
men are deceived, and mistake the door, and go into Errors house, when they
seek the Truth.

These two ways I have briefly suruayed, and distinguished by two several
Titles, The Safe way, an^ The By way: The one (like the house of Truth) is
plain and naked, and known only by the Scriptures; and this is Via Tuta, a
certain and Safe way. The other (like the house of Falsehood) is adorned with
specious shows, and colorable pretenses of Traditions, of Fathers, of
Councils, of a pompous outside, of an eminent and glorious Church; and this is
Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-way. Let us look back, and take a short view
of the particulars.

We say the Scripture is a sure, evident, and perfect rule of Faith, and this
is Via Tuta, a certain and Safe way: They say the Scripture is ambiguous,
obscure, and insufficient; and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-way.

We say, all Traditions concerning Faith and manners, that can be proved by
Scriptures, are of equal authority with the Scriptures; and this is Via Tuta,
a certain and Safe way: They say, that diverse Traditions of faith and manners,
whereof there is no ground nor evidence in the Scriptures, are to be received
with equal reverence, and religious respect, as the Scriptures themselves; and
this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-way.

We say, the undoubted writings of the ancient Fathers are to be followed,
according to their own rule, so far as they disagree no from the Scriptures;
and this is Via Tuta, Bulla Pij 4 pro Forma Iuramenti etc.
a certain and Safe way: They say, and take an oath, to follow the judgment
of the Fathers, making no distinction of true and doubtful Authors, nor
limiting their doctrine to the Scriptures; and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain
and By-way.

We say, that General Counsels lawfully called, are of great authority, and
singular use in the Church, to determine Controversies of Religion, but yet are
subject unto error; and this is Via Tuta, a certain and Safe way: They say,
that General Counsels called and confirmed by the Pope, are of an infallible
auhoritie; and their Decrees are to be obeyed under a curse by all Christians;
and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-way.

We say, the Church is a Congregation of Pastors, and people, wherein the word
of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered, and these
are Essential marks of the true Church, and this is Via Tuta, a certain and
Safe way. They say, sometimes a Council, sometimes a Pope and his Consistory,
sometimes the Pope alone, is the Church, and the marks of their Church are
amplitude, and splendour, and miracles, etc. and this is Via Deuia, an
uncertain and By-way.

We say, the Rock upon which the Church is built, is Christ; and this is Via
Tuta, a certain and Safe way: They say, the Rock is the Succession of Popes
derived from Peter; and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-way.

We say, the effect of the Sacraments depends upon the Institution of Christ;
and this is Via Tuta, a certain and Safe way: They say, the efficacy of the
Sacraments depends upon the Intention of the Priest; and this is Via Deuia, an
uncertain and By-way.

We say, we ought to call upon God by Christ, and that he is our Mediator who
only knows the secrets of our hearts, and sits at the right hand of God, to
make intercession for us: And this is Via Tuta a certain and Safe Way: They
say, we ought to use Saints and Angels for Intercessors, when as they have no
commission from God to present our prayers, nor can know the secrets of the
heart, nor have we any assurance that they hear us at all, and this is Via
Deuia, an Uncertain and By-Way.

We say we ought to adore Christ's bodily presence in Heaven where he sits at
the right hand of the Father, according to the Apostles Creed: and this is Via
Tuta, the certain and Safe Way: They say, we ought to adore Christ's very body
and blood in the Pix, under the accidents of Bread and Wine, according to their
Trent Creed, and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-Way.

Lastly, we say that we are all unprofitable servants, and no man living can
be justified in the sight of God by his own merits; and therefore all that
expect salvation must lay hold on Christ by a lively faith, and wholly rely
upon his merits only; and this is Via Tuta, a certain and Safe way: They say,
that the Law of God may be fulfilled in this life, and that they can merit and
perform works of Supererrogation, and accordingly they rely partly upon their
merits, and partly upon their superabu^dant satisfaction of Saints, for their
Salvation, and this is Via Deuia, an uncertain and By-Way.

Thus I have set before you Truth and Error, Light and darkness, the Safe
Way, and the By-Way. Give Me leave therefore by way of Conclusion to adjure You
in the sacred form of words, sometimes used by the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 30.19
and faithful Servant of God. I call Heaven and Earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing,
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.

(...).

