CERTAIN RVLES, To be observed In the Administration of the Lords Supper,
Offered To the Private Consideration of those that intend to partake of that
Sacrament to their comfort.
1. IT is not lawful for us in Gods worship to do what we think good in our
own eyes, but what he does appoint.

2. For if we know not what he does appoint, we cannot worship him in Faith.

3. If we worship him not in Faith, we can not please him.

4. And if we please him not, we can not expect his blessing upon our
performance.

5. Therefore to be sure of a blessing in his worship, we must come to him in
Faith, worshipping him in Spirit and Truth: and to come thus to him, we must
needs know and observe what he has appointed to be done in his worship.

6. Now to know and observe this in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we must
consider Christ's Practice in the Institution thereof, so far as it is
imitable: and his intention in commanding us to imitate him therein.

7. The necessity of considering Christ's Practice and intention in this
matter, does arise from the Apostles commandment, who does heerin very
distinctly refer us unto Christ himself, for a warrant of that which is to
be done; Saying, that in this matter, he delivered that which he received of
the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.23. and that we ought to follow him so far as he is a
follower of the Lord. Ibid. v. 1.

8. Therefore we are bound to look unto Christ first then to the Apostle,
because finally our Faith must rest only in him; for we are sure that in
following him and fulfilling his intention we do nothing amiss.

9. Christ's Practice then in the institution of his Supper to be imitated was
this:

I. First he took bread, and by giving special thanks over it, he
separated it from the common to a Holy use: Then he brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, and commanded them to ear thereof.

II. Secondly, he took the Cup which in like manner by a special blessing,
he separated from the common to a Holy use, and then gave it to his disciples
commanding them all to drinck of it.

III. This bread and Cup the Lord did distribute being at Table with his
disciples, and speaking with them of his death and of the fruits thereof. Math.
26.20, 26. Mark. 14.18, 22.10. Next to Christ's Practice the Apostolical
Practice is considerable, which in the Primitive Church did imitate the Lord
heerin: namely that all the members of the Church were together at the Lords
table, where they did eat of the bread and drinck of the Cup (both being
blessed) as they used to do at their meals, with a table gesture. 1 Cor.
11.33. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 21. 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22.

11. Christ's intention in this institution of his Supper, does appear clearly
by his words, and some of his Actions, to have been this.

I. Firsh that he did purpose to give unto his disciples a seal of his
covenant, and a representation of his death, and of the benefits thereof
exhibited in the new covenant to the worthy receiver. This is evident by the
words of consecration which he uses in delivering the Elemens; which words
are a promise of the virtue of his body and blood exhibited unto his disciples.

II. Secondly, that he would have his disciples to imitate in after times his
practice in this his last Supper for a memorial of him till his coming
again: This is clear by the express words of the commandment: Do this in
Remembrance of me, Luk 22.19. and by the Apostles explication thereof, 1 Cor.
11.25, 26.

III. Thirdly, that he would have them by this his Supper not only to be
mindful of his death till his coming, but also of his coming it self, and
therein of their Happy estate with him in his Fathers Kingdom and at his table
in heaven; which appears by the words of promise, which the Evangelists
relate Christ annexed to the consecration of the Cup; namely that he would not
drink of the fruit of the vine from that time foreward; until that day when
he should drink it new with them in his Fathers Kingdom, Matthew. 26.29. Mark.
14.25. So then he did make that Cup and bread wherein his body and blood was
offered unto them here on earth, a pledge of the food of glory which they were
to receive in heaven at the feast of the Lambs wedding.

IV. Fourthly and lastly, it seems also that Christ's intention at this his
last Supper was, to let his Disciples know and to give them an Assurance of the
Esteem which he had de of them; namely that he counted them no more servants,
but his friends and familiars; Ioh. 15.15, and to express this fully and
clearly to them, he does not only set them with himself at table; but he
rises from table, and girdeth himself to serve his loving guests at his table,
Joh. 13.4. till 17. Whereby he not only does teach them an example of humility
one to another, but moreover through them he makes good to all his Faithful
servants that promise which shall be fulfilled in his Kingdom, as he
expresses it in Luke 12.37. Blessed are the servants whom the Lord when he
comes shall find watching (and consequently faithful to him in their
charges) verily I say unto you that he shall gird himself and make them sit
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. This then Christ having done
at his last Supper to his Disciples; and promised to do to all that should be
watchful, may be conceived to have been some part of his intention in the
sealing of his covenant to all believers. See also for this Luke 22.27.

12. From all which this Conclusion as a General Rule is to be gathered,
namely:

That that Manner of Administration of the Lords Supper is most warrantable
which comes nearest unto this Practice of Christ: which does express and
represent most effectually this his whole intention; and which is fittest to
accomplish most fully his commandment of celebrating the Memorial of his
death till his coming again; and of the benefits and blessedness which the
Faithful reap both by the one and the other.

And that on the other side that manner which is furthest off from Christ's
practice, which does least represent and express his intention, and which is
least fit to accomplish his commandment of celebrating the Memorial of his
death, till his coming again; is least warrantable, and ought not to be
practiced when it can be omitted, without the scandale of a rent in the
Churches.

Now it is evident that a table gesture comes ne^erest unto Christ's Practice,
and does express best his whole intention, and is fittest to fulfill his
commandment, and that on the other side, that gesture which is furthest from a
table gesture is least fitted for all these.

Therefore it follows that a table gesture is most warrantable, and that
which is furthest from a table gesture, is least warrantable to be used in the
Administration of the LORDS Supper.


