THE LIGHT OF BRITAYNE.

A Record of the honorable Original and Antiquity of Britain.

AT LONDON Printed: Anno. Domini. 1588.

portrait of Queen Elizabeth TSER


To the most high and mighty Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen
of England, France and Ireland: defendresse of the true, ancient, Catholic,
and Apostolic faith. etc.
MOST dread sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God: The Phaenix of the
world: The Angel of England: The bright Britona of Britayne: even
Britomartis President of Britain: The chaste Diana of Calydonia sylua
Britanniae, terror syluestrybus apris: The most noble Lioness Atalanta: that
keeps Calydonia sylua Britanniae: from Romish wolves and Foxes: And from the
Antichristian wild Boar figured by the wild Boar of Calydon that was
chased: hunted: and first wounded by the chaste Maiden Atalanta, a figure (as
J take it) of your majesty, that has wounded the wild Boar, that raunged
over all Calydonia sylua Britanniae, and spoiled the principal branches of the
fruitful vines of Calydonia sylua: and the fruitful trees of AEtolia, even at
Parth^^n the principal town of AEtolia, now called Atholl, in Britannia
secunda.

To your most excellent majesty, whom I doubt not but our Meleager (even Jesus
Christ the righteous) when he has cut off the head of that monstrous wild
Boar, shall at last take you to his spouse: and encrese your joy with an
eternal Diadem, and crown of glory. To your Majesty: to your grace: O Diua
potens Elyzabetha: my dear and dread Sovereign: whom this day I do behold
and see, (after diverse dangers and troubles past, to the great joy and comfort
and to the good example of all your Subjects) to come to the Church and house
of God amongst his Saints in the congregation: to give all the honor and
glory unto God: and in the zeal of a most Christian Prince, to offer your
self, and Scepter, a lively sacrifice to the Lord God of Hosts, who has
wrought wonders in your days, by delivering you his handmaiden and your
faithful Subjects (his people of Britayne) from the hands of your and our
cruel enemies. To you I am come with this small offering, for lack of a
better, (The light of Britayne) my fealty and bounden duty to your most
excellent majesty, and my native Country, whom I pray GOD always to bless in
his mercy, and grant your majesty, always to tryumphe over all your enemies,
and to reign over us for ever, if it be his blessed will.

Your humble and faithful Subject. Henry Lite, of Lytescarie.

The Light of Britayne.
BRitania mayor, Britannia of Britona.
(the Country of the bright Britona, called Britomartis the president of
Britayne) that is to say, Diana.
the chaste Diana of Calydonia sylua: Astrorum decus: Syluarum dea: casta, et
innupta: custos, et cultrix nemorum: Metuenda virago: terror syluestribus apris.

This Britannia mayor, Britannia of Britomartis.
(the country of the bright Britona called Britomartis) was first found by
Brute of Albania: Brutes style
the Conqueror of the Greeks: the mighty deliverer of the Troyans: and the
first founder of the noble Britaynes.

Who by the Oracle of the bright Britona, Diana Britonas Oracle.
called Diana of Calydonia sylua (Astrorum decus) brought the Remains of the
Albanian Trojans of Asia: Albania, Calydonia AEtolia
from Albania Calydonia sylua: and AEtolia in Greece to Albania: Calydonia
sylua: and AEtolia in Britayne.

Before whose most happy, and fortunate arrival: Britannia a wilderness.
there was neither Town, City, Country, River, region: or place of name in
Britayne for Britannia (at Brutes arrival) was no Britannia, but a rude and
solitary desert or wilderness without name, Ferarum altrix.
Ferarum altrix, that is to say, a very nurscerie, or place of store, for wild
beasts. The Countries and Regions of Britain, were then all ouergrowne with
woods, replenished with all kind of savage and cruel wild beasts: as Lions,
Bears, Wolves, Foxes, wild Boares, and all kind of game belonging to the
Chase. Besides, diverse other kinds of wild beasts and Cattle: especially, a
certain kind of white monstrous wild Bulls, and Kine with long shagde
curled hair, and manes: which kind of Cattle were as fierce and cruel as
Lions, and could never be tamed by man's art, as ye shall find it registered and
recorded in our ancient Chronicles, and noted in the the common Dictionaries:
upon these words Caledonia: and Caledonia sylua Britanniae, Caledonia for
Calydonia.
always mistaken and corruptly written, Caledonia for Calydonia, because the
reason why our Country was first called Caledonia sylua, was no better known
to the ancient Romans in Julius Caesar's time, then it is at this day known
to diverse our Antiquaries and Chroniclers of Britayne: Bucanons Calden.
as we may see how Bucanon deriueth Caledonia sylua from Calden: and Camden
(the author of the new Britannia, which lacks Brutes light the glory of
Britayne) deriueth Calydonia sylua from Kaled. Camdens Kaled.
But Camdens fair daugheer Kaled, is yet too young to be the mother of
Calydon, or Calydonia sylua Britanniae. And Bucanons Calden, or Hasell stick,
is too weak to be the mother, Calydon, was the son of AEtolus the son of Mars.
of Calydon. For (Calydon) of whom Calydonia sylua by AEtolia in Greece took
name, was the son AEtolus, who was the son of Mars the God of battle.

Mars the father of AEtolus. Parthaon and Britona.
Mars the God of battle, was the father of AEtolus: of Parthaon, and of the
bright Britona called Britomartis the president of Britayne.

AEtolus the son of Mars, and brother to the bright Britona, was the father
of Calydon of, whom Calydonia sylua by AEtolia in Greece (the mother of our
Calydonia sylua the general name of all Britayne) but especially of Calydonia
sylua secunda, Calydonia sylua prima
Calydonia sylua secunda.
which is Scotland, called Britania secunda, in which part of Britayne at
this day is the most ancient Town of Parthaon, Parthaon in AEtolia.
now called Perthe: and S. John's town, the principal town of AEtolia,
AEtolia Atholl.
now called Atholl, a Region or country of Britannia, Albania, or Calydonia
sylua secunda: Calydon wood.
where the great Calydon wood, which beeginneth at Striueling (called the
Dolorus Mount) and runs forth through Mentieth, and Stratherne, Calydoniu^
Cathanesse.
to AEtholia (that fruitful region of Grampius Mount) which reaches to
Lochquhaber, and to Calidonium Promontorium, which is Cathanesse or Orcha: the
angle, point, cape, forland, or lands end of Scotland.

This Calydonia sylua Britannia, Clydon,
was the daughter of Calidonia sylua by AEtolia in Greece, who took his
Original from Calydon the son of AEtolus, the son of Mars.

AEtolia, AEtolia.
now called Atholl in Britayne, is the daughter of AEtolia, city of Albania,
and Calydonia sylua in Greece, so called of AEtolus the son of Mars.

Parthaon: Parthaon
now called Perthe or Saint John's Town, the principal Town of AEtolia in
Scotland, Britona Britomartis
took his glorious name of Parthaon the son of Mars, brother to the bright
Britona, called Britomartis, the president of Britayne, of whom al Britannia
(containing all the countries and regions, of England, Scotland, Wales, and
Cornwall: called of Alexander Necham, in his book De diuina sapientia Bruti
tellus,) took the most glorious name of Britannia.

Britanniae of Britona.
For Brute of Albania: the founder of Britain, came to this Isle by the Oracle
of Britona, called Diana of Calydonia sylua, wherefore, he called this Isle
Britannia, of the bright Britona (called Britomartis) the president of Britayne.

Albania: of Albania.
The same Brute also who was borne in Albania, banished to Albania: and the
first founder of Britayne called Albania: called all our country of Britain,
Albion, seu Albania: not of the white Rocks and Cleues as some me^ do suppose,
but of Albania in Asia: and Albania Epiri in Greece, the Country of Helenus and
Andromache, the Queen of Albania Epiri, from whence Brute of Albania brought
the Albanian Troyans, the founders of Britayne.

The same Brute of Albania, Calydonia sylua of Calydonia.
the founder of Britayne: who by the Oracle of the bright Britona, called Diana
of Calydonia sylua, did bring the remains of the Troyans from Albania:
Calydonia sylua: and AEtolia in Greece, to Albania Calydonia sylua: and AEtolia
in Britayne: named al our country Calydonia sylua Britannia, but especially
Scotland called Britannia: Albania: and Calydonia sylua secunda. Whereas at
this day. Ye shall find Calydonia sylua: Calydon Town: Calydon Castle,
Calydon Promontorie. With that most ancient Town of Parthaon in AEtolia, The
Britains of the generation of Mars and Hercules.
most glorious records of the honorable Original of the noble Britains, the
remains of the Troyans, that sprang of the generation of Mars and Hercules,
and other the immortal Gods of the Gentiles. Bright stars at this day,
whose mantions in the firmament are well known to all Philosophers and
Astronomers of our time. So that to conclude, the Britaynes sprang not ex
coluuie omnium gentium, Bucanon.
neither of Dogs (as Buchanon says he is able rather to prove) but they sprang
of the Albanian Troyans, the principal Soldiers of the world, whom Brute
brought from Albania, Calydonia sylua, and AEtolia in Greece, to Albania,
Calydonia, sylua and AEtolia in Britayne.

Cronicles and written Records of Brute.
Whereof we have a multitude of most glorious Records and Chronicles, written,
and printed, confirmed by the testimony of Julius Caesar, by Elutherius Pope:
by Parliament holden at Norham upon Twede: and at Lyncolne in the time of King
Edward the first, who by his Letters sent from Lyncolne to Pope Boniface,
Brutes history counted a fable.
does approve Brutes History to be no fable, as the Critici of our time do
esteem it, who will not believe our ancient written Records, although
confirmed by Emperors, Kings, Popes and Parliaments, neither the testimony of
Strangers. Wherefore by the Oracle of Diana, The Swans of Carry, are stirred up
to maintain Brutes History.
called Britona the president of Britayne: And by the Oracle of Diana Lucifera:
that is to say, Venus called Bosphorus: the bright Queen of Phrygia: and Caria
the mother of Aeneas and the Graces, of who^ came Brute of Albania, the founder
of Britayne: who brought in Carius, a noble prince of Lydia and Caria, with the
people of Carry, and Swans of Carry into Britayne. By the Oracles aforesaid,
The Swans will maintain the verity of the British History.
the Swans of Carry in Britayne, are now stirred up to maintain the verity of
the British History. By the gods of the Gentiles. Diana: Apollo: Venus: Mars:
Mercury: etc. Whose Temples our forefathers, Dianas Temple of Troia noua.
the Ge^tils of the Troyan race, erected in diverse Countries and Regions of
Britayne, especially at Troia noua, now called London in Britayne, Diana
Tauropolia Thoantea Dea.
where the Troynouants did sometimes sacrifice Bulls, Bullox and Stags, to
Diana Tauropolia, whom the Gentiles called the Queen of Heaven. Which was the
same Diana called Bellona, Diana Bellona of York.
whom the Brigantes honored at York, Brigantium ciuitas: and what were these
Brigantes I pray you? Herodian says, Briges Phryges. Brigantes.
that the Briges, Phryges, and Brigantes were all one, whereupon I conclude,
that the Brigantes, that is to say, our Northen Britaynes, were Phrygian
Troyans. The Brigantes of Britayne, Brigantes.
are the people of Yorkshire, Richmondshire, Lancashire, Durham, Westmerland,
Abij, Picti, Agathyrsi,
and Cumberland: hard to the Pictes wall. Where the Abij and Picti Agathyrsi
dwell, about Abus Aestuarium: Abus Aestuariu^.
now called Humber.

And what were these Abij, but Albanian Troyans, Abij, Albani.
that came also from Abus River of Albania Epiri. And the ancient Britaynes
called the Picti Agathyrsi, what were they, Agathyrsi.
even Scythian Troyans of Albania, who sprang of Scythes and Agathyrsus, the
sons of Hercules, Scythes. Agathyrsus
who sometimes reigned in Troy. And let not the Scythian Scots disdain their
name, Scythian Troyans.
seeing they were Troyans, for the famous City of Troy in Phrygia, the head
of all Asia, was in Scythia.

The noble Troyans were called Taurini, and Tauroscythe, Troyans called
Taurini, and Tauroscythi.
of a famous Mountain of Asia, called Taurus Mount, Taurus in Caria.
which runs through all Asia: a great part of the Mountain Taurus, ends
in Caria, Taurus the mantion of Venus.
which is a Country of Asia belonging to Troy. Venus called Bosphorus, the
mother of Aeneas and the Graces, (of whom came Brute of Albania the founder of
Britayne) was Queen of Phrygia and Caria: The famous River of Maeander is in
Caria. Maeander River of Caria, golden sands, singing Swannes.
This Maeander River, has golden sands and singing Swannes, that sometime
served Venus Queen of Phrygia and Caria: wherefore the Swannes of Caria,
Swannes of Carry, Signettes of Troy.
and Signettes of Troy in Britayne, must always singe of Troy and Troyans.

The Daughters of Heaven and Earth: Ryuers of Britayne, are Records of Brute.
that is to say, Isis, Themis Rhea, Thetis, Abus, Arius, Alanus, Ax, Tameres,
and all our famous Ryuers of Britayne, with the Deucalion Sea, and Islandes of
Britayne, especially Archadia, Aemonia, and Arachne, are glorious Records of
Brute and the Troyans the founders of Britayne.

Towns and Cities, Records of Brute.
Diverse our most ancient towne^ and Cities of Britayne, as Oxford upon Isis,
and Themis: Troia noua, upon Isis, Themis, and Rhea Albanorum: York Brigantium
ciuitas: Antandros, turned to S. Andros: Parthaon turned to S. John's town:
Albanum ciuitas, turned to S. Albanes: Chester and Doriscestria, with the
ancient Towns of Derbie, and Leicester, and Tyanton upon Tamares River of
Britain, with diverse other towns and Cities of Britayne, are Records of
Brute and the Troyans founders of Britayne.

The diverse nations and people of Britayne, as the Troynouaunts, Diverse nations
and people of Britayne Records of Brute.
the Brigantes, and Scotobrigantes, the people of Albania, Calydonia, and
AEtolia: the Iberi: the Albani, and Georgij: the people of Derbie and
Leicester: the people of Chester, that came from Cestria Epiri, Tanton upon
Tamares, or Tone River.
with the Doors, Jove's, and Cares, and the Tamarites of Tyanton, commonly
called Tanton, al these are Records of the noble people of Greece and Asia,
the Remains of the Troyans that came into Britayne with Brute

Princes, Noble men and Gentlemen, Records of Brute.
To these, add the Catalogue or Register of the ancient Princes, Noble men,
and Gentlemen of Britayne. Records of Brute, and the Troyans, founders of
Britayne.

FINJS.
A Catalogue or Register of ancient Princes, noble men and Gentlemen of
Britayne: whereof some remain to this day. Records to confirm the honorable
Original of the Brytaynes, that sprang of the remains of the Albanian
Troyans, the founders of Britayne: which Brute brought from the Countries of
Isis and Themis, and from Albania, Calydonia sylua, and AEtolia in Greece, to
Albania, Calydonia sylua, and AEtolia in Britain. Before whose arrival, there
was neither Town, City, Country, River, Region, or place of name in
Britayne.

Brute. Corineus. Locrine. Camber. Albanacte. Madan. Mempricius. Ebranke, and
his twenty sons. Brute green shield. Assaracus, and Cicilius, etc. Belinus
and Brennus. Cambra, or Cambria, Antenors wife. Cambra, Belinus daughter.
Conidagus King of Albania, slew Morgan at Glamorga^. Conidagus, builded the
Temple of M^nerua, at Ba^gor in Wal^ and the Temple of Man at Parthaon now S.
John town of AEtolia in Sco^lande: Albania secunda. Aruiragus, i^ whose daye^
Joseph of Aramathia preached in Britayne. Leile. Androgeus, brother to
Cassibelanus, thi^ Androgeus, let Julius Caesar into Britayne. Pyrrhus.
Alexander Arcadius. Alexander Audax. Achaius. AEtolus. Helena. ^oile.
Constantine. ^raye. ^ersie. Dercie. ^arie. Busir, or Bousir. Cicell. Cydne.
Dennis. Bridgis. Andros. Carowe. Caros. Tracie. Rhese ap Rhesus. Oen, or Owen,
King of Calydon. Brent, the son of Hercules. Thinn. Euance. Bryce. Hill.
Drake. Calais. Nele. Gryne. Dorill. Hodie. Crane. etc.
FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device LETVS CARIAE CVGNVS ARMA VIRVMQVE CANO



