THE ROSE, AND LILY. DELIVERED AT THE LECTVRE, In ASHBY de-la-Zouch in the
County of Leicester.

By WILLIAM PARKS, Master of Arts, and Curat of Chelaston in the County of
DERBY.

(...)

Discendum propter docendum. LONDON, Printed by J. N. for GEORGE WILNE, and are
to be sold by SAMUEL MAN at the sign of the the Swan in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1640.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings, Hungerford,
Botreaulx, Molins and Moules, and Lord Lieutenant of his Majestes County of
Leicester, and Rutland, my Honored Lord.
Right HONORABLE,
IT is not any want of Books in these days of ours, wherein they do so much
abound, that moves me to publish these my weak labors, nor yet any desire I
have to show myself in Print, J am too sensible of mine own imperfections, to
be desirous to show them to the World. But considering my engagments
(especially to your Honor) and not willing to be altogether guilty of that
hateful sin of ingratitude, but knowing no other way to express my
thankefulnes J have pitched upon this, chooseing rather to show my self a
weak man, then ungrateful. J must confess I had rather besilent, then be
seen in Print. And my small fortunes, had made me as dejected in person as J
was in place, until it pleased your Honor to cast the beams of your
countenance on me (in giving me part of this Lecture where these Sermons were
preached) which made me a little erigere caput, to peep up, and show my self,
if to no other end then this (to express my thankfulness it were a sufficient
cause to move me to it. J have here endeavored to give unto your Honor not
only what Aeschines gave unto Socrates (me ipsu^) but even Deum ipsum: for it
is an unfolding of some part of those Mysteries that concern Christ; of whom
your Honor is a livelie member in his Church militant, and will be until you
are a full partaker of all his benefits in the Church triumphant, which that
your Honor may be is the prayer of

Your Lordships daily Orator, and most humbly devoted Chaplain. WILLIAM PARKES.

The Praeface to the Reader.
I Will use no Praeface but only say as Ruffinus did to Laurentius Interopa
Cyp. haebetur page 543.
, Mihi quidem ad scribendum animus tam non est cupidus, quam nec Idoneus,
scienti non esse absque periculo, multorum judiciis ingemum ten^e and exile
committere. And indeed when I first pend these sermons, I did not intend to put
them to the Press, nor to expose my self and them to (that which the World is
too full of) censure. But finding some part of it in the delivering of them (as
namely for the urging of fathers in Latin in my Sermons, etc.) for which I
have been traduced behind my back, and persuaded to my face to leave them, I
could therefore do no less (for the justifying of my self and the satisfying
of others) then commit them to the eye, as I did to the ear, to see whether
they deserve any Pragmaticall censure. It is a true observation of Macrobius
Lib. 6. Satur
, that Multa ignoramus, quae no laterent, si veterum lectio nobis esse
familiaris, we are ignorant of many things which would not be hid unto us, if
the reading of ancient writers were familiar with us, yet such is the humor of
some, that nothing can please them except it be plain and delivered ex
tempore, from men's own brains, without any ground or light from any ancient
fathers. Though nullum est jam dictum quod non dictum sit prius Terent Eunuch.
prolog.
, There is no new thing under the Sun Eccles. 1.9.
: yet such is the condition of these Athenians that they are altogether for
novelties, which makes their itching ears to be delighted with new fangled
teachers, which preach the Chymaeraes of their own brains, altogether
neglecting the fathers of the Church. If Prayers or Sermons be pend, they are
presently slighted, and the more pains are taken in them, the less
acceptance have they with these men. I know no reason he had to tear out the
Athanasian Creed out of his bible; when it was read in the Church, but only to
satisfy his own humor, and as little that our Novelists have to except
against our Church liturgy, except it be for that suffrage: from all blindness
of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred and malice,
and all uncharitablenes! Good Lord deliver us: which is a great part of their
Religion. And I know less reason for any to censure so rashly, as to say, that
a pend Sermon never converted soul: for I dare presume to maintain, that many
have been converted by reading, and I think it must be pend before it be
printed, and written before it be read. We read in the Gospel John. 3.
: that Christ turned water into wine, he might as easily have filled the
vessels with wine, as made them to be filled with water first: but to signify
that he will not fill those empty vessels, that come unfurnished into the
pulpit, and look then for Revelations. But if it were lawful at other times
to preach quicquid in buccam venerit, yet is it very unfit for a Lecture in
Divinity, for a Lecture does consist of a mixed auditory, and must have as well
meat as milk, that the learned may have strength by the one as the ignorant
have growth by the other. Again a Lecture (as I conceave) was at the first
founded for the explayning of the fundamental points of Religion, and the
handling of controversies in the University, and so are continued by men of
great learning and eminence, the public professors. And in Queen Elizabeth's
days (as I conjecture) Lectures were permitted in Parochial Churches, not
commanded or enjoined (for I read of Parsons, Vicars, and Curates in the book
of common Prayer but not of a Lecturer) neither were they suffered to this end
to draw eare-Christians and lip-professors together to parlee in a parlour of
points of Divinity which they understand not, and of matters of Church
discipline that do not concern them, but to build the people up in knowledge,
and to handle matters of controversy, and then in points of controversy, and
explicating of difficult points of Divinity, the fathers are very fit to be
urged. Ob.
But it is an unknown tongue, and the Apostle says 1 Cor. 14 24
: that edifyes not, and therefore Latin is not fit to be used. I answer, Ans.
it edifyes the learned if not interpreted, but if interpreted it edifyes the
Church Aret in 1. Cor. 14.
, and if it were unlawful to speak in an unknown tongue altogether, why
should S. Paul's practice contradict his precept? for he writes to the Romans
and Hebrews in Greek, when Latin was the language of the one, and Hebrew the
language of the other. Ob.
But it takes up a great deal of time, Ans.
Not so much time as many usually spend in vain Tautologies, and idle
repetitions, which stand like ciphers to fill up empty places in their Sermons.
Ob.
But it would please better without them. Ans.
Indeed if a Lecturer were to live like the poor and the blind merely by
collection, then happily he must preach to please his good Masters: or else
he would loose a great part of his living. But Sermons are not to be made as
some Commaedians made their Plays. Populo ut placerent quas fecissent fabulas
Terence.
, And yet (for ought I know) Sermons with Latin in them may please as well (and
better) as those without it. Ob.
But S. Austin himself bids not to hearken what Epist. 18. and contra Petil.
lib.
Rogatus, Donatus, vincentius, Hylary. Ambrose says, Ans.
but what says the Lord? But S. Augustines purpose is not Hooker Eccl. Pol.
lib. 2.6, 7.
(I think) when he bids us not to hear men that we should stop our ears
against his own exhortation, and therefore he cannot mean simply; that
audience should be denied unto men, but either if men speak one thing, and God
another, then he, not they is to be obeyed, or if they both speak one thing,
then also man's speech is unworthy of hearing, not simply, but in comparison.
But Lastly, Ob.
it may be objected the Scriptures of themselves are sufficent for salvation
and justification. And therefore there is no use of Fathers in Sermons. Ans.
It is true that the Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation: but such
is the dulnes of our understanding that we cannot understand the difficult
places of it without an interpretor. I confess I had rather light my dim Lamp
at their lights, and take an interpretation from them; then from many modern
writers, and will always use them, and despise new non licensed Pamphlets,
that may breed faction and irregularity in the hearers. So that Fathers are not
such a Bugbeare but a man may look on them without frighting, and borrow their
golden sentences, as the Israelites did borrow from the Aegiptians Jewels of
Silver, and Jewels of Gold. Which may appear by example, reason, and
Scripture. By example, thus, All the Fathers and (almost) all modern writers
do it, even they themselves that deny it will use modern writers, how is
Calvin urged in defense of usury, and against Church government and then why
may not we cite the Fathers? By reason thus. If it be lawful to read them it
is lawful to cite them Doctor West faling in his Sermon, preached at Oxford
Anno. 1582.
, and if it be lawful to read later writers (which I know none that does deny)
then why not them? except they may be read for their manner of tractation, and
not for their matter. By Scripture thus. The Apostles and our Savior too bring
sentences of the Prophets in the new Testament, which were interpretors of the
Law, and why may not we bring sentences of the fathers which are interpretors
of the Gospel? Nay S. Paul brings sentences from the Poets: viz. from Aratus
Acts 17.28.
: Menander 1 Cor. 15.33.
. and Epimenides Tit. 1.12
: so that we may rob the profane Poets of their ornaments Aret. loc. com. de
Lect. Ethin.
: and consecrate them to Christ, much more may we take sentences from the holy
Fathers. Besides there are Hebrew and Syriack words used in the new Testament
without interpreting; as Anathema, Maranatha, Hosanna, and Cephas, which might
occasion Optatus Milivitanus (for ought I know) to think Peter Lib 2. contra.
Parme.
: to be the head of the Church he thinking it to be a Greek word and derived
from (...) a head when as it is a Sirack word and signifyes a stone: but there
can be no danger in any mistake in urging sentences of the Fathers being
interpreted. So that though we do not bring any grounds of faith from them,
yet it is lawful and fitting to urge them. First, for interpretation of hard
Texts. Secondly, for illustration. Thirdly, for confutation of errors as our
Savior quotes Mat 23.
: the Pharisees. Fourthly, for instances, and. Fifthly, we may use them
comparatively, and bring the sayings and examples of Heathen to shame
Christians. I had thought to have said more, but fearing least my porch should
be too big for my house, and that this book should be like the City Minda with
too great gates, I conclude. wishing thee and all good Christians to do that,
that shall tend to the glory of God and the peace of the Church, Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. WILLIAM PARKES.
From my study in Chellaston, MAY. 28 1638.
THE ROSE AND LILY.
Solomon's Song. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the Valleys.


THE sum of man's duty to God consists in the keeping of the ten Commandments
which (for the brevity of them) Moses, that man of God, calls Exodus 34.28.
(...) Gnasereth haddebarim, december verba, ten words: our Savior Christ
reduces those ten to two: and the Apostle S. Paul reduces those two to one,
when he says; that Galat. 5.14.
love is the fulfilling of the Law. But all love is not lovely in us, nor
likeing to God: for as there is the love of God; so there is the love of our
selves, and the love of the world, which two last, like Pharaohs lean kine
Genesis 41.21.
, eat up and devour the former, and yet are never the better; and therefore
they must be pruned away, that the former may be grafted in. Now Solomon (who
passed 2 Chronicles. 9.22
all the Kings of the earth in wisdom) wrote three books; the book of the
Proverbs, to prune away the love of our selves; we must not think our selves
to be wiser than all others, and Prove. 1.7
despise instruction lest we prove fools: And the book of Ecclesiastes, to
prune away the love of the world; because Eccles 1 4
all is but vanity and vexation of spirit. Cum enim duo sunt mala, quae vel
sola vel maxim militant adversus animum, vanus scilicet amor mundi, et
superfluus sui; pesti vtrique duo illi libri obviare noscuntur, says S.
Bernard In Cant. Ser. 1
. Whereas there are two evils, which either solely or cheifely do fight
against the soul, to wit, the vain love of the world, and the over-weaning
love of our selves; those two Books yield a remedy for each malady: Alter
sarculo disciplinae prava quaeque in moribus, et superflua carnis resecans;
alter luce rationis in omni gloria mundi fucum vanitatis sagaciter
deprehendens, veraciterque distinguens a solido veritatis: The one by the
pruning-hooke of instruction cuts off the rudeness of manners, and the
superfluous desires of the flesh; the other by the light of reason does quickly
apprehend the smoke of vanity in the glory of the world, and distinguish it
from the truth: And he wrote this third book of the Canticles, to ingraffe the
love of God in our hearts. As the inmost part of the Temple was called Heb 9.3.
Exodus 26.34.
the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, as being the Most holy place, so is
this book called Canticum canticorum, the Song of Songs from the excellency of
it, as being the cheifest Song, not only of Solomon's (who wrote 1 Kings 4 23.
a thousand and five) but also the most excellent Song that ever was pend, as
describing the union and Communion between Christ and his Church more
excellently and elegantly then any other. The penman of this book is Solomon,
which is a name of peace: he begins his book with a Sol. Song. 1 2.
kiss, which is a sign of peace: and the whole subject of the book is love,
which is Calvin.
fomentum pacis, the fomentation of peace; for it is a Divine Epithalamium, or
marriage song upon the holy nuptials between Christ and his Church. And
although some (perhapps) would understand it literally of the marriage between
Solomon and Pharaohs daughter: yet as our Savior Christ said once, Mat. 12 42.
a greater then Solomon is here; so may I say now, a greater then Solomon is
here meant, and a Spowse far more glorious and beautiful, then Pharoahs
daughter. As there were two Alexanders, the one Apellis opus, the other
Philippi filius, the one portrayed by Apelles, being unmatchable for the
skilfulnes of the art, the other the son of Philip, being invincible for the
valor of his heart: so there were two Solomon's, the one typricall, the other
mystical; the one the wisest among the sonns of men, and yet but a man; the
other excelling all men, for he Psalm. 45.7.
was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, being both God and
man, and he it is that is chiefly spoken of in this book, which sets down the
mutual and reciprocal love between him and his Church. Now the Scripture
mentions H^erome and Answorth on the Can^,
the Bride, the Bridegroom, and the friends of them both, and all these in
this Song (especially the two former) are brought in as speakers every one of
and unto others. The Text that I have chosen is the speech either of Christ, or
of the Church; for in respect of both it may Em. Sa in l^cum.
be said, I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the valleys.

I have all this while but showed you the Trees, I shall now give you of the
Fruit; and open the shell, that you may taste the sweetness of the kernel: we
have hitherto, as in bortis inclusis, stood without, I shall now bring you into
the Spouses garden, where you may gather Roses, and feed on Lilies. The words
conteyne three parts, First, Subjectum, a Subject, in the first word, I, and
that is either Christ, or the Church. Secondly, Subjecti Attributa, the
attributes of this subject, the Rose and the Lily. Thirdly, Attributorum
Limitatio, the Limitation of these Attributes, the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily
of the valleys. I will begin first with the best Subject, and show you wherein
Christ does resemble the Rose of Sharon: for of him do S. Hierome and others
Orig. Bernard Amb. Angelom, et Doctor Dove in lcoum.
expound the Text.

Most of the Fathers following the version of the Septuagint, in stead of, I am
the Rose of Sharon, read it, I am the Flower of the field; and thus S. Amb.
Apud Angelom.
expounds it: Ante suam incarnationem Salvator in Angeli persona Patriarchis et
Prophetis loquendo, solus cui nullussimilis inter Angelos, Thronos,
Dominationes, et Potestates, omnibus admirandus, singularis flos in toto
coelorum campo coruscans, probatur. When our Savior spoke to the Patriarks and
Prophets in the person of the Angels, he showed himself to be the chief
sweet smelling Flower of Heaven, having none like him among the Angels Thrones,
Dominions or Powers. But, as a precious stone lying hid in the earth, or as a
Jewel being locked up in a casket, though it be glorious and beautiful in it
self, yet is not beneficial unto us, until it be dug or taken out for our
use; So though Christ were always glorious in himself, while he was yet in
sinu Patris; (...) of that which he felt at his passion: these were but dropps
in respect of that shower: these were but skirmishes, in respect of that
battle: these prickles did but pierce his Skin, those his Heart; these
wounded his Body, those his Soul the sufferings of his Body, were but the Body
of his sufferings, but the sorrow of his Soul, was the Soul of his sorrow.
Go with him to Mat. 26.36.
Gethsemane, and see his agony in the garden, and you shall see our
propitiatory sacrifice (though men were made upright) lie flat on the earth: he
that had no place Luke 9.36
wherein to lay his Head, could easily find a place whereon to lay Mat. 26.39.
his Face, even on the ground: he that bids us to Mat 11.29.
take his yoke on us, for it is easy; and his burden, for it is light, being
to take on him the yoke of our sins, he found it to be paynfull, and our
burden heavy: the first Adam was Genesis 3.19.
to eat his bread in the sweat of his face, and the second Adam being to
satisfy for sin (for which that was a curse) used the sweat of his Face, and
that no ordinary, but an extraordinary sweat, even Luke 22 44.
dropps of blood: by and by comes in Judas that traitor, with company to
apprehend him: he was once an Apostle, but he went out from Bethel to Betharah,
from the house of God to the house of confusion, and sold his master for a
little money: valuing his head, at less then an asses head was valued at, at
the siege of Samaria, for that was sold for 2 Kings 6.25
fourscore pieces of silver, and Christ but Mat. 26.15
for thirty. Go along with him to Joh. 19.1^.
Gabbatha, and see his sufferings in the high Priests Hall: before he comes
thither, his Disciples Mat. 26.56
forsook him, but Peter followed him a far off to deny Luke 22.44.57.
him: he that cured the Eyes of the blind by annoynting them John 9, 6
with clay and spittle, had his own spit on to put them out: he was derided and
was Isay 53 7.
dumb that had cured the dumb: though he purchased for us a Crown of glory,
yet was he himself Matthew. 27.29.
crowned with a crown of Thorns: the multitudes cry of Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna, is altered and turned to Crucifige; Mark. 15.13.
crucify him: in stead of spreading their Matthew. 21.8.
garments in his way, they part Mat. 27.35.
his garments among them: he that suffered for sinners, was condemned by
sinners: the most righteous judge of the World, was condemned by the most
unjust judge in the World; even Pilate, though he had pronounced him guiltles
Luke 23.22.
three times, will condemn himself rather then not condemn him. Go on with
him to John 19.17.
Golgotha, and see the Catastrophe of his tragedy on Mount Calvary: and you
shall see that he that suffered for all sins, suffered in all his senses:
Sustinuit in tactu clavorum asperitatem, in auditu opprobriorum confusionem, in
odoratu sputorum faeditatem, in gustu aceti et fellis amaritudinem, in oculis
lacrimarum effusionem: Messreth Post. Dom. post. 1. Oct. Pasch.
his Eyes saw his most cruel enemies, his Ears heard their bitter revilings,
his Nose smelt the stink of the place, his taste tasted the bitterness of the
Gall and Myrrh: his feeling felt the accuratenes of the torments he was put
to. He that suffered for all kinds of men, suffered from all kinds of men,
Kings, Priests, People, rich and poor, men and women. And he that suffered for
all persons, suffered in all the parts of his Body, we may Mr. Austins
meditations for good Friday
say in genere (for we cannot count the species) that he suffered from all
kind of men all kind of pain, in every kind of subject: that is, in his
fame, his honor, his goods, his Soul and Body. His Head that did wear a
Crown of Majesty, was crowned with Thorns; his Eyes that were Sol. Song. 5.12.
as the Eyes of Doves upon the Rivers of waters, were dazzled with blows; his
Cheeks that were Sol. Song. 5.13.
as a bed of Spices, and sweet Flowers, were defiled with spittings, and
buffetted with fists; his Hands that had cured diseases, had now need to be
cured themselves; they that were Ibid. ver. 14
as rings of Gold had now rings made in them by the Nails: his Feet that were
Luke 7.38. John 11.2.
washed with Maryes tears, and wiped with the hayres of her head, were nailed
to the Cross: we had no whole part about us by reason of our sins, neither had
he any whole part about him by reason of his sores, but this Rose-tree was full
of prickles, from the bottom to the top: even Esaias 1.6.
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the Head there was no soundnes, but
wounds, and bruises and putrefying sores. It is observed by S. Bernard, De
Pass. Dom. page 1219.
that all that Christ suffered in the time of his exinanition, is to be
referred to the rednes of his passion, and the often effusion of his blood was
the better coloring of this Rose. Which precious blood of his was shed seven
several times to free us Destructo. rvitiorum.
from the seven deadly sins, (or rather from all the deady sinens (wherewith
we were defiled. First, in Circumcisione, when he was circumcised and had his
name given him (that ^^^l. 2.9.
name above all names) to be called Luke 22.1.
Jesus: Propterea quod tum puram salvationem sanguinis fundere inciperet, qui
in completione salutis nostrae totus erat effundendus, says S. Bernard. Vbi
prius.
Because he did then begin to shed his blood for our salvation, which was
wholly to be shed for the perfecting of it. Secondly, he shed his blood in
sudore, when he sweat drops of blood in the Garden Luke 22 44.
, which did not only distillare, drop down guttatim drop by drop, but
decurrere, it ran down in so great abundance, that it was sufficient to color
this Rose perfectly red. A third effusion of his blood for the coloring the
Rose of his passion, was in alapizatione, in his buffetting: (...) and (...)
say the Evangelists, Mat. 26 67.
colaphis and alapis caedebant eum, they buffetted him and smote him, and that
in his Face and Neck Gorran in Mark chap. 14.
with the palms of their hands, and their fists say some, A^ct. in Mat. Cap. 27
or else with fists and clubs say other; Barna^d in Conc. Eva^g Tom 40 lib 6.
Cap. 2.
so that it is very likely Stella in Luc. Cap. 22.
that the blood flowed both from his nostrills and mouth, though the
Evangelists express it not totidem verbis. Fourthly, his blood was shed in
Flagellatione, John 19.1.
when he was scourged by Pilate. How great a quantity of blood (think you)
must flow from the most pure and tender Body that ever was (for, quo complexio
Nobilior, and men's dexterior, eo tenerior esse solet caro Aristot.
, the more noble the complexion, and the more nimble the apprehension, so much
the more tender is the Skin) How much blood (I say) must flow from this most
tender Body, when the number of his wounds was, as Ludolph. de vita Christi
some say, five thousand fourehundred and ninety, as others Barrad. To 4. lib.
7. cap. 6.
; five thousand four hundred seventy and five: or as others Sermon Meffreth de
Sanct. in di^ Parasceves.
, five thousand four hundred and sixty, according to the verses: Sexaginta and
Quadraginta superaddito millia quinque: tot fuerat Christus pro nobis vulnera
passus. Or at the least say they that say least Do. Gwiliams 7. Gold
Candlesticks treat. of the passion.
, six hundred and sixty, according to the number of a band of soldiers. A 5th
effusion of his blood was in Coron^tione, when Mat. 27.29.
they crowned him with thorns, perhaps there might be some Rose trees among
them, for (putting him to the most exquisite torments,) it is likely they would
use the most accurate and sharpest prickles: Si^thly he shed his blood in
clauorum fossione, when his hands and feet were nailed to the Cross. Foderunt
manus and pedes meos, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 22.16.
in his person; they dug my hands and my f^et. It is recited and refuted by
Sixtus Senens. in Biblioth. Patrum lib. 8 page 625.
as a Heresy of the Jews, that those words are not to be referred to our
Savior Christ, and that he was not nailed, but tied to the Cross: But the
print of the nails was so apparent, that it John 20.25, 27.
was seen and felt by Thomas: and if we may believe Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 17.
the nails he was nailed with were so big, that Constantine made of them a
bridle and an Helmet. The seventh and last effusion of his blood was in
lateris apertione, when his side John 19.34.
was pierced with a Spear, and forthwith came thereout water, and blood, so
that the blood ran down from his side which the Spear had pierced, from his
hands and feet which the nails had bored, from his head which the thorns had
pricked, from his whole body which his sorrow had melted, the fists buffeted,
and the whips scourged. Well therefore might the Spouse say Sol. Song. 5.10
her beloved was white and ruddy, for he was white with fear, and red with
blood: well might the Christian Poet Hovedenius.
say of him,

Cum cor sentit amoris gladium,
Cruor carnis rubricat pallium.
When loves dart did pierce his side
His garments crimson red were dyed
Well might that Evangelicall Prophet Esa. 63.1, 2.
say: Who is this that comes up from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah?
Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that
treads in the Winefat? and well may our Princely Poet and Prophet Solomon
call him the red Rose of Sharon.

In floribus duplex est gratia, coloris and odoris, says Isidore: Originum.
lib. 17. cap. 6.
flowers have a double grace in their color, and in their smell. And the Rose
has the name, (...) in Greek, quasi been olens, from the sweet smell it
gives, for it is sweet to a Proverb: and our Savior Christ may truly be said
(...), for he did resemble the Rose, both in color and smell. As the rednes of
the Rose represents his passion, so the sweet smell of the Rose represents his
sweet conversation upon Earth. Lorinus has observed in Epist. ad Pet. cap. 2.
v. 3.
a fourefold sweetness of this Rose: First: he is dulcis in cogitatione ad
meditandum, sweet in the thought for meditation: his fruit (says the spouse
Sol. Song. 2 3
) is sweet unto my taste, and the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119.103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter then honey unto my mouth.
Secondly, he is dulcis in aure ad audiendum, sweet in the care to hear him:
for Sol. Song. 2.14
sweet is his voice, and his countenance comely. Thirdly, he is dulcis in
aspectu ad videndum, he is sweet in the eye for to be seen, for Eccl. 11.27.
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun.
Fourthly, he is dulcis in opere ad exequendum, sweet in the work to obey him,
for. Eccl. 23.27.
there is nothing sweeter then to take heed unto the Commandments of the Lord.
But his sweet conversation did chiefly appear when he went about doing good
both in words and works: he preached the Gospel to the poor, liberty to the
captives, he Mat. 11.5.
restored eyes to the blind, ears to the deaf, a tongue to the dumb, limbs
to the lame, and life to the dead. In all which respects, we may say of him
with St. Bernard, In Cantic Cantic.
O bone Jesus qui suaviter cum Hominibus conversatus es, dulciter cum illis
locutus es. O blessed Savior which did converse with men most lovingly, and
talk with them most sweetly, herein showing himself to be the sweet Rose of
Sharon.

Thirdly, Floris Viriditas in hyeme absconditur, non amittitur: the greennes of
the Rose is hid for a time, but not quite lost; it lies dead in the winter, but
at the spring it sprouts up again; so our Savior Christ was dead, and hid for
a time in the earth, but after three days, he rose again, and appeared to his
Disciples: he lay days, that he might be known to be dead; and but three
days, lest he should be thought to have been dead for ever. Christ's lying in
his grave was like our falling Dr. And ^w^s Of the Resurrection. Ser. 1.
into a Bed in our Chamber, where though we lie little better then dead (to see
too) for the time, Yet in the Morning we awake and stand up: or like the fall
into a bed in our Garden; where though the seed putrify and come to nothing,
yet we look to see it shoot forth again in the Spring. Which Spring
Tertullian.
is the very resurrection of the Year, and Christ's resurrection falls out
well with that time. There was hopes of this tree, Job. 14 7.
though it were cut down that it would sprout our again, for the sap
remained, and he revived. When the women came to seek for Christ at the
Sepulcher, they found the stone Luke 24.2.
rolled away, and that was the thing that they desired, for they consulted
together by the way Mark 16 3.
, who shall roll away the stone for us.

But the body they found not, and that was a stone to their hearts, heavier
then the stone on the Sepulcher. Though they had so much courage as to be
ready to die for Christ, they had not so much faith as to believe him, for he
had told them before Mat. 17.23.
that the third day he would rise again. If they had believed him, and the
stone had been removed from their hearts, as it was from the Sepulcher, in
stead of saying Sustulerunt Dominum, John 20.13.
They have taken away the Lord, they would have said, resurrexit, Mat. 28.6.
he is risen: and indeed they contradict themselves in saying so; for if he
were their Lord, how could he be taken away? it was enough for Labans Idols to
be stolen Genesis 31.30.
when Jesus appeared unto Mary, she supposing him to be the Gardener said, John
20.15.
Domine si tu, or sir, if thou have borne him from hence tell me. This
Question was well asked, Domine si sustulisti, if you have taken him away? for
none could take him away but himself. The Rose-tree, though it be trodden on
and trampled on in the Winter, yet by the heat of the Sun, by the heavenly
influence, without any other help it springs again: so though they sought to
lay our Saviors honor in the dust, and (even) trample on him, yet by the
power of his Divinity (without other help) he did Erigere caput, lift up his
head again. Happily the Gardener (if it be a Garden Rose) may remove some of
the Earth for the Roses springing, and an Angel descended Mat. 28.2.
and rolled away the stone, for our Saviors rising. Others did rise before
Christ, for Elijah 1 Kings 17.22
raised the widows dead son of Zarephath, and Elisha being alive raised the
Shunamites 2 Kings 4 34
dead son; and being dead his dead bones did raise 2 Kings 13.21
a dead man. These were great miracles which these great Prophets did, but he
that was anointed Psalm. 45.7.
with the oil of gladness above his fellows, did lift up his head among the
rest, Quantum lenta solent inter viburn^ cupressi, Virgil.
as much as the loftiest Cedars overtop the lowest shrubs. What they did it was
in nomine and fide ejus, says St. Cyprian de resur. Christ. page 483.
in his own name, and by his power; but he, as he laid down his life of
himself John 1^.18.
so he had power to take it up of himself. They rose to die again, but he
rose to live for ever: for herein the resemblance does not hold between him
and the Rose; the Rose springs and dies again the next winter, but Christ
being raised Romans 6.9.
from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. They did
not conquer death, but death did at last conquer them, but Christ rediit victor
a mortuis, inferni secum spolia trahens Ruffinus in Him. Apost. inter oper.
Cypriani.
, did rise as a conqueror from the dead, carrying with him Trophyes of his
triumph over death and Hell. And it was he only Qui virtute propria ut victor
prodiit de sepultura, says S. Bernard De Resurrec. Christi.
, that by his own power could rise as conqueror out of the Sepulcher. Though
they laid him in the earth, they could not keep him under the earth, though
they did Imponere Pelio Ossam Virg. Georg. lib. 1. v. 181.
, lay a great stone upon the Sepulcher, but at the Spring of the resurrection
he rose again, herein showing himself to be the springing Rose of Sharon; and
so I come to the limitation of this attribute, Sharon. I am the Rose of Sharon.

Sharon is the name Ainsworth in locum.
of a place or plain which was very fruitful, wherein King David's herds of
Cattle 1 Chronicles. 27.29.
were fed. And the Prophet speaking of the flourishing of Christ's Kingdom,
says Isay 35.2.
that the excellency of Carmel and Sharon shall be given unto it. And in this
sense it shows that Christ takes no delight in them that are barren, but in
them that are fruitful in good works: and also it shows the fruitful estate
of the Church under Christ, that it is no barren Do, but a fruitful Hind: and
although before his coming she was a barren Wilderness, yet by him she was as
fruitful as Sharon. But the word (...) Sharon in the original signifies
Pagnin Le^i^.
a Field in general, as well as the Field Sharon in particular; and therefore
give me leave to follow the old Translation of this word, which renders it, I
am the Rose of the Field; for therein lies hid three mysteries.

First, he is the Rose of the Field, not of the Garden: Campus enim sine omni
bumano floret adminiculo, non seminatus ab aliquo, non defossus sarculo, non
impinguatus fimo: sic omnino, sic virginis alvus floruit, sic inviolata,
integra, and casta Mariae viscera, tanquam pascua aeterni viroris, florem
protulere, cujus pulchritudo non viderit corruptionem, cujus gloria in
perpetuum non marcescat, says S. Bernard De Adventu. Ser. 2.
The Field flourishes without man's industry, it is neither sowed nor dug
nor dunged by man, but the Flowers grow in it by the providence of God: so
Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost without the help of man, the virgins
Womb did flourish, and her chaste bowels (like a Field of eternal greenness)
brought forth a Flower whose beauty never saw corruption, and whose glory shall
never wither. The flowers of the Field Doctor Guilliams 7 Gold Candlest tract
of the Incarn.
have only a father in Heaven, that is, the Sun by whose heat and virtue
they grow, and a mother in earth, that is, the ground from whence they spring:
so this Flower of the root of Iesse had only a father in Heaven, God: and a
mother in earth, the virgin. He was Deus de patre, homo de matre, de patris
immortalitate, de matris virginitate, de patre sine matre, de matre sine patre,
de patre sine tempore, de matre sine semine, says Saint Augustine De Tempore
Ser 23.
, he was God of his father, man of his mother, of the immortality of his
father, of the virginity of his mother, of his father without a mother, of his
mother without a father, of his father without time, of his mother without
seed. Anselmus has observed Lib 2. cap. 8.
four ways by which man may come into the world. First, by the help of man
and woman, the common way. Secondly, without the help both of man and woman; as
Adam. Thirdly, of a man without a woman, as Eve. Fourthly, of a woman without a
man, as Christ. God made the first Adam without the help of man, Genesis 2.7.
for God formed him of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrills
the breath of life; so God made the second Adam without the help of man, but
the holy Ghost overshadowed the virgin, and she conceived. Ergo si tunc licuit
hominem sine homine nasci, cur non licuit hominem sine homine de Maria virgin
procreari, says S. Austin De Tempore Ser. 17.
, If man might then be made without man's help, why should not the man Christ
Jesus be borne of a virgin without the help of man? Diverse have rendered diverse
reasons why it should be so, first, because as that woman was a virgin by whom
sin was spread among men, (as Irenaeus thinks Lib. 3. cap 33.
that Eve was a virgin when she gave her husband of the forbidden fruit) so
was it fit that she should be a virgin, by whom a Savior should be produced
for man: for it pleased God that the fall and rising from sin, the salve and
the sore should be brought unto us the same Ludolph de vi^a Chri pan. 1. cap. 5.
way, though not by the same means: Ceciderat autem homo diabolo destinante,
serpente exequente, dialogo interveniente, and muliere consentiente Beda apud
Ludolph.
, When man, fell the devil appointed the Serpent obeyed, the speech passed
between the woman and the Serpent, and she consented. Contrarily when man was
restored; Deo destinante, Angelo exequente, dialogo interveniente, and virgin
consentiente, God appointed, the Angel obeyed, the speech concurred, and the
virgin consented. Secondly, Christ's generation was a figure of our
Regeneration, and it was fit, says Saint August. De Sanctis Ser. 17.
that Christ the head should be borne of a virgin, to signify that his members
(the children of God) must be borne of a virgin the Church: so the Apostle
tells the Corinthians 2 Cor. 11.2.
, I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
unto Christ: for Christ's Church (like his mother) is both a mother and a maid,
a mother (being betrothed to him) as she brings forth, and brings up many
children for him, and a virgin as she remaynes spotles before him. Thirdly,
being God, Barrad To. 1. lib. 7 cap 10.
, it was fit that he should be borne of none else but a virgin: and it was fit
that a virgin should bring forth none but God. Fourthly, Christ had a father in
Heaven before, God was his Father by an ineffable generation, and therefore he
was not to have a father on earth, lest he should have had two fathers.
Fifthly, the truth was to answer to the tipe; Melchisedeck was a type of
Christ, and it is said of him, Heb. 7.3.
that he was without father, without mother; so Christ was God without mother,
and man without father. Lastly, Christ Stap. Promp. Mor. In sest. Annunc.
was to take away sin, which he could not have done if he himself had been
borne in sin; and he could not have been free from sin, had he not been
borne of a virgin: our Savior himself tells us John 3.6.
, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh. All men that are begotten of men
may say with the Prophet David Psalm. 51.5.
, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. He
only was free from original corruption, that came not into the World by an
ordinary conception. This was figured by many things in the old Testament, by
the gate of the Sanctuary which was shut, and the Lord said Ezekiel. 44.1, 2.
it shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it,
because the Lord the God of Israel has entered in by it: by Solomon's Temple
that was built 1. Kings 6.7
without an iron instrument: by the stone Dan. 2 45.
cut out of the Mountain without hands; and Aarons Rod that Numb. 17.7.
blossomed and brought forth ripe Almonds without seed, signified that CHRIST
should be brought forth of a virgin without man's seed, or hands, or help.
Sicut non poterat caro nisi de carne nasci, it a non poterat Dei caro de
foemineo utero nisi sine generante prodire, says S. Aug. De Tempor. Ser. 11.
As flesh could not be borne without flesh, so the son of God could not be
borne but without carnal generation. He came not into the world by the help
of man, but by, the providence, of God herein resembling the rose of the common
field.

Secondly, the Rose of the Field Doctor Dove in loc.
is not enclosed, and made private to a few, as the garden Rose is, but is
common to all that will gather it: So Christ is not enclosed to a few, but is
common to all that will lay hold upon him. Once (indeed) before Christ's
coming, Christ might properly have been said to be the Rose of Sharon, when
the Jews were Gods peculiar people. Then in Judah p was God known, Psalm. 76.1.
and his name was great in Israel. God did then choose for himself one Vine of
all the Trees of the Forest, one Rose of all the Flowers of the Field, one
Dove of all the Birds of the air, and one Nation of all the Kingdoms of the
World: but since his manifestation in the flesh, the veil of the Temple was
rent Luke 23 45.
, and the middle wall of partition was broken down Ephesians. 2.14.
, and he became the Rose of the Field. And although the Apostles at the first
were commanded Mat. 10.5.
not to go into the way of the Gentiles, nor to enter into any City of the
Samaritanes, yet afterward their commission was renewed, and they were
commanded Mark. 16.15.
to preach the Gospel through the World. It is well observed Doctor Boys on
the Epist. 2. Sunday after Easter.
that GOD commanded Moses to put in his perfume Exodus 30 34.
as much Galbanum as Frankincense, and as much Frankincense as Galbanum, to
signify that Christ in his oblation on the cross, a sacrifice Ephesians. 5.2.
of a sweet smelling savor unto God, shed as much blood for the laboring man
that follows the Plow, as for the Prince that sits on the Throne: and that
his precious blood has, greater force in some then in other, is not the fault
of him that did so well impart it, but of them which do so ill employ it.
Christ was borne in a common Inn, diversorium dicitur, quia ibi diversi
convenient, says Isidore Apud Gorran.
he receives (like that) all ^^mers. In medio Templi misericordia est, non in
angulo aut diversorio: In communi posita est, offertur omnibus, and nemo illius
expers nisi qui renuit, says S. Bernard. In Purifi. page 101.
The mercy of God was placed in the midst of the Temple, not in some nooke or
corner, it is proffered to all, and none goes without it, but he that refuses
it: for though the Rose of the Field lies common to all, yet are not all
partakers of the benefit of it, but only these that use it for smell or for
medicine: so although Christ's merits are common to all, he keeps open house
for all comers, yet those only have full benefit by them that lay hold upon
them. God loved the World (indeed) John 3.16
when he gave his only begotten Son (not only to it, but for it) but those
only that believe on him shall not perish, but have life everlasting.
Praedicatio Christi neminem excludit nisi qui sese suapte excluserit perfidia
Bullinger in Tit. 2 11.
, Christ excludes none but those that exclude themselves by unbelief. The
Apostle tells us 2 Cor. 5.15.
that Christ dyed for all: And God 1 Timothy 2.4.
will have all men to be saved, not all of the World, as Origin. would have it
Hom 9 in Gen and recensetur inter errores ejus ab Abra. Scul. teto in medull.
Patr. To. 1. lib. 6. cap. 6.
, that all men and devils also shall be saved at the last day. But some say,
God will have all men to be saved which are saved, not that there is none that
shall not be saved, but that all those that are saved, are saved by the good
will and pleasure of God, so Aquinas Part. 1. Quaest 19. Art. 6.
. or as others, God will voluntate qua invitat, Because he puts no block in
the way, non voluntate qua efficit, for he does not remove the impediment: so a
learned professor Doctor Prideaux Lect. Oxon Lec. 3.
of Theology or: else God will voluntate antecedente, non consequente, with his
antecedent, not consequent will; so Aquinas Vbi prins.
from Damascen: as the Judge in his antecedent will would have all men to live,
but in his consequent will he would have the malefactors to be put to death; so
God (antecedenter) will have all men to be saved, but (cons^^uenter) he will
have the wicked damned. Or else Christ dyed for all secundum sufficientiam, in
respect of the sufficiency thereof, but not secundum efficientiam, in regard of
the efficiency thereof, as being effectual only to the faithful or elect of
God, so the Master of the Sentences Lib. 3. distin. 19. and Nich. de Orbell.
com. in Sent.
; though that distinction be exploded by many as well of the Church of Rome, as
of the Church of England, which hold that only to be sufficient which is
effectual. Illiricus De Trop. and Schem. Sacr. Litt. Trac. 4.
says, Christus actu passus est pro omnibus sed non actu salvantur, aut
omnibus actuejus passio prodest, Christ suffered effectnally for all, but his
sufferings are not effectual unto all: others would have the word (all) to be
understood, non de singulis generum, sed de generibus singulorum, and then it
is taken distributive, not Collective, as Logicians speak Arist. 2. Pol. cap 2.
, distributively for all sorts and conditions of men, high and low, rich and
poor Jew and Gentile, not universally for every particular person, so S.
Augustine, De Correp. and Gra. and Cosma. in 1. Tim.
Lastly, suppose it be understood de individuis omnibus (as some) Arctius in 1
ad Tim cap. 2.
of all particular persons, God will have all to be saved (conditionaliter) if
they will use and apply the means. Christ's blood is like the poole of Bethesda
John. 5.4.
, which was able to cure all manner of diseases, but it cured none but those
that did enter into it. So though it be true which some Clem. 5. apud Barradium.
affirm, unam guttam sanguinis Christi pro redemptione totius humani generis
suffecisse, That one drop of Christ's blood was of sufficient virtue for the
redemption of all mankind, yet (though it were all shed) it is of no more
virtue to him that will not lay hold upon it, then a pardon would be
beneficial to him that should either refuse or rend it. The least drop of
Christ's blood (as has been said) in respect of the excellency of the person,
the innocence of the nature, and the efficacy of the C^^sse, was sufficient to
redeem the World, yet this excellent salve so sovereign for all sores, does
no more good to many, then the most sovereign Rose or Herb of the Field can
work them health that will not apply it to their several diseases. Si quis
non credit in Christum, generali beneficio ipse se fraudat, ut si quis clausis
fenestris radios solis excludat says S. Ambrose Ser. 8. in Ps. 118.
If any believe not in Christ he deprives himself of the benefit of his
passion, as if one by shutting the windows should shut out the light of the
Sun: and therefore he that will not gather this Rose, let him blame himself,
seeing he is not enclosed in the garden, but the Rose of the open Field.

Thirdly, the Rose of the Field is for profit as well as pleasure, it being
healthful for many Medicines, as the Herbalists Dodanaeus Lantgraoe.
have observed: so Christ was profitable for us, and healthful unto us. He was
known in the old Testament by this name, I am Exodus 3.14.
, leaving a blanke for us to write what we will, and he will supply the rest. I
am your Savior, your Physician, your guide, your gain, your all in all, for
so he is to them that love him. Before Christ's coming the whole World was weak
and wicked, sickly and sinful. The general consumption of goodness, the
Dropsy of covetousnes, the Tympany of pride, the Gout of idleness, the tertian
of incontinency, and the quotidian of Gluttony did show that Adam was turned
Enosh, full of infirmity. Neither had this infirmity seized partially on it,
but with Job Job. 2.7.
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, they are all Psalm. 14.1.
corrupt. Nulla sanctitas, nulla sanitas. Nor was this malady but newly entered,
or continued only twelve years, as the Lu. 8 43.
issue of blood had with the woman, or thirty and eight years, as the man's
infirmity John 5.5.
at the poole of Bethesdah, but the World had lain bedrid almost four thousand
years, given quite over by the Law unto death; in this forlorn hope came the
John 11.25.
resurrection and the life, the sole Savior and great physician of the world,
crying out for our comfort, the world is not dead, but sleeps; restoring
health two ways, mediate, and immediate. First, mediate, by means: not as
once, by clay and spittle. Secondly, John 9.6.
as he restored sight to the blind: or as Isaiah to Hezekiab 2 Kings 20.7.
, by a lump of dry Figgs, nor as Elisha 2 Kings 5.10
to Naaman, by the waters of Jordan: but a Samaritanes cure Luke 10.34
, Wine to search, and Oil to supple, the Law being a corrosive to kill the
dead flesh, and the Gospella Cordial to comfort the heart. And this physic
does he still administer by his instruments, his Ambassadors: by them that
plant in the Pulpit, and water in the press, that plant in their Doctrine, and
water in their conversation: by them that administer such physic as he does
direct and apply such salves as the word does prescribe for the healing of sick
souls Secondly, Christ heals immediately b^ himself; pride was Adams bane,
Christ cured it by humility; man (surfeting) fe^^ by the forbidden Tree, Christ
(fasting cured it by the cursed Tree. Other Phy^sitians Stella in Luc. 5.
restore health by opening o^veynes, by letting of blood, by giving o^^
Potions, and by prescribing of diet, b^^ Christ (this heavenly Physician) made
himself the Physic to heal us, Staplet. Prom. mor. Dom. inf. oct. not. Dom
he took the bitter Potion John 19.29
of vinegar, the deit (...) fasting Mat. 4 2.
, the bloodletting in his Hands his Feet, his Side, his Head his Body
Mirabile plane and incomparabile genus medicinae, propter quam medicus voluit
aegrote^re, and aegrotos ipsos, quibus salutis remediu^ procuravit, sua
decrevit infirmitate curan^^ says S. Aust. De Sanctis Ser. 19.
It was a wonderful an^ incomparable kind of physic for which the Physician
would be sick, and dete^mine to cure those sick persons (to who^ he procures
health) by his own infirmity. Esse hominis filius voluit ut nos Dei fili^^
faceret, humiliavit se ut populum qui pri^^ jacebat erigeret, vnlneratus est,
ut vulnera nostra sanaret, servivit ut ad libertatem servientes extraheret,
mori sustinuit ut immortalitatem mortalibus exhiberet says S. Cyprian De opere
and Elemos page 3^4
. He would be made the son of man to make us the Sons of God, he bumbled
himself that he might exalt the humble, he was wounded that he might heal
our wounds, he became a servant that he might set us at liberty that were
servants, he dyed to restore immortality to mortal men. And indeed Christ's
whole life, whether you consider his Doctrine or his doings, was healthful and
medicinable to us, if we obey his precepts, or imitate his pattern.

This Text has been hitherto as a fruitful Field wherein I have gathered some
corn, I shall now bind some profit of it up in sheaves that you may the better
carry it away with you. First, therefore, here we may see Christ's love to us
with astonishment and admiration. What the Jews said concerning Lazarus John.
11.36.
(when Christ raised him from dead) behold how he loved him; so may we say,
behold how he loved us, how dear and precious our life has been in his eyes
may appear by the greatness of the price which he paid for it, even his own
life. Quam indebita miseratio, quam grata dilectio, etc. regem gloriae
crucifigi pro despicatissimo vermiculo Div. Bern.
! O how undeserved is that mercy, how free is that love, that the King of glory
should be crucified for despicable Worms! It was a great love Cowper. on Romans
8.
that Abraham showed to Lot, in hazarding his own life Genesis 14.14
, and the lives of his family to rescue him out of the hands of Chedorlaomer;
but not comparable that love which our kinsman, the Lord Jesus, has showed
unto us, who has given his life to deliver us out of the hand of our enemies.
It was a wonderful great love that God would make man like himself, and all
things for man, greater love; that he himself would be made man; but greatest
of all that he would die for his salvation. Secondly, let us consider the
odiousnes of sin with hatred and detestation. Thousands of Rams Micah. 67.
, nor ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, could not make satisfaction for sin,
neither could the fruit of our body make satisfaction for the sin of our
soul, but the Son of God must needs die for the sins of man. If sin cost
Christ so dear, doubtless it will cost us dearer, except we repent. Memoria
ergo crucifixi in nobis crucifigat omne peccatum Div. Bern.
, is an excellent counsel, and worthy our practice: therefore let the
remembrance of Christ crucified cause us to crucify all sin in us, he stretched
out his hands on the Cross to embrace us, and let not us stretch out our hands
to wickedness to disgrace him, he was crucified for us, let not us crucify him
again by our sins, but crucify our sins that caused him to be crucified.
Thirdly, Christ is a pattern for our imitation, and that in three things.
First, we must imitate him in the sweetness of our action, especially in dong
good. Secondly, in our resurrection, which is twofold, the first (...), the
other is (...). The one is a resurrection of the dead, the other is a
resurrection from the dead: We must rise from the death of sin to the life of
grace, if we mean to rise from the death of the grave unto the life of glory.
But we must not rise as the Rosetree does at the spring to die again the next
winter, but with Christ, he being raised from the dead Romans 6 9.
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, and we must so rise from
the death of sin, that we never commit the same sins again. Thirdly, as Christ
was conceived and borne for us, so must we conceive and bear him in our
hearts. There is a threefold nativity of Christ, Divine from his Father,
fleshly from his Mother, and spiritual in the mind. Ex patre nascitur semper,
de matre natus est semel, in mente nascitur saepe, says Innocentius Ser. 3.
apud Barrad.
; He is borne of his father always, he was borne of his Mother once, and is
borne in the mind often, and we must endeavor to keep him there always.
Forthly, here is also matter of consolation, and that in a double respect,
first as Christ is the Rose of the common Field, and lies open to all, he
refuses none but those that refuse him. Secondly, because he is the Physician
of our Souls, that is able to cure them, hiding allour sins, and healing all
our Sores, giving us spiritual health here, and eternal health and happiness
hereafter. Lastly, as Elisha said to his servant concerning the good Shunamite
2 Kings. 4.13.
: She has been careful for us with all this care, what is to be done for her?
so may I say to you concerning our Savior, he has been thus careful for us,
what shall we do again for him? As he drank to us in the cup of salvation,
so let us pledge him in the cup of thanksgiving: as he gave himself a
propitiatory sacrifice for us, so let us give up our selves a gratulatory
sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving to him. And let us fall down with the
Revel. 19 4.
four and twenty elders, and the four beasts, praising GOD with our Church,
and saying.

Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward men. We praise
thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks unto
thee O, Lord God, heavenly King, for all thy blessings bestowed upon us, for
that thou have sent thy Son Jesus Christ not only to live among men, but to
die for men: Grant (O Lord) that we may all be partakers of all the benefits of
his passion. And that for the same Jesus Christ his sake, who as he died for
sin, so he ever lives to make intercession for sins. To whom with thee, and
the Holy Spirit, be all honor, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

To the Right Honorable, FERDINAND O, Lord HASTINGS, my very good Lord.
WHAT Thucidides affirms, experience proves true, (...), that hearing is not
liable to any account, but (...), whatsoever a man speaks (but especially
writes) it lays him open to others censure, unto which I have now exposed my
self, and crave your Lordships protection. Your Honor must not expect any
high straynes in this Sermon.

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi.

As it is I desire your Lordships acceptance of it, as an expression of some
part of that duty and service I owe your Honor. The God of mercy pour down
his mercies on your Lordship, your Honorable Lady, and hopeful children.
Which shall always be the prayer of

Your Lordships in all duty, and service. WILLIAM PARKS.

THE ROSE AND LILY.
SOLOMON'S SONG. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the vallyes.


WHat the Queen of Shebah told Solomon, that 1 Kings 10.6, 7.
though it were a true report which she had heard of him, yet the one half
was not told her: so may I say unto you concerning this Text, though it be a
true report you have heard of him that is greater then Solomon Mat. 12.42.
; yet the one half is not told you. For this Text is a most fertile and
fruitful Field, containing variety of no less profitable then pleasant
Flowers, from whence I have already brought you a Posy made of Roses, and now
give me leave from the same Garden to present unto you a Posy composed of
Liles. The Lily is next in nobility to the Rose, says Pliny Lib. 2 cap. 5.
, and therefore as I have showed you wherein Christ resembles the Rose, so must
I now show you how he is the Lily of the vallyes.

The writers Arist. Pliny Dodan.
of the nature of things have written much in the commendadation of the Lily,
affirming it to be a most fine Flower, both for fragrant smell and curious
colors. And many Princes did bear it in their crests and Escutchions, but I
leave this for Heralds to discourse of, and for Herbalists to discuss, and
shall only show you that Christ resembles the Lily in these four respects.
First, the Flower of the Lily is lifted upward, and open toward Heaven, but
toward the earth it is close and shut; so Christ had his mind open toward
Heaven, set on heavenly things, but he always neglected and contemned earthly
things. Secondly, the leaves of the Lily spread outward, and bend downward; so
Christ extended his benefits downward, even to his enemies. Thirdly, the
whiteness of the Lily may signify Christ's eternity, or his in^ocency.
Fourthly, the Lily grows among thorns, and Christ (when he was upon the
Earth) was conversant among sinners: in these respects he ^hewed himself to
be the Lily of the ^^ally^s. And first of the first, the Flow^^ of the Lily is
open toward Heaven, (...) it close toward the earth, so Christ had ^^s
affections open toward heavenly ^^ings, but he neglected earthly.

As Christ was sometime Luke 2.51.
subject to ^^s Mother, so was he always obedient to his father. He that John
3.31.
came from above, did set his affections on thing above. Colos. 3, 2.
This Lily had always the ey^ of his affections open toward heaven (it being
his chiefest care to do his he^venly fathers Luke 2.49.
business) but close she toward earth and earthly things. The^^ are three
Ludo^ph de vita Christi. part 1. cap. 67.
things that hinder us from having the eyes of our souls open t^ward Heaven,
but Christ was free from them all. First, quando oculus nimis (...) cupatur
circa sensibilia, when the eye (...) too much employed about sensible o^jects,
namely when the affection is (...) on earthly things, for then is the eye (...)
the soul dazzled with the dust of co^^tousnes, but Christ had no mind (...)
earthly riches, but as he had none, (...) he did desire none. Secondly, quando
(...) mis occupatur circa delectabilia, when (...) is too much taken up with
delight^^^ things, the carnal desires of the fles^ for then the eye is blinded
with (...) fire of concupiscence: but Christ w^^ free from that, and it is such
a sin that the devil himself would not tempt Christ by that, though he
tempted him by riches and the glory of the World Mat. 4
Thirdly, quando nimis occupatur circa sublimia, when it is intent on lofty
things, namely ambitiously taken up with the pomp and glory of the World, for
then the eye is darkened with the smoke of pride, but Christ was free from
that, for he John. 6.16.
fled from those that would have made him King. So that he had no worldly
riches to clog him, no carnal pleasures to allure him, no ambitious thoughts
to stop him, nor any of those to hinder him for having his eyes and thoughts
settled on heavenly things. He was not like the Basiliskes which Pliny Lib. 8.
calls (...), because they look downward, and cannot turn their countenance
upward toward the Firmament: but rather he was like the fish which Albertus (as
I remember) makes mention of, that had but one eye, placed in his pole, so that
he always looked upward, minding things above, but he did altogether neglect
(if not contemn) all earthly things. Which will the better appear if we
consider his poverty in his birth, in his life, and in his death. First, in his
birth: Exigua magni pompa puerperii, says S. Cyprian Sermon. de nati. Chr^sti.
, There was but small pomp at this great birth; he was borne in so mean a
manner; that the cratch was his cradle, the Luke 2.7.
manger his chamber, and the stable his Inn. If the Sun of God will needs come
and dwell among the sons of men, Kings palaces (me thinks) were bad enough to
receive so worthy a person, and yet (behold) the stateliest place for his
entertainment is a stable. If the King of Heaven will needs come into the
earth, the most princely chamber were fitrest for him to be lodged in, and yet
(behold) he lies in a manger. If King Solomon was so ravished with admiration,
when he considered that GOD would reside at the Temple in Jerusalem (which
was so glorious that it was 1 Kings 6.38.
seven years, in building) that he cries out 1 Kings 8.27
, But will GOD indeed dwell on the earth? behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of
heavens cannot contain thee, how much less the house that I have made? how
much more would he have admired, had he come into this stable, and found Christ
(this Lord of life) lying in a manger? Secondly, in his lifetime he was poorer
then the beasts of the Field, and the Birds of the Air, for they have dens and
nests to roost and to rest in, but he had not a place where to lay his head,
as himself restifies Mat. 8.20.
. And as for his outward estate he was so poor, that when tribute was demanded
of him, he had nothing to pay it, but he sends Peter with an angle Mat. 17.27.
to catch a fish to bring him money to pay it: therein showing great Ians^n.
conc. cap. 69
Majesty as well as poverty, his poverty in that he had nothing wherewith to
pay it, and his Majesty in that being Lord of Sea as well as Land, he commands
a Fish to do it for him. So that as the Apostle S. Paul says of himself, 2
Cor. 6.10.
he was as having nothing, and yet possessing all things; so may I say of
Christ, he possessed nothing, and yet he was Lord of all. When Eriene. Cicero
Paradox 1.
the City where Byas dwelt was taken by the enemies, and the Citizens fled,
carrying as much of their substance with them as they could, when he was
admonished by some to do the like, Ego quidem (inquit) facio, nam omnia mea
mecum porto; I do it (said he) already, for I always carry all my goods about
me: so lightly did he esteem of those ludibria fortunae, (riches) that he
thought them not worth a carrying: so Christ carried all his goods about him,
so that when he died, he needed no executors to prove his will, for John 19 23.
the Soldiers parted his goods among them, and he had nothing for them to
part, but only his garments. Mat. 27.35.
I have heared a story of Richard Nevile, sometime Earl of Warwick (how true
it is, I know not) that when the people would have made him King, he refused
that dignity, saying, that he had rather make Kings then be one: but this I
know, he that Psalm. 85.7
puts down one, and sets up another, when the people would have made him
King, refused it. Erat Rex qui timebat fieri Rex: nec talis Rex qui ab
hominibus fieret, sed talis qui hominibus regnum daret, says Saint Augustine
In John ^ract. 23.
He was a King that feared to be made a King, not such a King that should be
made by men, but such a King as should give a Kingdom to men. A King he was
indeed, and acknowledged to be so Mat. 2.2.
by the wise men at his birth. Nathanel John 1.44.
, and the whole multitude acknowledged him Luke 19.38.
to be King in his Life: at his death Pilate wrote him King of the Jews John
19, 19.22.
, and would not alter that title, and yet he would not be made a King by the
people, lest Calvin in John 19.
his spiritual Kingdom should have been at an end; he refused to be made a
King on earth, for he was already King of Heaven and earth. Thirdly at his
death he was so poor, that he had neither Sepulcher nor winding sheet of h^s
own, but John 19.38.39.
Joseph and Nicodemus were feign to supply them. Even the richest men and most
puissant Monarchs have nothing at their deaths, that they may properly call
their own, but only their Sepulchers. We may say of them all as S. Austin Ad
fra^r. in Er^^o. Ser. 48.
speaks of Caesar's Tomb; Though he were the fear of men, and terror of
Princes, yet all his great riches, his titles of Honor and Dignity, his Crown
and Scepter, Spear and Sword, Omnia sibi pariter defecerunt, quando defecit
spiritus ejus: and reliquerunt eum captivatum in sepulchro trium brachiorum
plenum foetore and putredine. All those things left him (as they do all men
else) when he was bereft of his soul, and left him nothing but a Sepulcher of
six cubits to conteyne him; but Christ, as he was without all earthly pomp in
his life, so at his death he had not so much as a Sepulcher or winding sheer of
his own, until they were given him. In all which respects we may say of him
with S. Augustine De Cat^ch^z. r^dibus.
, Omnia bona terrena contempsit homo Christus, ut nobis ea contemnenda
monstraret. The man Christ Jesus did contemn all earthly things, to teach us
also to do the like. It was a curse laid upon the Serpent in Paradise Genesis
3.14.
, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life, and therefore the seed of the woman Ver. 15.
being to break the head of the Serpent, went not on his belly, nor had his
affections placed on the earth, but was lifted sursum versus coelum, upward
toward Heaven, therein resembling the Flower of the Lily of the Valleys.

Secondly, folia liliorum non solum dilatantur ad latera, sed etiam inferius
declinant ad ima, the Leaves of the Lily do not only extend outward, but bend
downward, so Christ extended his benefits far off, and even to his enemies.
The Apostle S. Paul tells the Gentiles Ephesians. 2 13.
, that now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. Christ's benefits to us, are like the ointment Psalm. 133.2.
on Aarons head, that ran down on his beard, and descended to the skirts of
his garments; they went down to the lowest members of the Church. When he was
upon the earth he showed his love unto the poor, in doing good to the Halt,
the Lame, the Blind, as it were so many cripples from several Hospitalls. Now
love Doctor Boys expo. of the Creed.
is more showed in deeds then in words: but more in suffering, then it is in
doing, so that the love of Christ was especially showed unto us in dying for
us. As the Father showed great love in giving his Son unto us; so the son
showed like equal love in being so ready to suffer for us. Greater John 15 13.
love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friends; but
Christ suffered for us dum inimici essemus Romans 5.8, 10.
, while we were sinners, and enemies, and gave himself to death for us, while
we were Ephesians 2.1.
dead in trespasses and sins. We read of some indeed that have been ready to
die for their friends, as Cicer. Offic.
Damon for his Pithyas; Pylades Id^m de Amici
for his Orestes, of whom the Poet. Ovid.
.

Extitit hoc unum quod non convenerat illis,
Hic negat, inque vicem pugnat uterque mori.
They never fell our about any thing but this, which of them should first lay
down his life for the other. And we read of some that have dyed for others,
as S. Austine reports De Civitate Dei li. 8. cap. 5
of Castor and Pollux the sons of Tyndarus, that Pollux entreated to impart
half his life on his brother. And we read that Codrus did willingly Justin.
die for his country. And also it is reported Iuvenall.
Subeuntem fata mariti Alcesten: that Alcestes did undergo the destinies of her
husband, and by her death redeemed his life. These showed great loves in laying
down their lives, but it was for them that loved them as much, or had deserved
so much at their hands: But Christ laid down his life for us, not only Sine
nostris meritis, sed cum nostris demeritis says S. Bernard In Cant. Ser. 15
, when we deserved no love, but when we deserved as much hatred from him as was
due unto his enemies; and extended the fruits of that love, and the benefits of
that passion to all that will lay hold upon them. It is written of the
Cherubins 1 Kings 6.27.
that they stretched out their wings, ad parietes usque, to the wall on each
side, full ten cubits so Christ being stretched forth upon the Cross, extended
his benefits to the ends of the World: he stood open to receive all comers,
and spread forth the branches of his love unto all, therein resembling the
leaves of the Lilies of the Valleys.

Thirdly, the Lily, Lactei floris herba, unde and nuncupata, quasi lidia, says
Isidore, Orig. lib. 17 cap 9.
cujus cum candor sit in foliis, auri tamen species intus effulget. The Lily is
a milk white Flower; from whence it takes its denomination from the whitenes
of it, and the whitenes of the Lily may signify Christ's eternity. And therefore
S. John the divine describing the parts of Christ's Body, says Rev. 1.14
his Head, and his Hairs were white like Wool, as white as Snow; for though,
Perkins on the Rev.
as he is man he had a beginning, yet in regard of his Godhead he is
eternal, and is therefore called Dan. 7.22.
the ancient of days; there is nothing more ancient then he: for he had a
being when all other creatures were not, being begotten of his Father before
all time. And therefore the Arrian out of his envious pride Sidenham Ser. on
John 8.50.
is at once bountiful and injurious, willing to invest Christ with the title
(...), but disrobes him of that glorious title, and his own, (...), granting
him a like essence with the Father, not the same, equal to him in power, not
eternity: for if he be a son (says he) he must be borne, and if borne,
there was a time when there was no son.

Indeed it is true according to the course of nature, but this is so far
above it, that Es. 53.8.
who can declare it? Cum natum confitemur, non tamen non natum praedicamus,
says S. Hilary De Trin. li. 12.
. When we confess that he was borne, we do not say that he was not borne. For
ubi author aeternus est, ibi and nativitatis aeternitas est, Where the author
of the birth is eternal, there is also an eternity of the nativity, and from
an eternal begetter proceeds an eternal begetting. Indeed the Word John 1.14
was made flesh, but non amiserat quod erat, sed coeperat esse quod non erat,
De Trin. li. 3.
says the same Father he ceased not to be what he was before, but he began to
be in a new manner that he was not before. The name (...) Jehovah, derived from
(...) Havah fuit, he was, (in which name all time past, present, and to come is
comprehended, as the Rabbis B^cay on Ex. apal A^nsworth.
have observed) is given unto Christ, who is called Ier. 23.6. (...) Jehovah
tsidkenu) the Lord our righteousness: intimating that he is the same GOD that
is Rev. 1.8.
that was, ab aeterno, from all eternity, and will be in aeternum to all
eternity. He being the same yesterday Heb. 13.8.
before his coming, to day, at his coming, and for ever, even at his coming
again. Hear Christ testifying of himself; Joh^ 5.26.
as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life
in himself. Apertissime docet (says Saint Cyrill Thesaur. lib. 10. cap. 1.
quod sicut pater in seipso aeternaliter vitam habet, sic and filius
aeternaliter vitam in seipso habet. As the Father has life eternally in
himself, so has the Son life eternally in himself. As he was man Athanas.
Creed.
of the substance of his Mother, borne in the World, so was he God of the
substance of his Father, begotten before the Worlds, for he is eternal; being
the white Lily of the Valleys.

But whitenes more properly signifies innocence, and therefore the Latins call
innocence candor, which signifies whitenes, and innocent men, candidi, white
men: and the holy Ghost seems to allow it; for the Church is said Rev. 19.8.
to be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness (or
innocence) of the Saints. Seeing then that folia liliorum sunt purissima, and
tam intus quam extra candidissima, the Lily is most pure and white both within
and without, it fitly resembles the ^nnocency both of Christ's nature and
action. Nigra sunt vitia, virtus candida est, says S. Bern. In Cant. Ser. 7.
vices are black, but virtue is white. So that Cicero might well affirm, De
legibus li. 2
that Color albus praecipue decorus Deo est: the whitest color is most
agreeable to the highest Son of GOD. Absque liliis nunquam est, qui absque
vitiis semper est. Div. Bern. ubi supr.
He is never without the whitenes of the Lily, that is ever without the
blacknes of sin. He is fayrer then Psalm. 45.2.
the children of men: And it may more truly be said of him then it was of
Absalom 2 Samuel 14.25.
: But in all Israel there was none to be praised so much for his beauty: from
the sole of his foot, even to the crown of the Head there was no blemish in
him. Christ was a Lamb 1 Pet. 1.19.
: (...), without blemish and without spot: without Lorin. in Pet.
blemish of original sin, and without the spot of actual. There could be no
spot found in his action, nor blemish in his conversation. But some may object
and say, Christ took upon him the defects and infirmities of our nature, which
in us are often sinful, and so they might be in him. To this Aquinas answers,
Par. 3. qu. 15. Art. 1.
Christ took our defects upon him to make satisfaction for us, to manifest the
truth of his humane nature, or to be a perfect pattern of virtue unto us. But
he could not take upon him any sinful defects for any of these causes. For
First, sinful defects could not make satisfaction for sin, as being that
wherewith God is displeased. Secondly, sin could not manifest the truth of his
human^ty, for sin belongs not to the natur^^ of man, but is rather contrary
unto it for that was good and made by Go^ but sin is evil, and was brought in
(...) the Devil. Thirdly, it could be not ample of virtue, as being contrary
unto it. But Christ took not on him (...) the defects of man's nature, for
first^^ took not on him Nicol d Orbell^n 3. Sente^t. d^stinct. 16
defectus vitiosos, poenales, not the defects of sin, as ignorance, and
pronenes to evil, which was impossible that he should be subject unto; but
such defects as were punishments for sin, as hunger, thirst, etc. Secondly,
he took upon him not defectus personales, sed naturales, not personal
defects, that accompany some particular persons, but universal, that accompany
man's nature. But the defects in him did differ from ours in three August de
Civitat. Dei. li. 14 cap 9.
respects. First, respectu effectus, in regard of the effect, in us they often
disturb reason, but in him they did not. Secondly, respectu principii, in
respect of the beginning or cause of them, in us they often go before the
judgment of reason, but in Christ they were always subject to reasons
command. Thirdly, respectu objecti, in regard of the object, in us affection is
not always void of fault, being often carried upon unlawful objects, but in
Christ it was not so, his were like water put into a pure Glass, and ours like
water put into a vessel besmeared with dirt, the more we stir it, the
dirtier it is. So that (notwithstanding his defects that he ^ooke from us) we
may say of him with the Apostle Heb. ^ ^5.
Though he were touched with our infirmities, and in all points tempted as we
are; yet was he without sin. God sent his Son Romans 8 3.
in the likeness of sinful flesh, flesh in truth, but sinful flesh in likeness,
not but that he was so far from sin Six. Sen. A^^^. 244 ^x. H^p Com^^. 3.
S^n^^ 3
that he had no inclination unto it. The first Adam did (as I may so speak)
(...) (...) on Pet 2.22.
make sin in the World, the second Adam did take away the sins of the World
John 1.29.
; and it was necessary that he that should satisfy for the sins of others,
should be free from sin himself. The first Adam had a posse non peccare, a
power not to sin, but the second Adam had a non posse peccare, no power at
all to sin, but he was.

Integer vitae, scelerisque purus Horace.
; He did no sin, neither was guile 1 Pet 2.22
found in his mouth. Neither was it sufficient to manifest the whitenes of his
innocence, that he was free from sin, but he was full of holiness also. Semper
manet sanctus in verbis, sanctus in actibus suis, sanctus in omnibus
voluntatibus suis, says S. Cyrill In Levit li. 12.
Christ was always holy in his words, holy in his works, holy in his
affections. And because a sinner cannot make satisfaction for his own sins,
therefore he ought to be holy Parae. in Heb.
not legally only, as the Leviticall Priests were holy, being consecrated by
their legal sacrifices; but morally also, which the Apostle setts down Heb 7
26
in four Epithetes. First, he says he is (...) sanctus, holy. Secondly,
(...), innocens, innocent, free from all natural corruption which the Priests
of the Law were subject unto as well as the people. Thirdly, (...), impollutus,
not defiled with any actual sin. Fourthly, (...), segregatus a peccatoribus,
separated from sinners: that is; guilty of no punishment due unto sinners by
the Law. So that his challenge made to his enemies must needs stand good, Which
of you John 8.46.
convinces me of sin. Habet hoc verbum Christi magnam fiduciam, (says S.
Origin.) In Johan.
cum nullus hominum fiducialiter hoc dicere potuerit, nisi solus Dominus noster
qui peccatum non fecit. This saying of Christ is spoken with great confidence,
and carries credit with it, seeing no man could say so much truly of himself,
but only our Lord which did no sin. What was said of Job might be said of him
Job 1.22.
; In all (that he did) he sinned not, neither charged God foolishly i, e,
wickedly. His innocence has been cleared many generations since (even by his
worstenemies) by Pilate that condemned him, who accknowledgeth that Luke 23.14,
22.
he could find no fault in him, and pronounces him guiltles three times,
before he does condemn him as guilty. And by Judas that betrayed him, who
confessed that he had sinned Mat. 27 4.
in that he had betrayed innocent blood. So that when Herod, and his men of
war Luke 23.11.
arrayed Christ in a gorgeous (or white) Robe, they did therein after a
mystical manner sufficiently testify both the excellent dignity, and the
innocent probity of the man, declaring plainly against themselves, that Christ
should rather have been acquitted as an innocent, then condemned as a
malefactor, for in his innocence he did resemble the white color of the Lily
of the Valleys.

Fourthly, the Lily grows and flourishes among Thorns, so Christ when he
was upon the Earth was conversant among sinners. He conversed with sinners,
though he were free from sin. And this sense some Angtlon. in loc.
expound this part of the Text. Vbi per incarnationis sacramentum, huc in
convallem lachrymarum, inter spinas and consortia peccatorum descendit, lilium
effectum se esse testatur. When Christ by the mystery of his incarnation, did
descend into this valley of tears, among thorns and sinners he showed
himself, to be the Lily of the Valleys.

The Pharisees did wonder to see Christ u, Mat. 9.11.
eating with Publicans and sinners but it was no greater marvel to see our
Savior Christ conversant upon earth among sinners, teaching them, then it was
to see the Devil with our first parents in Paradise, tempting them. He was the
Physician of souls (as you have already heard,) and sinners were his best
patients, and why then should he forsake their company? No, he shuns them not,
but he converseth with them, and feeds with them, and calls them to come to be
cured. Miraris Iudaee (says Chrysologus Ser. 29.
) cur Christus misceatur convivio peccatorum, qui propter peccatores and nasci
voluit, and non recusavit occidi? Oblatras cur peccatorum Vinum bibat, qui pro
peccatoribus suum sanguinem fudit? do thou admire (O thou Jew) why Christ
should eat with sinners, who would be borne for sinners, and refused not to
dye for them? Do thou murmr that he will drink the wine of sinners, which
poured out his blood for sinners? What marvel is it, if he does eat at the
table with sinners, that suffered death on the Cross for them. Never did the
Physician leave the patient that he would heal, nor God forsake the sinner
that he would save? It was Christ's office Mat. 9.13.
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance: not the righteous, for
there were none so righteous, that have no need of his coming: Si homo non
periisset, filius hominis non venisset, says St Augustine de Tempor. Ser. 8.
, If man had not sinned, the Son of man had not come: or else not to call the
righteous, ironice, Chrysostom. Hierom apud Barrad.
that is, not the Scribes and Pharisees which did justify themselves, and
thought themselves to have no need of the Physician, but were just and
righteous in their own conceits, thinking all to be bad but themselves. Like
unto whom were those Heretics the (...) Eusebius Pamph Eccles Hist.
in the primitive Church, that thought themselves (only) to be pure, and
accounted all to be sinful but only those that were of their own impure
sect: And these were the Fathers and predecessors of the factious Schismatickes
who (at this day) do walk in their steps, accounting all reprobates, but them
of their own tribe. But he calls those sinners, that feeling their sins
acknowledge themselves to be sinful. But as the Lily (though it grow among
Thorns) yet it loses none of the whiteness of his color, or fragrancy of its
smell: so Christ, though he conversed among thorny sinners, yet he retained
still his innocence: neither did he converse with them Jansen Concor. cap. 33.
to confirm them in their sins, but to convert them from them. Though he
did go upon Prove. 6 28.
coals, yet was he not burnt. Though he touched pitch Eccles. 13.1.
, yet was he not defiled with it: though he had fellowship with the proud,
yet was not he like unto them, though he were conversant with thornie
sinners, yet was he not infected with their sins, that kept on still the white
Robes of his innocence; therein resembling the nature of the Lily of the
Valleys: And now, I come to the limitation of his second attribute to the first
subject (of the Valleys) I am the Rose of Sharon, etc.

Christ is not Doctor Dove in Loc.
the lofty Cedar, but the lowly Lily; not of the high Mountains, but of the
low valleys, that is, humility it self, Suorum Deus altissimus, fuorum
Christus humillimus as God of all others is a pattern of Majesty, so Christ of
all others is a spectacle of humility; He was an example of humility in these
respects August. de Civ. Dei. li. 14.
: nascendo, conversando, praedicando, miracula faciendo, and moriendo; In his
birth, in his conversation, in his preaching, in his working of miracles, and
in his dying. First, in his birth, He chose not his descent from the mighty
Monarchs of Assyria, Greece, and Persia, but of the contemptible and despised
Jews: and among them he chose not any rich Parents to be borne of, but a
poor Virgin, espoused to a poor Carpenter. What greater abasement could there
be, then that he which thundered in the Clouds, should cry in the Cradle?
that he should put off the glorious Robes of his immortalite, and put on the
base rags of our mortality; that he which was clothed with Majesty and
honor, should be clothed with swaddling clowtes; that he that in Heaven was
GOD not subject to his Father, in earth should be man subject to his Mother;
that Mary that was a sheep, should bring forth a Sheepherd; that he which was
the Father of Mary should become the soon of Mary; this mystery is so great,
and the humility so wonderful, that, as Saint Bernard says, it In vrgil.
Nativ.
is mirabiliter singular, and singulariter mirabile, wonderfully singular, and
singularly wonderful. There is so great humility in CHRIST'S birth, that S.
Augustine says Ser. 18. Not
, Omnis bujus nativitatis schola, humilitatis est ^fficina, the whole School
of Christ's nativity, is a shop of humility. Secondly, he showed his humility
in his conversation, because though he did no sin Destruct. vi^.
, yet he took upon him the punishments for sin, most humb^y undertaking the
infirmities of the body, and defects of the soul (that are not sinful) as to
be weary, hungry, sorrowful, etc. And though he were Lord of all, yet he
becomes servant to his own Disciples, and John 13.5.
washes their feet, telling them Luke 22.27.
that he is among them as one that serves. Whence some Barrad. Stella
conjecture, that Christ did use to serve them being at meat. Thirdly, he
showed his humility in his preaching, because he sought not his own glory,
but the glory of him that sent him. And he tells his Disciples John 14 10.
, The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self. And when he
chose his Disciples to preach unto the World, he chose not rich and learned
men, but poor simple silly Fishermen. Had Christ chosen such as Aristotle,
and Demosthenes, to preach the Gospel, they would have said, they were so
learned, that they might easily convince; they were so eloquence that they
might easily persuade: but he chose unlearned Fishermen to confound the
learned Philosophers, that the glory might not be given to the means. Forthly,
he showed his humility in his working of miracles; because when he did great
miracles, he commands the parties on whom they were wrought, not to divulge
them. When he cured one of the leprosy Mat. 8.4.
, and restored sight to the blind man Mark 8 26.
, he charge them to tell no man. Mundavit leprosum Dominus, and jussit eum
nulli hoc fateri, hoc fateri, docens quam esset alienus ab aura gloriae,
pompaque jactantiae, says Saint Chrysostom Apud Barrad
; In doing those miracles which Christ would not have told, he showed how far
he was from vain glory, and seeking praise of men; but in those miracles that
he would have to be divulged, he shows how free he was in seeking glory to
GOD: for he bidds the man that was freed from his legion of devils, to show
Luke 8.39.
how great things (not he) but God had done for him. And all the time of his
life wherein he wrought his miracles, he went abour doing of them; he rode
not in any stately manner, but went on foot: neither do I read that he did
ride at all, but once, when he rode upon an Ass Mat. 21.25.
into Jerusalem.

And when he sat, Nunquam in sede, nec in pulvinari, sed in ipsa superficie
terrae, modo in montibus, modo apud fontes sedet and docet, says St.
Chrysostom; Hom. 67. in Mat.
; Christ sat and taught, not on any couch or chair of state, sometimes on the
mountains, sometimes by the fountains, always on the superficies of the
earth. Fifthly Christ showed his humiltty in his dying. It was great love, and
as great Humility for him, to be clothed with the veil of our nature, and to
undertake the infirmities of our feeble nature; yet it was greater love (and
humility too) for him, to be compassed with the shadow of death, and to
undergo the penalty due to our sinful nature. What humility could be
greater then that the Lord of life should suffer a shameful and ignominious
death? that he that was gloria Angelorum, should become opprobrium hominum? he
that was the glory of Angels, should be made the Psalm. 22 6.
scorn of men, and despised of the people? Thus Christ (knowing that humility
did suite well with the head, when the body was sick with pride) bowed. Psalm
18.9.
the heavens and came down; there was the humility of his Godhead, not
putting it off, but clothing it with the rags of flesh: And from his birth to
his burial, from the time of his being borne in another man's s^able, until
the time of his being bu^^ed in another man's tomb, he always showed the
humility of his manhood, never ceasing until his head were laid under the
earth, his footstool. So that we may say of him with St. Bernard, De Pass.
Dom.
, Nemo illo sublimior, nemo humilior, there was none more lofty, none more
lowly; none more high, and none more humble then he: he humbled himself (says
the Apostle) Philip. 2.8.
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, in all his
humility showing himself to be the Lily of the Valleys.

Now because it is not enough for us to feed on the Word, as the Israelites
might Deuteronomy. 23, 24, 25.
on their Neighbors Grapes, and Corn, while they were in their Vine-yards, or
Fields, but might carry none away with them; I shall (briefly) therefore shake
some of the Boughs, and give some of the Fruit (of th^^ which has been
delivered) to ever^ one that will carry it away with him First, therefore, in
that CHRIST resembles the Flower of the Lilies, and (...) open toward Heaven,
but close an^ shut toward earth, we may from thence learn to know the seat
of our affection: to set our affections Col. 3.1, 2.
on things above, and to seek those things, and not the things on earth.
Christians receive their name from Christ. Et operae pretium est, quod sicut
sunt haeredes nominis, ita sint imitatores sanctitatis, says S. Bernard Semen.
page 496.
: It is fit, that as they are heirs of his name, so they should be imitaters
of his nature and conversation. Conversatio autem Christi aperte docet
praesentia contemnere, and ad futura spem dirigere, says the same Father Page
17. 23.
. But the conversation of Christ does plainly teach us to contemn present
riches, and to love future, not to mind things present, but to place our hopes
on things to ^ome. Secondly, let us show our love to Christ by pity and
compassion. Christ (resembling the leaves of the Lilies) did extend his love
downward toward us: let us extend our love upward toward him. As Christ showed
his love every way to us, so let us show our love every way to him: he loved
us even when he was dying, let us love him all the time we are living.
Christus quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior, says S. Bernard In Epiph.
Ser. 1.
: The more vile the Son of God was made for us, so much the more dear should
he be unto us. Domine Jesus, dilexisti me plus quam te, quoniam mori voluisti
pro me etc. pudeat non redamare te pro tanto amore tuo S. Augustine
O Lord Jesus, thou have loved me more than thy self, in that thou would
vouchsafe to die for me: it would be a great shame for me, not to love thee
again for this thy so great love. Thirdly, Christ was an example for us to
imitate in our conversation: and that in three respects. First, in innocence;
we may learn from him to be Mat. 10.16.
wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Secondly, as Christ was conversant
with sinners, but not defiled with sin; so though we live in the midst of a
sinful generation with Noah, yet let us not participate with the evil of the
time, or place, or company where we live. I do but touch of these things by
way of application to this subject, because I must speak more of them by way
of explication in the next. Thirdly, and lastly, Christ is a pattern unto us
of humility. Remember that Christ is a Lily of the Valleys. God Angelom in loc.
is the God of humble men, and humility was taught us from him by precept and
pattern. Puderet te forsan imitari hominem humilem, saltem imitare humilem
deum, says S. Austin. In John Tract. 23.
Thou would be ashamed (perhaps) to imitate an humble man, yet at least
imitate a humble God. Men are ready to allow Court fashions, and the greater
the personage, the sonner is the fashion followed: Now Christ our King took on
him the fashion of humility, and all that mean to be accepted in his court
must wear the same fashion. For Quid detestandum amplius, quid gravius
puniendum, quam ut videns deum coeli parvulum factum, ultra apponat homo
magnificare se supra terram? Intolerabilis impudentiae est, ut ubi sese
exinanivit Majestas, vermiculus infletur and intumescat, says S. Bernard
Flores Born. page 2133.
; What is more to be detested, what more worthy to be punished, then that man,
which seeing the God of Heaven to become little on earth, should exalt himself
above earth? It is an intolerable impudency that where Majesty became low, a
Worm should swell and think to be great. The Disciple Mat. 10.24.
is not greater then his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; Vt exaltari
voluit sicut Dominus and humiliari noluit sicut servus Ma^c. Mural.
That he should be exalted as his Lord, that will not be humbled as a
servant. And therefore, Si vis capere celsitudinem Dei, cape prius humilitatem
Christi, is the counsel of Saint Bernard Epist.
; If thou desire to be partaker of the glory of God, follow Christ in the
steps of humility, through this valley of misery, that thou may ascend to him
to the Mountain of Majesty. Which GOD grant we may all do, for Jesus Christ's
sake. To whom with the Father, and the Blessed Spirit, be all honor and
glory, now and for ever more, Amen.

To the Right Honorable, Sr. RICHARD FENN, Knight, Lord Major of the City of
London; And to the right Worshipful, the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the
Company of HABERDASHERS, LONDON.
I May perhaps by some be accounted a right Son of Levi Numb. 16.7.
, in taking too much upon me, to present this Sermon to your Patronage (Right
Worshipful) But it has some right and title to you, who show your selves to
be members of the Church, in extending your charity to them that are far
off. For you do not take delight, as Cyrus did, Xenophon.
(...), in putting men in good hopes, but in doing good deeds, and allowing
good helps, to maintain many of the Sons of the Prophets. Among the rest J
was one that had an exhibition from your Company, while I lived in the
University. This I could not forget, and therefore, though I cannot do any
thing by way of requital with David 1 Kings 2.7.
to Barzillai, and Jonathan 2 Samuel 9.7.
, yet J must ever by way of thankful acknowledgement, pray for your society,
as S. Paul did for the house of Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 1.16.
. The Lord give mercy unto you all, and grant that you may all find mercy of
the Lord in that day.

Your Honors, and Worships to be commanded in all Christian duties, WILLIAM
PARKES.

THE ROSE AND LILY.
SOLOMON'S SONG. 2.1. J am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the vallyes.


WHen Balak brought Balaam to the top of Pisgah Numbers 23.13 14.
, he showed him only the utmost part of the children of Israel, but did not
show him all: so may I say unto you, I have brought you (as it were) to the top
of Pisgah, whence you have seen (only) the utmost part of those mysteries
that concern our Savior Christ; but cannot show you all. We have all this
while but floated on this deep Ocean, we are not able to fadome it. It is as
much impossible for the wit and learning of one man (though he have Ps 45.1.
the Pen of a ready writer, and 1 Cor. 13.1.
speak with the tongue of men and Angels) fully to comprehend and express
those mysteries, as it is for a Boy to empty the Ocean Sea with an
Oyster-shell. And therefore as the Paynter Tymanthes, being to express
Agamemnons grief conceived for the loss of his daughter Iphigenia, drew him
with his face covered over with a veyle, that men might conceive of that sorrow
which he could not express: so I, being to speak of those great mysteries of
Christ's passion, resurrection, humility, and the rest, must needs have passed
many things over with the veyle of silence, as being not able perfectly to
decipher them. Now then give me leave to alter the subject of my Text, and to
leave it as it concerns Christ, and to follow it as it respects the Church,
for of that subject (the Church) do some Caldee Para. ^hrast, Arnsworeth
B^ightman in loc^m.
expound the Text, as you formerly were also told. For what is written of
Ianus, that he had two faces, praeterita retospiciens, futura prospiciens,
looking two ways, forwards and backwards: so may I say of this Text, it has
two faces, one looking toward Christ, the other toward the Church. I have
al^^ady (in some measure) unveyled that, that looks upon Christ, and now (...)
must unmaske that, which looks ^owne on the Church. As I have shew^^ how
Christ does, so now I must ^^ew you wherein the Church does ^^semble the Rose
of Sharon, and the ^^ly of the Valleys.

But because the spouse ought to be ^^rrespondent to the husband, the members
to be proportionable to the head, and the mystical body of Christ conformable
to himself, therefore I shall not need to seek out any new and untrodden
path, but follow the same way I have already gone. First therefore, as the
rednes and prickles of the Rose did represent Christ's passion, so does it
represent the Churches trouble and persecution; Secondly the sweet smell of the
Rose does intimate the Churches sweet conversation upon earth: and Thirdly the
Roses being dead in winter, but budding out again, shows the resurrection
from the dead: First, of the first: as the Rose is full of prickles so is the
Church always subject to persecution.

The sweetenes of the Rose is joined with prickles which does plainly teach
that, Quae jucunda vobis sunt (O homines) tristibus permixta sunt, says St.
Bazill Hom. de Paradiso.
sweet and sour, mirth and mourning are intermixed together in this life,
Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane, says the Poet Virgil.
; Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the Morning, says the
Prophet Ps. 30.5.
, Julius Caesar was one day renowned in the Senate, accounted a Pater patriae,
a father of his Country; often Praetor, and invested with princely honor; The
next day, (as it were) you may see him loose his honor, and be reputed a
tyrant, accounted no pater patriae, but hos^is patriae, no father of his
country, but a factor against it, no Praetor to defend it, but praedator, a
preyer upon it to spoil it, not saluted, but slain in the Senate, and from an
Emperor turned to a dead carcass. Our Savior Christ himself when he was
upon the earth did find this intercourse of things, for upon Mount Tabor he
was transfigured with glory that his face did shine, upon Mount Calvary he was
disfigured with sorrow that confusion did cover his face, and such is the
condition of man in this life, sometimes he is lifted up on the Mountains of
prosperity, and sometimes he is cast down into the valley of adversity:
sometimes he walks in the sunshine of peace and plenty, and sometimes in the
shade of trouble and persecution. But the Church does usually lie open to that
lash: for a short space (indeed) she had peace under the Emperor Constantine,
but presently in the time of Arrius she was troubled with persecution. To
Solomon's Temple there was purpureus ascensus, as the latin version renders it
Cant. 3.10.
, a covering of purple* that Temple was a type of the Church, and the covering
shows that it wears the color of the Rose. Oportebat Christum pati, It
behoved Christ to suffer Luke 24.46.
, and afterward to enter into his glory: must he suffer before he could enter
into his own glory, and is the Disciple greater then his Master, to think to
come thither without it? Christi nativitas a martyriis infantum statim coepit,
per quod ostensum est, says S. Cyprian Ad Thibarit de exhar. mart. Epist. 56.
page 126.
, neminem esse a periculo persecutionis immunem. Quam ergo gravis causa sit
hominis Christiani, servum pati nolle, cum prior passus sit dominus? and pro
peccatis nostris nos pati nolle, cum peccatum suum proprium non habens, passus
sit ille pro nobis. The martyrdom of Infants did follow presently after the
birth of Christ, by which is showed that there is no member of the Church free
from the prickles of persecution. And how grievous is the case of a christian
man, that the servant will not suffer when his Lord has suffered before him?
that we should not suffer for our sins, when he that did no sin, suffered for
us? Noah's Arc was tossed up and down by the waves of the flood, and rested not
until it lighted on the Genesis 8.4.
Mountains of Ararat; that Arc was a type of the Church, which is tossed up
and down in the Sea of this World by the waves of persecution one wave
following in the neck of another, and finds no rest, until it come to that
mountain of holiness, that haven of happiness where it would be. Persecutio
nunquam deest Christiano, neque and Christo, says Sr. Bernard Ia Co^vers. Paul
page 68.
, as Christ was not, so the Church must not look to be free from persecution.
Erras, frater, erras, si putas unquam. Christianum persecutionem non pati,
says St. Hierom Epist. 1.
; thou art deceived (brother) thou art deceived, if thou think that a
Christian at any time should not suffer persecution. Look back to the infancy
of the Church, when there was but one family in the world, the family of Adam;
where was the Church, and you shall see Cain persecuted Abel, and Genesis 4 8.
Mat. 23.35.
slew him. Abraham was the father Romans 4.16.
of the faithful, and yet in his family, Ismael persecuted Isaac, and mocked
him Gal. 4 30. Genesis 21.9.
. Israel was Gods peculiar people, yet what did they suffer in the time of
their four hundred Years captivity in Egypt, under Pharaoh. After they came
out of Egypt, how were they afflicted by the Canaanites, the Moabites, the
Ammonites, the Philistines which were Numb. 33.55
as pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides? What cruel persecution
did they suffer under Antiochus Epiphanes, in whose time all were commanded 2
Macab. 6.
to be put to death that would not depart from the law of their God. Descend
down to the time of the Gospel; what exquisite torments have been inflicted
upon many Myriads of Christians, under the ten most bloody and grievous
persecutions, some being torn in pieces with wild beasts, as Ignatius, some
broyled on the Gridiron, as Lawrence, some stoned to death, as Eusch. Eccle^.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 40.
Metras, others burned to death by a slow fire, as Iulianus Ibi lib. 8. cap. 39.
of Cappadocia, and the rest put to that accuratenesse of torments that we may
say of them, as the Christians did certify the Pope Turk. Hist. page 13.
in their letters, that they did every day suffer that which Christ their King
suffered but once, to be daily buffetted, scourged, peirced. So that what
would now be accounted cruelty, was then accounted the Emperors clemency Eus.
li. 8. cap. 12.
; When he commanded the right eye of the christians to be plucked out, and the
empty place seared, and the left leg to be cut off, and the place seared, and
condemned them to the minepits. And to show that they did seek rather jugulare
animos, quam corpora, to slay their souls then their bodies, they did put them
to such lingering torments, as if they meant to kill them often. Morsque minus
poenae, quam mora mortis habet. It is a greater pain to be long a dying, then
death it self: yet I read that one Peter, a Page to the Emperor, refusing to
sacrifice at Nicomedia, was hoysed up Idem ibi. cap. 6.
on high, and his naked body scourged, and his flesh rent in pieces with the
lash of the whip; and when the bones were bare, they powered vinegar mixed with
salt into the wounds, and bruised parts of his body, and then he was laid on
a Gridiron with a slow fire under, to consume him until he dyed.

Quis talia fando Virgil.
.
Temperet a lacrymis?
If it be a grief to us seriously to consider those torments, what was it in
them to endure them? Not long after the tenth persecution ended, the the heresy
of Arrius Perkins on Heb. 11.
, raised up by the devil, brought as grievous persecutions on the Church, as
ever the Pagans did; dying and coloring the Eastern churches with the blood
of GODS Saints, for the space of fourscore years together. Since that time
what have some of the Romanists effected? With what rage and malice, fire and
faggot, have they proceeded against all those that profess not their errors:
What Conr. Theodor. Dieter.
excommunications, burnings, killings, hangings, they have inflicted upon the
true professors of the Gospel; the massacre of Paris, and the death of many
thousands of Christians (both in this Kingdom and others) do sufficiently
testify. So that the Church did seem to dwell (like the man in the Gospel
Mark 5.3.
) among the tombs: And Christianus Luther loc. Com. Tit. Calamit.
, seems to be crucianus: A christian may seem to be derived as well from
Christ's cross as from Christ.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crevit.
Sanguine succrevit, sanguine finis erit.
The Church was begun with the blood of Abel, strengthened by the blood of the
Prophets, increased by the blood of the Martyrs, and all 2 Timothy 3, 12.
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. If any should
ask the reason why the Church is subject to the prickles of persecution. I
answer it is both in respect of the godly, and in respect of the wicked: An
iron being put into the fire, and heat red hot, is afterward laid on the
anvill, and then every blow struck upon it does make it the fitter for use, but
it makes the instruments, the Anvill, and the Hammer, the harder: so Gods
children being heat red hot (as it were) in the fire of persecution; it makes
them the better, and the more pliable to gods service, but it makes the wicked
which are the instruments to be the harder. First, then, it is for the benefit
of Gods children, Candidior tribulationum aculeis efficieris, Angelomtin loc.
The Church is more white and beautiful by the prickles of persecution. The
Church is compared to the Moon Sol. Song. 6.
: Ecclesia sicut luna defectus habet, and ortus frequentes, sed defectibus suis
crevit, and his meruit ampliari, dum persecutionibus minuitur, and martyrio
coronatur, says S. Ambrose Hexam. li. 9.
; The Church (like the Moon) has ^ifings and settings, fulls and waynes, but
she increases by her defects, and deserves to be augmented, while she is
lessened by persecution and crowned with Martyrdom. We cannot be crowned
except we fight, neither can we triumph except we have got the victory; when
we fight and conquer, then may tropheys be set up. In the shop of a Ieweller,
the Jewels would not be so beautiful, if there were no iron instrumens to
furbish them. Solomon's Temple had never been so glorious, if there had been no
craggy stones to build it: so Gods children would never be so beautiful in
themselves, nor so glorious in the fight of God, if they had no persecution to
try them. When we sit by the waters of Babylon, then we remember thee Psalm.
137.1.
, O Sion. As the Prophet David says of himself Psalm. 119 17.
, It is good for me that I have been afflicted; so may many a member of the
Church say, it is good for me that I have been persecuted Man (says one Clem
Alexand
) is like unto a vine; now a vine (as he there speaks, and we here know)
unless it be pruned, it will straight way grow wild: so man, if he have no
persecution, no cross laid upon him, he will be ready to forget himself,
and to spurn against his maker. Persecution then is like the wind, which does
cleanse the good grain though it blow cold; like the fire which does purify
the good gold, though it burn hot: for the godly are bettered by it, their
knowledge is sounder then it was, their faith stronger, their humility lower,
their goodness in general is greater, toward GOD, toward their neighbors,
and toward themselves. And as it is for the benefit of Gods children, and
tends to their salvation; so it proceeds from the malice of the wicked, and
ends in their destruction. Iniquitatis filii, cum clarorum hominum virtutem
repraehensionem quodammodo suae pravitatis existimant, veluti immanes quaedam
ferae crudeliter ruunt, etc. says S. Cyrill In Genesis lib. 10.
; The children of wrath, when they see the virtues of good men reprove their
vices, they rage like wild beasts: for when by their works of light the works
of darkness are reproved, they cast the darts of envy and malice against them,
which do oftentimes return back on their own pates. The fire of martyrdom
S. Augustine.
, which does purify the godly, does damnify the wicked, the one it does enrich
with eternal happiness, the other it shall consume to dust and ashes. Ashur is
said to be the rod of Gods anger Esaias 10.5.
and wicked men are but the rods of his wrath, with which though he does
sometimes chastise his children (and suffer them to be persecuted) yet at
length he will burn the rodds. But some may object, and say, that in those
dangerous times of the primitive Church, the Church might properly be said to
be the red, Rose of Sharon; When a man might pay dear for Christ, as Christ
paid for him, even his life; it being (then) almost impossible to follow Christ
without Martyrdom. But now (thanks be to God) there is no such danger, no
Christianus ad Leones? let the Christians be cast into the Lions den, no
pulling before Magistrates, but every one may practice christianity, as well as
profess it without danger; nay it is dangerous indeed to every one that does
not profess and practice it (in our Kingdom) and God continue it so long as
the Sun and Moon endures so that the Church may now seem to be free from
the rednes, and prickles of persecution. To this answer is made Chrysostom. Theoph
apud Cosma in 2 Timothy 3.12
, that to suffer persecution is taken not only for that which Gods children
suffer from open enemies, but for that grief and sorrow which they suffer in
their own bowels. Patiuntur hanc persecutionem non in corporibus, sed in
cordibus, says S. Austin, De Civitat dei li. 18. cap. 5.
they suffer this persecution not outwardly in their bodies, but inwardly in
their souls. And there is a persecution of the tongue, as well as a
persecution of the hand. The Scripture prompts me to it, where it says Gal
4.21.
Ismael persecuted Isaac, when he Genesis 21.9.
mocked him. So that there is disguised as well as open persecution, Wissons
Christ. Diction.
by word as well as by Sword, by deceit as well as violence, from false
brethren as well as from professed enemies. And this kind of persecution I
cannot say that our Church is free from; for that Schismatic brood that
whips it in their words, and scourges it in their Pamphlets written against
the government and governors of the Church, what do they else but (as much as
in them lies) v kill the Prophets, Mat 23.37.
and stone them that are sent them. And who so patiently bear Doctor Boys
exposit of the Gospel on S. Steph. day.
those wrongs, and suffer those dilapidations in their credits, what are they
else but Stephens, mere Martyrs. And this kind of persecution must the Church
never look to be free from. Though she may sometimes be free from stripes
and strokes, yet she is never free from mocks and scoffs; though she may be
free from deaths and imprisonments, yet never from raylings and revilings;
though she may be free from murtherings, yet not from murmurings, and so
never free from the pricks of secret persecution. By this we may partly see
whether we belong to the Church or no. We live in the latter days, wherein
many that should countenance Religion do contemn it, being like unto the
Negroes Heylens G^ogr.
that paint the Devil white, and the Angels black, because they themselves are
so. Do thou then like the weathercock turn thy self by their wind, and
conform thy self to them, for fear of losing a favor, or getting a frown?
thou art not a true member of the Church. Again, we live in a scoffing age,
wherein true Christians are accounted by many, as S. Paul was 1 Cor. 4.13.
, the filth of the World, and the offscouring of all things. Art thou ashamed
to be religious, because thou art affrayd to be scoft at? Art thou afraid to
be slaundered, as the Lords Priests 1 Samuel 22.
were by malicious Doeg? Art thou afraid to be rayled at, as David was 2 Samuel
16.7
by freviling Shimei? Art thou affrayd to suffer affliction with the people of
God? How then would thou be contented to be stoned Acts 7.59.
with Steven? to be cast into the fiery Furnace Dan. 3.23.
, with the three children, or into the Lions Den with Dan. 6.16.
Daniel? to have thy tongue cut out, thy skin pulled of 2 Maccab. 7.
thy head, and be fried in a Pan, as the Mother and her seven sons? do
those small skirmishes make thee afraid, and think thou thou could endure
the heat of the battle? Questionles if those small blasts make thy soul to
totter, why then the storm of persecution will pluck thee up by the roots.
We stand between prosperity and adversity, as Goliath did between the two
troops 1 Samuel 17.10
, and wish that we had a man to fight withal. But if the least storm arise,
the hearts of many fail. So that as Joseph's brethren said unto their Father,
Vide an filii tui tunica sit, an non? Genesis
see whether it be thy sons coat or no? so may I say to the Church concerning
any of her members, Vide an sit filii tui tunica, an non? if he be free from
all manner of persecution and trouble, it is a sign he is a bastard and no
Son: but if his coat be dyed in blood, if he can show the right color, it is a
sign that he does belong to the red Rose of Sharon.

Secondly, the sweetness of the Rose represents the Churches sweet conversation
upon earth, and that both in words and works. The sweetness of the lips
increases learning, says Solomon Prove. 16.21.
; good words are sweet words, and the Church and the members thereof must
speak them, and not unsavory speech. We are strangers and pilgrims in this
life, for here Heb. 13.14.
we have no abiding place, but we seek one to come. Now strangers and pilgrims
are known by their tongues, for he that John 3.31.
is of the earth, speaks of the earth: Earth is at their hearts, and their
breathes smell of it. But the children of light (which are not so wise as the
children of this generation Luke 16.8.
) concerning the things of this World are dumb: they know not the language of
the liar Ephesians. 4.25.
, but their tongues are tipped with truth. They are ignorant of the language of
the black mouthed swearer, but his communication Mat 5.37.
is yea, yea, and nay, nay, in a word, he knows not the language of Babel,
but speaks the language of Canaan. Now there is the sweetness of Honey in godly
discourses, but the bitterness of Gall and Wormwood in wicked words, and
although wicked men may (happily) think that they find sweetness in them, yet
they are like the Be, though they be Honey in the mouth, yet they have a
sting in the tail. They are like S. John's book Rev. 10.10.
, though in the mouth they be sweet as Honey, yet in the belly they are
bitter, for what Solomon said of a whorish woman Prove. 5.4.
, so may I say of them, though in the mouth it be sweet as an honey comb, yet
their end is bitter as Wormwood.

Secondly, the Church must also show sweetness in her works. Ad praedicationem
novae gratiae, secuta est novitas vitae, in his qui crediderunt qui
conversationem suam inter gentes habentes bonam Christi erant bonus odor in om
niloco, says S. Bernard In Cantic. Ser. 60.
Newnes of life did follow the preaching of the new grace of the Gospel, in
them which did believe, who having their conversation honest among the
Gentiles, were a sweet favor unto Christ in every place. For, Plantae quae
been olent bonam famam and nomen pollicentur Hier: Card Sinines. Somni li. 1.
cap 30.
, those Flowers that smell sweetly do signify a good name and report. Odor
bonus, est nomen bonum, and hoc de bono opere, tanquam de flore odor, procedit,
says Saint Bern. Vbi prius
A sweet smell is a good report, which proceeds from good works, even as
sweetness does from the Flower. The good works of the godly cast a sweet smell
even to them that are without. Bona quidem per se sunt aromata virtutum, and
per se redolere videntur, sed cumulatiore gratia flagrant, cum de unctione
spiritus, suavitatis afperguntur odore Gilleber in Cantic. Ser. 33.
, The spices of virtues are good, and smell sweet in themselves (if in the
heathen) but they give the more fragrant smell, when they are sprinkled with
the odor of sweetness by the anointing of the spirit (in the godly) good works
are an odor of a sweet smell unto men, and a Sacrifice acceptable, well
pleasing unto God, as the Apostle tells the Philippians Phil. 4 18.
concerning their charity. The Prophet Hosea Hos. 14.7.
, speaking of the Church says, it shall grow as the Vine, the sent thereof
shall be as the Wine of Lebanon. It is written Daneus from Pliny lib. 14.7.
of some Vines that in the time of their flourishing, they send forth so sweet a
smell, that not only the Vine-yards themselves, but the Country round about,
is refreshed with the sweet savor thereof, so that if any Serpents be near,
they are driven away by the sweet smell of the Vines; so the conversation of
the godly is no less fragrant, not only in themselves, but also to all that
are round about. A good name is better then precious ointment Eccles 7.1.
. And the godly have their conversation so honest among the Gentiles 1 Pet 2.12.
, that they may by their good works which they behold, glorify GOD in the day
of visitation. And their sweet conversation does drive away Serpents; whether
we expound Serpents, as S. Austin does In Psalm. 42.
, Serpents vitia tua sunt, The Serpents are thy sins; then their works of
light expel those works of darkness: or else as S. Bern. does De Pass. Dom cap
45.
, Quid melius per Serpents, quam diabolicas suggestiones accipiamus? What is
better meant by Serpents, then the suggestions of Satan, which do secretly
creep into the minds of men; then if we look upon that brazen Serpent Christ
Jesus, which was lifted up upon the Cross, by the eye of a true and lively
Faith working by love, and sending forth the sweet savor of good works, we
shall be Ephe 6.16.
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. The smell of the Churches
ointments Cant. 4.10, 11.
(that is, her graces) is better then all spices, and the smell of her
garments, is like the smell of Lebanon. But when Isaac smelled the savor of
Jacobs garments, they were nor his own, for Genesis 27.15.
Rebeccah took goodly raiment of her elder Son Esau, and put them on Jacob. As
he was clothed with the raiment of his elder brother which gave such a sweet
smell: so the Church is clothed, not with the garment of her own
righteousness, but she puts on the glorious robe of her elder brother CHRIST
JESUS, by which she is made the sweet Rose of Sharon.

Thirdly, as the Rose is dead in winter, but shoots forth again at the Spring:
so though the members of the Church ly a long time in the grave, yet at the
Spring of the resurrection they shall rise again. As long as the root is quick,
the branches will not die, but flourish. Christ is the root Rev. 5.5. and 22.11.
, we are the branches John 15.5.
, and our root did not rot in the ground, but rose from the grave, to certify
us, the branches, of the resurrection. As long as the head is above the water,
the body cannot be drowned. Christ is 1 Cor. 11.3. Ephesians. 5.23.
the head, we are 1 Cor. 12.27.
the body; but Christ our head is risen from the dead, and his members, the
Church, shall assuredly rise from death to the Resurrection of life. As Christ
Church Hom. of the Resurrection.
dyed not for himself, no more did he rise again for himself, but for us.
Quia tu Redemptor noster suscepit mortem, ne mori timeremus; ita ostendit
resurrectionem, ut nos resurgere posse confideremus: for as our Redeemer dyed
that we should not be afraid of death; so he rose again, that we may be sure
of our Resurrection unto life. GODS Covenant with his Church Jerem. 31.33.
, I will be their GOD, and they shall be my people, Pe kins on the Creed.
is an everlasting covenant to last for ever; but if God should leave his
people in the grave for ever, how could they be called the people of GOD? for
Mat. 22.31.
for GOD is not the GOD of the dead, but of the living, and therefore seeing
Gods Covenant is everlasting to all, the Faithful must rise from the dead,
that God may always be said to be their God, and the godly be always said
to be his people. It is an especial part of Gods glory to show forth his mercy
on the godly, and his Justice on the wicked, to render Romans 2.6.
to every man according to his deeds. But here in this life Eccles. 9.2.
all things come alike to all, to the righteous, and to the wicked. and
therefore there must be a resurrection of the dead, that the godly may have a
reward from his mercy; and the wicked from his justice. Resurrectio quidem
communis est, and ante tribunal Christi necesse est in corpore justos stare and
impios, Dei hoc dictante justitia, ut pietas and impietas in operatoribus
debitis stipendiis donarentur says Saint Cyprian De R^surrec. Christi.
. The resurrection (indeed) is common, and it is necessary that all, both good
and bad, stand before the tribunal of Christ, that both piety and impiety
might receive a due wages in the workers thereof; Et qui finem habere
contempserunt in malis, infinita clauderentur ultione in poenis and qui
gloriati sunt in cruce, cum crucifixo regnantes, beatae fierent perennitatis
participes; And that they which refused to have an end in evil, might be shut
up in pain without end; and they which gloried in the Cross, might reign
with him that was crucified, and be partakers of blessed everlastingnes. For
God, as he is principium effectivum in creatione, refectivum in redemptione,
so he is principium perfectivum in retributione Joh de Comb. Comp. Theol. lib.
4. cap. 11.
, as he is the efficient cause in the creation, the reficient in the
redemption, so he is the perficient in the retribution. Why should any Epicure,
or Atheist deny, that the omnipotent and everlasting God should be able to
raise men's bodies out of the dust, when experience tells us, that miserable and
impotent men, can by art make the curious workmanship of glass? Minus est Deo
reparare quod erat, quam fecisse quod non erat S. Gregor.
; It is a less matter to restore that which was, than to make that which was
not. And therefore though the members of the Church should have their bodies
torn in pieces by tyrants, or consumed to ashes by fire, or rent by wild
beasts, or devoured by Worms or Fishes, yet they do but rest a while in the
earth; for at the Resurrection they shall be restored, when they shall rise
from their graves, as the Rose (in the Spring) from the ground, for therein the
Church resembles the springing Rose of Sharon. And so I come to the limitation
of this attribute (of Sharon.)

The fruitfulnes of Sharon shows, that though the Church before Christ were
barren like Sarah, or Rachel, yet by him it is made as fruitful as Leah. But I
promised to proceed in the same method that I did before, and therefore (the
word Sharon signifying any Field) I must show you that the Church resembles the
Rose of the common Field in three respects.

First, the Flowers of the Field grow by the providence of God without the
help of man. Campus ex semetipso flores producit, absque omni humanae
diligentiae adjutorio says S. Bernard In loc. Ser. 4.7.
: The Field produces her flowers without the industry of man. So the Church is
not planted by man's industry, but by the providence of God. The Trees Doctor
Dove on Cant. 4.12.
grow not in it naturally as the Trees of the Forest, which bear no Fruit:
but they are planted by the labor and industry of the husbandman, as the
Fig Tree. God planteth all that are in the Vineyard of his Church, as our
Savior says Mat. 15.13.
Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. It
is he that brings forthg his vineyard out of Egypt, and plants it too. Psalm.
80.8.
The Church is a Vineyard, God is the husbandman that plants and keeps it, it
is watered by the word, dressed by the Ministers, refreshed by the comfortable
Sunshine of the Gospel. And here is a difference Doctor Hall Ser. on I say 5.4.
: between Solomon's Vineyard and his that is greater then Solomon Mat. 12.42.
, Solomon let out his Vineyard Sol. Song. 8.11.
to keepers, but Christ keeps his in his own hand, he uses the help of men
sometimes, but as tools rather then agents, he works by them, they cannot
work but by him. And as it is planted by him, so is it watered by him. As
Promotion (so grace) comes Psalm 75 7.
neither from the East, nor yet from the West, but from God. What the Apostle
says Ephesians. 2.8.
of salvation, may be said of all grace, It is not of our selves, lest any men
should boast. We have no more power of our selves, to work grace in our selves,
then these inferior bodies have power to give light, when the light of the
Sun is absent. Adams ability was lost by his fall, now Sampsons locks are cut
off, and therefore we may be carried whither our leader (the devil) will,
since we suffered that Dalilah, sin, to steal away our strength from us.
Adam per malum velle, perdidit bonum posse, by willing that which is evil, he
lost his ability to perform that that is good; and since him every mothers son
may be called, as the wife of Phinehas named her child, 1 Samuel 4.21.
Ichabod, for in him this glory departed from us. GOD now works in us Phil.
2.13.
both the will and the deed. Ipse aspirando nos praevenit ut velimus quod
adjuvando subsequitur, ne inaniter velimus, says S. Gregory In Ezekiel. lib. 1.
Hom. 9.
; He by his preventing grace makes us to will that which by his assisting
grace he makes us to perform. The sap and juice that is in the Rose-Tree
proceeds from the root, and the grace that is in the members of the Church
(whether it be gratia infusa, effusa, or diffusa, in thought, word or work)
does proceed from God the Fountain of grace. Non est gratia ullo modo, nisi
sit gratuita omni modo: it is not grace except in be given gratis. So that the
planting of the members in the Church and the watering them for their growth,
being planted, proceeds not from themselves but from God; for therein the
Church resembles the Rose of the common Field.

Secondly, the Rose of the Field is not enclosed to a few, as the garden Rose
is, but lies open to all; so the Church is not enclosed in some narrow nooke or
corner, but is spread through the World, and lies open to receive all. Before
Christ, Israel was Gods peculiar people, the nation that he had chosen to set
his name there, to them he gave his word, with them he made his covenant, and
showed them the presence of his godhead. He dealt not so with other nations,
neither had Psalm 147.20.
the heathen the knowledge of his ways. So that then Jacob was the man that
prevayled with God, and his posterity, the only Israel that saw him. He
suffered other nations to sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Then
Israel was Calv. Instit.
the Lords Son that was his darling, others were strangers. Israel was received
into his care and protection, others were left to their own blindness: Israel
was honored with the presence of God, others were excluded from coming nigh
him, in a word there was a general darkness over all the Land of Egypt, among
the Gentiles: but in the Land of Goshen Exodus 10.
among the Israelites there was light. But since Christ the mercy of God was no
longer enclosed within the narrow confines of Iewry, but the glorious light of
the Gospel shined through the World. Before Christ the Church was a garden
enclosed, Sol. Song. 4.12.
a spring shut up, a Fountain sealed, but now she is the Rose of the common
Field. The Kingdom of heaven, is likened unto a man, Mat 13.24.
which sowed good seed in his Field. The Church is the Field, the seed is the
word, and the Gospel shall be preached through the World Mat 26.13.
. And to this purpose the Church is called Catholic Catholica, id est, per
totum orbem diffusa, says Saint August. Epist. 170. and in Ps. 56.
because it is spread through the World. And so the Epistles of S. James, S.
Peter, S. John, and S. Jude, are called Catholic, because Willsons Christ.
Dictionary.
, they are written not to a particular person, as to Timothy, etc. or to a
particular Church as to the Romans, etc. but either to all the Jews every
where, or to all the Christians in the World. And to this purpose also the
Apostle calls Heb 12.22.
, the Church (...) Conventus vniversalis, the general assembly, to show the
Universality of it. The Apostle S. Peter affirms Acts 10.34.
. Of a truth that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation, he that
fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Though the Church
be but one, yet it lies open to all that will come unto it. Vnus est Christus,
per quem omnis gens omnisque lingua fide and confessione unita est says
Ignatius Apud Amand. Polan.
, there is but one Christ (and one Church) by whom (and in whom) all nations,
and tongues are knit together. Quid enim est Ecclesia aliud, quam congregatio
fidelium in unitate fidei advnita says Oecolampadius Annotat in Chrysit.
What else is the Church of God, but the congregation of faithful people
(spread through the World) knit together in the unity of faith: the Church is
spread every where through the World; and admits any persons in the World into
her bosom. And therefore the Church is not to be tied to Rome, or any one
particular place, Rome may with no better reason be said to be the Catholic
Church, then the head may be said to be the whole body: for if it be a true
Church, yet it is but a part of the Church Catholic, and not the whole. And
to say the Catholic Church of Rome, is all one, as if I should say the
catholic Church of Canterbury, or of London, or a particular universal
Church, which how harsh it sounds the most simple may easily understand. After
this I beheld says S. John Rev. 7.9.
, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number of all nations, and
kindred, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and palms in their hands. The Church is
collected out of all nations. Aceipit Ecclesia omni tempore volentes credere
nemini prorsus occludit se huc festinanti, sed liberum and licitum est
volentibus quolibet tempore, nullo impediente, ad lucem veritatis adduci says
S. Cyrill v. In ^^l. lib. 5 cap. 60.
The Church receaveth all that will believe at all times, she is shut to none
that come unto her, but it is free and lawful to all that will (there is none
to hinder them) to come to the knowledge of the truth. And therefore if thou
have no benefit by this Rose, if thou art no member of the Church blame thy
self, for she is not the enclosed Rose of the Garden, but the Rose of the
common Field.

Thirdly, the Rose of the Field is for profit, as well as pleasure, and is
healthful in many medicines: so the Church is profitable, and healthful to
her members. She restores health to her members by monitions and admonitions,
strengthening them that are sound by wholesome Doctrine, and restoring them that
are sick by good discipline. But if any member be past cure then.

Ovid Metamorph.
Immedicabile vulnus
Ense redendu^ est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Then she cuts it off by the spiritual sword of Excommunication. Those that
are in the barren Wilderness, without the pale of the Church are miserable,
there is mors in olla, death is in their pot, but those that are within the
pale of the Church in that fruitful Field, are happy, there is health in her
bosom. The Church of God is the House of God 1 Timothy 3.15.
, the Pillar and ground of truth. And she is very profitable unto her members,
Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, is a common saying among the fathers, without the
Church there is no salvation. Without the Church they cannot attain unto the
right of adoption, whereby they that live faithfully, are made actually the
children of GOD. They that continue in the Ship of the Church are secure Doctor
Boys
, though the Sea make a noise, and storms arise, but he that utterly forsakes
the Ship of the Church, and swims either in the cockboate of heresies, or upon
the windy bladders of his own conceit, shall never touch the land of the
living. Those that are out of the, Church have not the communion and interest
of the members with the head, and being no part of his body how can they lay
claim to his benefits? or challenge right to the Kingdom of heaven. And to
this purpose heaven is called Acts. 26.18.
the inheritance of them which are sanctified by faith in CHRIST.

Nothing now remains to be spoken of at this time, but only that every one
fill his pitcher with this water, and carry it home for his own use; which
that we may do; I shall briefly apply. First, in that the Church is the red
Rose by persecution, every one should learn patience in his affliction.
Remember the sufferings of Christ, we do but sup of that Cup which he drank
quite off. Nihil est quod non aequanimiter tolleretur, si passio Christi in
memoriam revocetur. St. Gregory.
There is no affliction so great, no cross so grievous that will not easily be
borne by us, if we do rememberthe sufferings of Christ: And therefore
Vniversa pro eo sustine, qui prius pro te Majora sustinuit says St. Bernard de
Resurrec. Dom.
suffer some persecution for his sake, that suffered more for thine. Secondly,
let us labor for our Renovation that our newnes of life may send forth a sweet
savor in our conversation. Thirdly, in that the Church and the members thereof
shall rise from the dead: it affords matter of our consolation: For so the
Prophet David speaks Psa. 16 9 10
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest
in hope: for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. Fourthly, seeing the Church is of Gods own
plantation, let us look to our fructification. Our Savior puts forth the
parable of the Fig tree to us Luke 13.6.
A certain man had a Fig Tree in his Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit
thereon three Years: Every one of us is a Tree planted in the Vineyard of the
Church: God has expected fruit of us three Years, in general of the whole
Kingdom, under the Reigns of our most gracious Sovereigns, Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and King Charles; in particular of every private persons, the three
ages of man's life, infancy, youth, old age: let not us give him the bark of an
outward profession only, nor the leaves of good works, but the fruit of good
works. Lastly, seeing the Church is open to all comers, let every one of us
labor to be of that corporation, that we may be partakers of all the benefits
that accrue thereby, and that being members of the Church militant, we may
reign with the Church triumphant. Which God grant unto us all for Jesus
Christ's sake. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one
God, be al honor, and praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
To The Right Worshipful, his much Honored friend THOMAS PARKS, Esquier.
SIR.
IF Elisha were at a stand, when he considered what the good Shunamite had
done for ^im, that he asks 2 Kings 4.13.
. What to be done again for her? sAnd Ahasuerus for Mordecay, when he had
received a good turn from him that he says Esther. 6.3.
, What has been done to him for this? How much more may I say of you, you
have been beneficial to me from my Youth, what duty and service shall J
return to you again? J confess that if there be any thing in these my
weak labors that may deserve acceptance, you may justly challenge it as
your own, Without whose bounty I had not lived in the University, nor
attained to that small measure of knowledge that J have. And therefore (being
able to do nothing else) J commit this Sermon to your Patronage and
protection, and your self, your fruitful Vine, and Olive branches to the
protection of the Almighty, desiring him to give you the blessings of his Right
hand, and of his left, to fill you with the blessing of grace here, and of
glory hereafter.

Yours, to be commanded in Christ Jesus WILLIAM PARKES.

THE ROSE AND LILY.
SOLOMON'S SONG. 2.1. J am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the vallyes.


WHat S. Jerome says Ad Paulin.
of the Catholic Epistles, of S. Peter, S. James, S. John, and S. Jude.
Breves esse pariter and longas, that they are both short and long, so may I say
of this Text, it is short in words, but long in matter. And what S. Austin
says Praefat in Psalm. 87.
, of the fourscore and seventh Psalm. Brevis est numero verborum, magnus
pondere sententiarum, that it is short in regard of the number of the words,
long in respect of the weightines of the matter: so may I say of this Text, it
is a short sentence, but full of sense containing matter for (almost) as many
Sermons as it conteynes words. It being but five words in the Original, yet is
the subject of four Sermons. Three of them have been delivered formerly, and
now the fourth, (the same assistance strengthing, and the same patience
expecting) is to be prosecuted, in showing you wherein the Church resembles the
Lily of the Valleys.

First, the Lily is open toward heaven but close and shut toward earth, so the
members of the Church must have their affections open on things above.

Secondly, the leaves of the Lily extend outward and bend downwards, a fit
emblem of the Churches charity.

Thirdly, the Lily is white, which signifies the Churches innocence.

Fourthly, the Lily grows among Thorns, and in the Church there is a
commixtion of good and bad, in these respects the Church (also) resembles the
Lily of the Valleys.

First, the Flower of the Lily is lifted upward, and spreades toward heaven,
but toward the earth it is close, and shut, whence the Church and the members
thereof, may learn a sursum corda, to lift up their hearts and to open them
toward heaven, but to keep them close shut toward earth, and earthly things.
We read in the Law Lev. 11 42.
, That those creatures, which crept on their bellyes, were unclean, so under
the Gospel, those men that have their bellies, their affections, creeping on
the earth are unclean. Si delectat te mundus, semper vis esse immundus, si
autem non te delectat mundus, jam tu es mundus says S. Austin In John Tr. 36.
, If the World delight thee, then thou art still a worldling, and unclean, but
if the World delight thee not, then art thou chosen out of the World, and art
clean. Man is called (...) in Greek, (...) from looking upward, his name may
put him in mind of his nature, and duty, to look upward, and to contemplate on
heavenly things. And whereas all other creatures look downward toward the
earth the place from whence they were taken.

Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque Videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera tallere vultus.
Says the Poet Ovid Metamorph. lib. 1.
man has his countenance erected toward heaven, to look up to that place to
which he should aspire. God made not Eccles. 7.29. and 15.
man crooked (but upright) for who can streighten that which he has made
crooked? but man boweth down himself by his own inventions, and makes
himself like that woman in the Gospel Ink. 13.11.
, which was so bowed together that she could in no wise lift up her self. But
as the eye is placed in the head to look upward, so is the heart in the body
open to contemplate on heavenly things: For if you look into an Anatomy, you
shall see that the heart is broad above and narrow below, signifying it should
be open toward Heaven but contracted toward the things of this life. The
windows of our spiritual temples, our bodies must be built like the windows
1 King. 6 4.
of Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem, broad without, toward Heaven, and narrow
within: But such is the nature and disposition of the sons of Adam, that
Maryes choice cannot content them, that Vnum necessarium, Luke 10.40 42.
that one thing that is needful, to sit and hear Christ and to be busied
about heavenly things, but with Martha we are too much cumbred with earthly
affairs: we do not first Mat. 6.3.
seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, as good Christians
should do, but we are careful about earthly things as the Gentiles used to
do. Some writers make mention of some people that go upon all four, I fear
there are many such people in England, that by grovelling upon earth and
earthly things. This is the Devils policy, who labors that dust should be our
meat as it is the Serpents Genesis 3.14.
that we should be not only filii terrae, made of the earth as indeed we are,
but toti terrei altogether earthy, both in our minds and affections. But though
man be made in terra Pet. Lomb. Sent. lib. 2. did. 14.
and exterra, non tamen ad terra, nee propter terram, sed ad coelum, and
propter coelum, in the earth and of the earth, yet he is not made to the earth
nor for the earth but to Heaven and for Heaven. Wherefore then lay you out your
money for that which is no bread? Are we not all strangers and pilgrims in
this life? if we be not we shall never be Citizens in the life to come? And
therefore as worldly, so spiritual pilgrims, must carry nothing, but things
necessary. The Patriark Jacob in his journey to Padan Aran Genesis 28.20.
, desired only bread to eat, and raiment to put on. So Gods children in their
journey toward Heaven, desire only a viaticum, sufficient to suffice them by
the way. The two things that hinder us in our journey toward Heaven, are
sin, and earthly superfluity (for it is as hard Mat. 19.^4
, for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as it is for a Camel to
go through the eye of an Needle) And therefore first let us disburthen our
selves of sin, and lay that burden on Christ, and then disburthen our selves
of earthly superfluity. and cast that burden on the poor, send our riches
before us, that we may the better follow after to Heaven. The heathen Orator
can tell us, that our life is C^cero de Seen.
: commorandi, non habitandi locus, a place for some short abiding, not for a
long dwelling. We are non habitatores terrae, sed accolae, says S. Ambrose De
Abrah Patr.
. Immates for a time, and not permanent livers. And to this purpose our life is
called Cicero.
, diversorium, an Inn, and a cutthroat Inn it is, where the sign forward is
the Maremayd, but backward ship-wracke, where the flesh is Hostice, and the
Devil (too commonly) host. Gluttony is the Cook, drunkenness Tapster, and
wantonness Chamberlayne, and these are as officious as may be, to give
entertaynment: but when the reckoning comes to be paid, the host (the Devil)
himself brings in a long Bill, with an Item for this, and an Item for that
sin, and conscience stands at the Bar and justifies all, the end is that
prison from whence, Mat. 5.26.
thou shall not come out, until thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Yet
many setting their affections on that triple headed Geryon of riches, honor,
and pleasure, remember not the time of their reckoning which is at hand, when
they will want the precious merits of their Savior, to pay the dear price of
their sins. And therefore as the Birds that feed below, do build on high, so
we though we live below on earth, must build above, and lay up our treasure
in heaven. Si diem mortis nostrae in mente habemus, statim ea, quae in hoc
mundo sunt, despicimus, says S. Bernard De modo bone vivendi Ser. 8.
, If we did but consider, how short a time we have to live in this World, we
would not set our affections on it, but on a better. The Hedghog that has
rouled his skin full of Apples, when he comes to the hole, he wipes them all
of: so he that has fethered his nest with the things of this World, yet when
he comes to his hole, he leaves all behind him. Naked came we into this
World, and naked shall we go out again Job. 1.21.
; Let us not then be like the Raynbow, which though it seem to be in the
Air, yet the ends tend to the earth, but rather like the Ceder that stretches
forth her branches toward Heaven. Interpositio terrae est causa Eclipseos
lunae. Magir. Phis.
The Interposition of the Earth between the Sun and the Moon, is the cause
of the Eclipse of the Moon. And the interposition of earthly things between
the Sun of righteousness and us, does blind our spiritual eyes, that we
cannot think of Heaven; but are like the Moon, when we are at the full
(oftentimes) in greatest opposition to that Sun. As GOD said unto Abraham.
Genesis 12.1.
Exi de terra tua, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, unto a
Land that I shall show thee, so does he speak unto the Church in general,
and to every member in particular Psalm. 45 10.
, forget thine own people and thy fathers house. This World is our Fathers
house, the Land wherein we are borne and bread, but we must forget our fathers
house, forsake Doctor Boys on the Epist. for Easter day.
, this homestall, and seek for another in the spiritual Chanaan one to come
in Jerusalem that is above. We must say to the World (when it is gotten into
the closet of our hearts) as Amnon did 2 Samuel 13.15.
: to his sister, get thee hence. And if it will not be gone, we must thrust it
out, and lock the doors of our hearts, and shut the windows of our affections
after it. It is written of the Squerill and Badger Pliny.
* that in their nests and dens they have two holes, one they open toward the
Sun, but shut the other to keep out the blustering winds: so let us open the
doors of our hearts toward the Sun of righteousness, but keep them shut
against the blusterings of this world. We should be like Aristotle's vessel
which being made of virgins Wax, would keep out the salt water, but receive
the fresh: so let us refuse the bitter waters of Jericho, and receive the
waters of life. If we affect Jerusalem that is above, let us neglect Babylon
that is below. Remember then (O man) that thou art a man, look not downward on
the earth with the eyes of thy soul, as beasts do with the eyes of their
bodies. Go not on thy belly with the Serpent, grow not with the Bramble with
both ends toward the earth, but be lifted upward toward Heaven, that thou
may appear to be a member of the Church which does herein resemble the
Flower of the Lily of the Valleys.

Secondly, the leaves of the Lily do extend outward and bend downwards, so the
Church and the members thereof must extend their charity, not only to them
that are near, either by propinquity of neighborhood, or affinity of kindred,
but even to them that are far off. The heart of man does derive the heat, not
only to the breast and belly, and the parts that are near it, but even to the
toes, and fingers, and the parts farthest of, so the members of the Church
ought to extend their charity not only to them that are near, but even no them
that are far off. The Henn (they say) will cover no Chickens under her wings,
but her own, or such as she supposes to be her own; So many will make much
of none, but those that are of their own kindred, as for strangers there is no
hope of any thing for them. Nature A^istotle.
, in the generation of a Frogge, being afraid that her matter will not hold
out, does bestow so much on the breast and belly, and the parts near the
heart, that there is little left for the legs, whence it is that the belly of
a Frogge is so large and swelling: so many fear that their substance will not
hold out, they shall not have enough for their friends and kindred, and
therefore their donation is very small for them that are far off, I speak
not this, to streighten the bowels of affection, and charity in men to their
own kindred, for in some they are straightened too much already, in these
degenerate days of ours, wherein a man may oftentimes meet with a more lively
heat of affection from strangers, then from their own friends and alliyes. The
Apostle says 1 Timothy 5.8
: he that provideth not for his own, he is worse then an infidel.
Cosmographers make mention of some Anthropophagi, men eaters, that live near
the Caspian Hills, that the children use to eat their fathers when they grow
old, that they should not be devoured of the Worms. This custom I fear may
be found among many, when as the Prophet speaks Ezekiel 5.10.
: the fathers eat the sons, and the sons eat the fathers, they oftentimes
consuming and devouring the estates one of another. The Apostle makes it a note
of the last days 2 Timothy 3.3.
: that men should be without natural affection. How can they be spiritually
affected Absal. Fune^all Tears.
, that are not naturally affected? Can they love Gods children that have no
love to their own bowels? or they be friends to their enemies, that are
tirants to their friends. So that it is true that charitas inicpit in seipsa,
charity beginns at him. Yet non desinit in seipsa, it must not end there, but
go abroad to ou^ neighbors Constantine the great Fuseb. Eccles. Hyst. li. 9.
cap. 9.
got great favor of the people, and added to the Christians daily by providing
for the poor, insomuch that the Gentiles noted the love of Christians one to
another, and by their charity were sometimes compelled to confess the God of
the Christians. Stipis pauperum the saurus divitum, was the word of the good
Emperor Tiberius Constantius Reusner. Symb.
, The rich man's treasure is the poor man's stock. It is recorded Nazian in vita
ejus.
: of S. Bazill the great, that in a famine he did not only give to the poor
such as he had himself, but exhorted all others to set open their Barnes and
to do the like. But now there are many churlish Naballs that say 1 Samuel 25.10,
11.
, Who is David? and who is the son of Iesse? there be many servants now
adays that break away every man from his Master. Shall I then take my bread
and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto
men whom I know not whence they be? There is many an unmercifull Dives Luke 16.
, that will not part with a crumme, though it might make them to gain a
Crown. For Da parva ut magna recipias says S. Bazill In Div. page 16.
. He that gives little shall receave much. And damna lucrum, Div. Chrysist.
The crummes that fall from thy table are lost, and yet not lost if thou give
them to the poor, for he Prove. 19.17.
: that has pity on the poor lends to the Lord, and that which he has given
will he pay him again. We have few tender hearted David's, whose Psalm. 22.14.
, heart is like wax, and melts in the midst of their bowels: many like the
Leviathan Job 41.24.
: whose heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a stone, yea as hard as a
piece of the nether Mil-stone, we have few like them Job speaks of Job 21.24.
, whose breasts are full of Milk, and their bones moystened with Marrow, many
like David in this, when his Psalm. 102.3.
, bones were dried, or burnt up, as an hearth: few that can say with Job v, I
have not eaten my morsel my self alone, Job 31.17.
but the fatherles has eaten thereof: but many that withold the poor from
their desire. Our Savior Christ bids Luke. 3.11.
: him that has two coats, to impart to him that has none, but rather we are
like David in his old age, we think all clothes to little to get 1 Kings 1.1.
, heat in our selves; We are like Isaacks well Rehoboth Genesis 26 2.
, that signifyes room, we have room enough to receive, but when we should
give any thing, we are like the Well of Haran Genesis 29.2.
: that had a stone rolled upon the mouth thereof; Our hearts are made, like the
door of that hard hearted neighbor in the Gospel Luke. 11.7.
hard to be opened I cannot rise and lend, much less would he rise and give.
It is true that there are among us some merciful Samaritans, good
Corneliusses, charitable Tabithaes, and Dorcasses, (and God increase the number
of them.) But all the members of the Church should be open handed and open
hearted: for Aurum habet Ecclesia, non ut serret, sed uteroget, says Saint
Ambrosse. Offic. lib. 2. cap. 28.
The Church has gold not to keep but to give: we being Gods stewards to
dispose of them to them that need. I have read of some Tartarians, that say the
custom of their country gives nothing to the poor. I say not that this
custom is known in our Hoemisphere, or come into our country; and yet if we
look into the disposition of many, we may find them of the nature of a sponge,
which will easily take in water, but will let nothing go without squeezing;
their hands are dried up like Ieroboames Kings 13.4.
, they cannot stretch them out to give an alms. But as the Lodestone draws
iron to it, so should our charity draw the poor unto it: there are but few
such Loadstones found among us. Many are rather like a kind of Loadstone
reported to be Pliny.
, in Ethiopia, which has two corns; the one draws iron to it, the other
expells it from it. Many make use of that corner that repells from them. When
they have need of a poor man's help, then they will draw him unto them with
the one corner, but when their purpose is brought to pass, then they will
turn alterum angulum, the other corner, and bid him be gone. Anglers use little
Flies to catch great Fishes, and many use poor friends to effect great
matters, But they use them as they do their shoe-hornes, to draw on some good
turn on themselves, and when they have done they put them away. Poor men have
always need of the rich, and rich men have sometimes need of the poor. And as
they do make use of the poor to help them at their need, so should they
releeve them at their need. We must put on Colos. 3.12
, the bowels of mercyes, and be merciful Luke 6.36.
: as our father in Heaven is merciful. Let us not shut the bowels of our
affections, but rather be like the water, facile fluit in terminum alienum, it
easily flows into others bounds. But let us not be like the Wells which keep
all in themselves, as those that are every man for himself, and do nothing at
all for others: nor yet like to the Rivers, which water the banks only that
are near unto them, as those that extend their charity only to their kindred,
nor yet like the Sea, which sends forth waters into the Rivers which return
back again thither, as those that give their gifts, as they toss the ball at
tennys, to them that will bandy it back again with requital: but like the
rain that falls from the Clouds in all places, so if we belong to the Church,
we must show our charity to the lowest member of the Church: for therein the
Church and the members thereof must resemble the leaves of the Lily of the
Valleys.

It is written of the Eagle Pliny.
, that standing on a rock, she looks on three things, upward toward the
brightness of the Sun, about her to the place whether she would flee, and
downward on her crooked talents: so must we look on three things especially,
upward toward GOD setting our affections on Heaven and not on earthly things,
about us on our neighbors, extending our charity to them: and downward on our
selves: which I am now to speak off: for Thirdly, as the leaves of the Lily
are white within and without, so must the Church manifest the whitnes of her
innocence, and although there are some black Lillies, yet are the white the
purest. The Priests were clothed with white Ezekiel. 44.17
: linen clothes, when they did enter into the Sanctuary, signifying integrity
and sincerity of conversation, that all that will come near the Lord, must be
clothed with those white robes; If the King of Babell chose children Daniel.
1.4
: in whom there was no blemish to stand in his Palace. Shall God admit any
that are full of spots, to stand in the Court of Heaven? The Temple of fortune
was built with the whitest stones that could be got, being fetched from
Cappodocia in the Emperor Neroes time, and shall not the Temple of Jerusalem
(the Church) be built with white stones, such as the Patriarchs, and Prophets,
and Apostles, such as Zacharias and Elizabeth Luke 1.6.
, that walked in all the Comandements, and ordinances of the Lord blameles. But
how can the Church be said to be white, when she says of her self Sol. Song.
1.5
, that she is black? S. Augustine answers De Temp. Ser 86.
: that she is nigra per naturam, formosa per gratiam, black by nature but
white by grace. Nigra per inhaerens peccatum says S. Bernard In Cant Ser. 33.
black through sin that dwells in her, formosa per justitiam imputatam,
beautiful by Christ's righteousness imputed to her. She is black as the tents of
Kedar, which S. Jerome says Super Cant Cantic^^.
: does signify darkness it self, but comely as the curtains of Solomon, which
were of silk and embroydered with gold Aethiopissa non mu^tat colorem says S.
Bernard Domin. p. Oct. Epiph.
: the Ethiopian cannot change his skin, Jer. 13.23.
but Iudaeam praecaedit Aethipia peccat; exuends nigredme and fidei induendo
candore, says S. Austin De Temp. Ser. 36.
. Aethiopia surpasses Iudaes in this, in putting of the blacknes of sin, and
putting on the beauty of faith Some think Brightman on the Rev.
, S. John does describe the Church when he says. Rev. 1.14.
The head and the hair were white like snow and like wool; The Church has
the whitnes of wool, by reason of the simplicity, and innocence wherewith the
Saints are endewed, which are oftentimes in the Scripture called sheep, and no
mervaile, for Christ their head is called a Lamb John 1.29.
, and of Snow, because the whitnes thereof is not natural, but adventitiall.
And as Wool, so the righteousness of the saints, will quickly be foul and
dusty of themselves, but being washed in the clean Fountain of Christ's blood,
it will be as white as Snow, or any thing else that exceedes in whitnes. But
how can the Church be said to be all white? for if we take the Church
generally there are many profane Esaus crept into her bosom: and if we take it
strictly for the multitude of believers; how can it then be said to be all
beautiful? for if the best of us look on our selves in the glass of Gods
Law, we shall find that we come far short of the beauty of holiness. I answer,
if the Church be taken generally, then is her beauty like Joseph's coat, party
colored, but if it be taken strictly, then she may be said to be all
beautiful, though not in sensu diviso, but in sensu composito. In her self
Doctor D^ce on the Cant.
her spots are as many as Lazarus sores, or Jobs botches, but through Christ,
she becomes as beautiful as Absalom. Ipse qui venit sine macula, and ruga,
extensus est in tendicula, sed propter nos, non propter se, ut nos faceret sine
macula, and ruga says S. Aust, De verb. Apost. Ser. 29.
he that came without spot, or wrinckle, was stretched out upon the tenters,
but not for himself, but for us, to make us with out spot, or wrinckle. It is
a custom with us, that what belongs to the Bridgroome, the Bride has title
to: so the Church, has Christ's, her husbands, beauty imputed to her; And
therefore S. Bernard notes In Cant. Cantic.
: that the Church is rather said to be dealbata, then alba, not white as having
her beauty in her self, but whited, as receiving it from Christ. We are all
Christians, and in our Baptism gave up our names to Christ Jesus, as pressed
Soldiers to fight under his Banners, but let us examine our selves, whether we
wear our Captains colors, truly white. Are we like the Nazarites of Israel
Lament. 4.7, 8.
, purer then Snow, and whiter then Milk? or rather are there not many like
them spoken of in the next verse, whose visage is blacker then a coal? Are
there not many that would be counted white, and yet with the Camelion can turn
of any color, and others like the Leopard are full of spots, if not gross
Aethiopians, that cannot be washed white, far from the nature of the Lily;
Noah's arc was pitched Genesis 6.14.
. within, and without, the Lily is white within and without, and so must the
members of the Church. Which manifests two sorts of men not to belong to the
Church: the one is of them which though they think themselves to be white
within, yet it cannot be perceived by their outward actions, but that they are
black. They are like Solomon's Temple, though it were overlayd with gold, yet
was it built of craggy stones. But the members of the Church must be like the
Kings daughter Psalm. 45.13.
: as she was all glorious within, so her clothing is of wrought gold, as they
must have a good conscience before God, So they must have a good conversation
before men. Secondly, others there are that would feign seem white without,
and yet within are full of gall and bitterness. They are like the Egiptian
Temples; which were very fair and beautiful without, but when you come within
to their sanctum sanctorum, you shall find nothing but a Crocodile, or a Serpent
which they did worship; So they carry a fair show outwardly, but let that
Serpent Satan bewitch their hearts (which should be Gods holiest) with sin.
The Greek word (...), is a title given to Players and Jesters, which do
resemble the persons of great men: as Roscius was Agamemnon in show, though he
were Roscius in deed, they are the children of father Abraham in show, but
children of their father the devil indeed, they imitate Gods Saints in
sincerity, Dum Curios simulant, and Bacchanalia vivunt, they live in iniquity.
Sin has some of those properties which Bellarmine makes De Not. Eccl. lib 4.
cap. 3.
, to be true notes of the true Church. First, for universality, it has
infected all the men in the World. Secondly, for antiquity it is almost as old
as the world, beginning in Paradise. Thirdly, for perpetuity, it will last
until the worlds end. Fourthly, for succession it became haereditary to all
Adams posterity, like Naamans leprosy 2 Kings. 5.27
: to Gehazi, for ever, but it wants visibility, and therefore that witch
(hipocrisy) rayseth many up to appear to be true Samuells, when as indeed they
are very devils. The hypocrit does consist of mere formalities, and esse
videaturs, and had rather be a member of the Church visible, then of the Church
Catholic. Whereunto shall I liken the men of this generation, they are like
to mud-walls, though they may be white without, yet they are full of dirt
within; like Swanns; whose feathers are very white without, but their flesh is
the blackest of all Birds; like the elder Tree which has a very white wood,
but bears black stinking berries. Goliahs sword lay hid under an Ephod, and
David said. 1 Samuel 21 9.
There is none like that, give it me. There is nothing like the deceit of a
seeming hypocrite. The Leprosy that was most white Lev. 13.^
: was most dangerous; though Myriam would turn prophet Number. 12.10.
: yet was she smitten with Leprosy white as Snow, so those that pretend
goodness, and do not intend it, it is but like the leprosy that appears
outwardly upon them. There were some Mat. 7.15.
: that came in sheep clothing, were inwardly ravening Wolves.

Hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto*
Hunc tu Christian caveto.
He is a black pawn, in a white coat. Wherefore as Daniel said to the King,
Hyst. of Bell. v. 7.
O King be not deceived, viz. by the fair shows of the Priests: so say I to
these men, let not their fair presence of holiness, be a cover of their inward
wickedness. Let them cease to be like the Apples of Sodom, that grow by the
lake Asphaltites, that had a fair show without, but within were nothing but
dust, and ashes. It was Julians policy to make his follower, seem holy, that
he might the better deceive, and Satan, Julians master makes his followers
seem holy, that he may the better deceive. But they may blind the worlds eye,
yet Gods eye, Qui ^ninime fallitur, quia minime clauditur D^ Bernard.
: which is always open, and never shut, cannot be blinded. Moses Leprosy Exodus
4.6.
in his hand, was as apparent in the eyes of God; as Vzziahs 2 Chronicles. 26 19.
Leprosy in his forehead. God sees secret hypocrisy, as well as open profannes,
and will discover it, and them. Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo.

They shall appear in their perfect colors. Wherefore, let every one endeavor
to be like Ezechiells book Ezech. 2.10.
: that was written both within and without, like the Arc Exodus 25.11.
: that was overlayd with pure gold, both within and without: like Mary's box
Mat. 26.7*
: that without was Alablaster, and within full of ointment, and like the Lily
that is white both within and without. And thus the Church appears to be all
beautiful, for to the perfectest beauty, is required the best commixtion of
red, and white: so that the Church may be said to be white and ruddy, being
blanched in the white robes of innocence, and gilded with the blood of
Martyrs, she is a red Rose by her Martyrs, and a white Lily by the virgin
innocence of the Saints. And though she sometimes want the crown of Martyrdom,
yet she must always have the white robs of innocence* though she seems
sometimes not to be the red Rose of Sharon; yet she must always be the white
Lily of the Valleys.

Fourthly, the Lily grows among Thorns, and in the Church the white Lillies
flourish among black Thorns. In Adams family there was a Cayne, as well as an
Abel: in Noah's Arc there was a Cham, as well as a Shem, or Iaphet, beasts
unclean, as well as clean: in Abraham's house there was an Ishmael, as well as
an Isack and it is no greater wonder to see a Judas among Christ's Disciples;
then it was to see a Saul 2 Samuel 19.22.
, among the Prophets. Wicked men in the Church are mixed with true believers,
and the Tares must grow among the Wheat: for the Church is a Lily among
Thorns. Which may fitly be applied against the Separatists, that leave this
Lily because of the Thorns, and go out of the Church by reason of some bad.
They have a heat in them but it is a strange fire, raked out of the embers of
passion, blown with the bellows of pride, and self conceitednes, and
mayntained by the fuel of faction, which makes them at first to be ^axardens,
and then draco volans; Like humid bodies facile in alienis terminis difficulter
in suis continentur: they first cross the Church and then the seas, first run
out of reason and then out of the Church. Cursed be such heat; for it is
cruel, O my soul Gen 49.6.
, come not thou into their secret, be not thou united to their assembly. When
Lot and Abraham fell out, Lot would needs part with him, though he told them
that they were brethren Genesis 13.8.
. So those Separatists fall out with the Bishops of our Church, and say as
those in S. Austins time Augustine in Psalm. 129.
: Seperemus nos, let us go out from among them. And although we say to them,
Servate pacem keep the peace and love the unity of the Church, yet they will
go out from us, Genesis 13.12.
although (I fear) oftentimes with Lot v into Sodom, when the other with
Abraham may enter into the Land of Chanaan. When Christ was upon the earth was
his head, pricked with Thorns, his body was scourged, but John 19.36
: not a bone of him was broken: so now he is in Heaven though his head be
pricked with contentions (although it might be wished that it were not pricked
at all) yet let us not break his bones. We must not part Paul and Barnabas,
for Acts 15 37.
, Marks sake, as long as we agree in fundamental points of faith, we must
not go out of the Church; by reason of some errors, or imperfections I wrote
unto you says the Apostle 1 Cor. 5.9.10
: not to keep company with fornicators: yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this World, or with the covetous, or extortioners or idolators,
for then must ye needs go out of the World. Should Noah have forsaken the
company of all wicked men, he must have gone out of the World; for the whole
earth was corrupt and Genesis 6.11.
: filled with cruelty, save only he and his family. What S. Austin Epist. 48.
: determined against the Donathists; may be urged against these men, non
propter malos boni deserendi, sed propter bo^ios malitolerandi. We must not
forsake the good for the bad, but must tolerate the bad for the good. The Tares
must grow among the Wheat without a separation, until the Lord of the harvest
make a separation, at the general day of ^udgment, and the Lily (the Church)
must grow among Thorns. But as the Lily among Thorns: retaynes the whitenes
and sweetness, so must the Church among thorny sinners and haereticall
Christians retain her innocence And this is Angelom in locum.
: no disprayse to the righteous but rather their praise to be godly among the
wicked, and not to be infected with the thorny conversation of others but to
shine as lights in darkness. Non mediocris est titulus profecto virtutis inter
pravos vivere bonum, and inter malignantes innocentiae retinere candorem, magis
autem si his qui oderunt pacem, pacificum te praebeas and amicum, says S.
Bernard. In Cant. Ser. 48.
It is no small virtue, to be good among the evil, to be innocent among the
nocent, and to be peaceable among the turbulent and contentious: herein they
are like the Lillies themselves, which by their own beauty adorn the Thorns
by which they are pricked. It is no great matter to seem to be good among the
good, and according to the Proverb.

Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivere more. When you are at Rome, to do as the
Romans do, but the godly must reteyne their innocence in the midst of the
tents of Kedar she must reteyne her whitenes, for therein the Church resembles
the Lily of the Valleys. And so I come to the limitation of this second
attribute, to the second subject (of the Valleys) I am the rose of Sharon and
the Lily of the Valleys.

The Church is the low Lilly of the low Valleys, which may teach humility to
all the members thereof. Humility is the first step toward Heaven, and I know
not how they that, miss that may ascend any higher. How can any think to
thrust into Heaven by that, that made Satan be cast out? pride was the devils
ruin, and can any think it should be his raising? And that we may practice
humility we may learn it Destruct. vitior.
: from things without us, from things we carry with us, from things about us,
and from God above us. First, from things without us, even from the earth it
self, from whence we came and whither we must: for God tells Adam Genesis 3.19.
, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. So that when thou see the
earth remember thy Sepulcher. And what cause have thou to be proud? if thou
consider that the earth which is now under thy feet, shall shortly be over
above thy head? Secondly, we may learn humility from what we carry with us,
even from our selves, if we consider our ingresse into the World, our progress
in the World, and our egresse out of the World. First, the ingresse of man's
life is miserable, he beginning his life with tears; as bewayling the miseries
of his succeeding ages. Secondly, the progress of man's life is short and
transitory, but a Psalm. 39.6.
: spannlong; and as short as Psalm. 90.9.
: a tale that is told. Thirdly, man's egresse is bitter and terrible, and
therefore death is said to be Aristot.
, (...) the King Job 18.14.
: of terrors; And what cause (then) has man to be proud, when at his birth his
conception is detestable, in his life his conversation culpable, and at his
death his dissolution terrible? Thirdly, we may learn humility from men about
us, when we consider that many of our brethren are poor, or lame, or blind or
miserable, and we are made of the same matter in the same mould: and deserve it
as well as they. And therefore what cause have thou to be proud; thou being as
subject to those calamities as they, and know not how soon thou may fall
into them? Lastly, we may learn humility from God above us. God retesisteth
the proud 1 Pet, 5.5.
: but gives grace to the humble. The humble are in Gods eyes as Stars are in
man's, though they seem little yet they are great. Quanto quis humilior fuit de
seipso, tanto major erit in conspectu dei says S. Austin Ad fratr in Erem.
Ser. 7
: how much the more humble a man is in his own eyes, so much the greater is he
in the sight of God. We bow our selves at the example of some great person, or
if we were to go in at some low door, or if a sword hang over our heads, and
we under it. But the sword of Gods wrath hangs over the proud, and we are to
enter in by the low door. Christ, who has left us an example of humility. To
behave our selves humbly est Christum scire imitari, says S. Bazil De Abdicat
rerum.
is to imitate Christ; but to carry ones self proudly est Diabolo se similem
praebere, that is to be like the Devil. And now I am sure thou have no cause
to be proud, except thou meanest to be conformable to the devil, and
abominable to God. To conclude without any further application (because what
has been spoken of this part has (for the most part) been by way of
application. Let every true Israelite fill his Omer with this spiritual
Mannah, Let every one take a posy of these Flowers home with him, nay let him
compose himself (as it were): posy of them. And let us all show that we have
the sweetness of the Rose, and the whitenes of the Lily, by innocence in
ourselves, and charity to others, that Christ that feeds Sol. Song 6.3.
among the Lillies may take delight in us, and accept us for his Spouse to live
with him for evermore. Which God grant we may all do for Jesus Christ his sake
our only Lord and Savior. To whom with thee, O Father, and thy blessed
Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, might and Majesty now and for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur hic liber cui titulas est ( (The Rose and the Lily) modo intra sex
menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex aedibus Fulham. July, 11. 1638. Sa. Baker.


