November 18. Numb. 17.

The Continuation of our News, from the 4* to the 17. of this instant:
Containing amongst other things, these particulars. A great overthrow given to
the King of Persia by the Turks. A Letter written by the King of Sweden, being
a second manifestation of his proceeding, and the reasons thereof, with
several passages concerning Germany, and of the Administrator of Hall, his
preparation and success in, and near Magdenburg. The valor and courage of
the Protestants in Bohemia, in resisting the tyranny of the Imperialists over
their conscience. Some late passages of the King of Denmark, and those of
Hamborough, and of his good success against the Hamburgers, and others.


LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1630.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR WEEKLY NEWS.
A Proclamation published by the King of Sweden, in the Dukedom of Meckelburg.
GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS by the grace of God, King of Sweden, etc. Be it known to
all and every one the Subjects, Inhabitants, Spiritual and Temporal Lords,
Gentlemen, Citizens and Countrymen, of what condition soever, none except, of
the Dukedom of Meckelburg, that we have understood with extreme admiration,
and almost seen with astonishment, how, not a few of you have most shamefully
forsaken the Magistrates by God appointed over you, being your most ancient
Princes, and lawful hereditary Lords and Masters, Our dear Cousins, and
Brothers, the Excellent, High, and Illustrious Princes, Adolph Frederic, and
John Albrecht, Brothers, Dukes of Meckelburg, etc, as soon as General
Walstein assaulted them, with an Army against the laws both of God and of
Nations, against natural right, and the Imperial constitutions, and
especially against the sworn ancient peace of Germany, without any just cause,
not considering, no^ withstanding the express commandment of God, and your
Oath and duty to the contrary, which did bind, (and should have kept you for
ever trusty) unto your said Princes, and your own Country: but more
particularly, to the blessed Evangelical Communion of Germany: whereby you
have most vilely offended others, and given them occasion to do the like: Yea,
some of you have entered into the service of the said Walstein, most forgetful,
and disrespecting of your said Oath and duty, whereof your said natural and
lawful Princes never did dismiss, nor acquit you. Now, for as much as we do
find our selves bound and obliged by many reasons, both to commiserate, and to
help the said Princes, that are so near in blood unto us, against so
detestable and damnable unjust oppressions and violences, by the undoubted
assistance of Almighty God, and to extend our Christian zeal so far unto
them, that they may forthwith recover fully what belongs unto them: And whereas
we, as a member of the Evangelical Church, do esteem it our duty to have a
watchful eye for the preservation of the true saving Religion, besides many
other causes which are known to the world to move us to arm: and are now
already (seeing we could obtain no peace, nay no hope of any amiable
accommodation from our enemies, upon our manifold endeauours) here arrived in
Meckelburg, by the happy getting of the passage of Rubnitz, with a strong Army
both of Horse and Foot: Therefore we do by virtue of these our Royal
Letters, and with all gracious earnestness exhort you, and every one of you,
according to the duty of true, Christian, honest, worthy, and valorous
Subjects, presently, and upon sight hereof, to return unto the party of your
Princes, the said Dukes of Meckelburg, as your Magistrates and Masters
appointed and set over you by God and Nature, and being well armed (according
to your ability and duty) to appear and come in our Camp, or to other our
Troops, where they are most commodious for you, either within, or near this
Dukedom, and withal, and likewise to persecute, imprison, bring to us,
assault, kill, or expel all such as have, or pretend any command, title, or
office under Walstein, or assist him and his in any manner, and under what
color soever: and to deal with them as with enemies and robbers of God, of
his Church, and of your Country; omitting nothing what you owe by your duty.
And whosoever of you shall not obey herein, but esteem better, or prefer his
life, goods and pleasures before his duty, honor, and salvation, those we
intend to persecute and to punish without miss, with fire and sword, and to
use them worse then the said enemies, as faithless, periurous, and most
disloyal Traitors, who are desertors of their Princes, and the greatest
enemies to God, his Word, and Church: But to the obedient, we do hereby
royally and graciously offer our Royal protection, favor, and grace. Given in
our Royal Camp, in the chief quarter at Rubnitz, the 28. of September, Anno.
Dom. 1630.

Extract of a Letter from Hamburg, the 22. of October, Stilo veteri. 1630.
The King of Sweden has already taken diverse good places in Meckelburg, and
lies now near Rostock, but the Imperialists are very strong within. The
Forces of the said King, which he left at the siege of Colberg, in Pomerania,
show great courage, and are in hope to get the said Town shortly. There
marched lately 8. strong Companies of Crabats, intending to relieve that place
as they were commanded, but coming near, before they were awares of it, they
were so welcomed by the Swedish, that the most part was slain, and the rest
forced to save themselves by flight.

The Imperial Forces do much increase about the Country of Magdenburg,
whereby the Administrators his Troops are no more at such liberty to run the
Country as they were before.

And cancerning the Duke Francis Charles of Low-Saxony (that was last winter
here in London) having taken three or four Towns of no great strength, and
intending to take the Castle at Ratzenburg from the Imperialists that lay in
it, he was betrayed by his own elder Brother Augustus, that was in the same
Town, who letting in secretly at night some Imperial Forces, caused thereby
all his Brothers men to be taken and unarmed, and his brother the said Duke
Francis Charles endeavoring to save himself by flight, went in a Boat upon
the Elb: But the Imperialists having planted some Ordnance to hinder the going
away of any Boat, gave fire, and shot off the head of the Dukes Pilote,
whereby the Duke was staid, and (as we are informed) taken prisoner, and so
carried up in the Country toward the Emperor. The Imperiallists do also
daily increase about Stoade, and in the Bishopric Bremen, where they have
gathered all the Boats, to hinder any body to pass, and themselves have past
over the River of Elb about 4000. men, intending (as we are informed) to
fortify and keep all the passages that are betwixt Lubeck and Hamburg,
whereby there is threatened a great dearth in those parts.

From Rome the 14. of September.
We learn from Spain, that the same King has caused the President of Mantua
to understand, that he must depart thence, for there was no need of his
presence any longer. The King also has sent the West India President into
Siuil, to see the vnlading of the Silver Fleet: Some suppose it is by reason of
some suspicion concerning the distribution: other think, because the King
intends to reserve the whole for himself, by reason of his extreme and urgent
present necessity.

From Venice the 17. of September.
It is confirmed from Constantinople that the Turk has obtained victory
against the Persians, and slain of them about 30000. and taken prisoners 3000.
of the same amongst them their Lieutenant General. The Persian King can
neither be found alive nor dead. Hereupon the Persians, to draw the Turk to
yield to a peace, do proffer him the City Babylonia, and abundance of Silk.
As yet is nothing concluded.

From Millan the 17. of September.
It is verified from Constantinople that the Jesuits have a long time
importuned the Grand Lord, to grant a slaughter, and utter extirpation of all
the Greek Christians. The same was consented by him the said Great Turk, but
there was no prefixed time prescribed for the execution of the same. Wherefore
these bloodthirsty wretches were at a certain time and place assembled
together, to resolve when, and how this wicked enterprise should be put in
practice. When they were sat in Counsel in this nature; such terrible
Thunderclaps, and dreadful Lightnings fell from Heaven, that their
mischievous intention was thereby frustrated. The Thunder and Lightning did
cast them down one after another to the very ground, did fire and burn the
very Cushions whereon they sat, and put them all into no small perplexity,
fear, and astonishment. The Great Turk (who formerly had not willingly
condescended to the cruel and bloody desseine) did openly profess, that he
did palpably perceive that such inhumane cruelty plotted against such innocent
harmless people, was altogether odious, abominable, and displeasing to the
Almighty. Whereupon he consulted what ought to be done to the first brochers
and inuentors of such villainy; and at last concluded and resolved upon, That
such Miscreants should be punished with Lex talionis, that is, be served with
the same sauce. It was so effected: for all those persons, that had a hand in
this business, as many as could be found out afterward (being dispersed) were
beheaded and put to death.

From the Bishopric of Minden the 29. of September.
That which formerly you have heard concerning the Maiden, and desire to be
resolved therein: it is most certain and true. The fourth day she lost her
speech again. She then received the holy Sacrament, and wept most bitterly:
afterward she went from one room and place to another, and did show with
signs upon her fingers, that she should dye within 14. days. Which is
verified from Wulffenbuttel to have fallen out according to her demonstration.
She has spoken most strange things, inditing and exhorting the people
earnestly to serious repentance, to prayer, Christian duties, generally to the
service and fear of God, for she said that great misery should befall those
parts: Insomuch, that between Augusto and Galle, in the Country of Brunswick,
upon the Long Wiese, near unto Pethmar, should be seen a terrible fight held,
that men should go up to the very knees in blood. After this should come a
great mortality, and at last a peaceable and prosperous year. Which things,
with many more she spoke so elegantly, pathetically, and with such grace, that
each one thought she was from her very Childhood brought up unto Eloquence; she
was of about the age, between 17. and 18. years.

From Regensburgh the 26. of September.
His Majesty of Hungaria and Bohemia, within few days arrived here with
certain Lords and other Attendants: all his servants werre arrived in most
sumptuous manner, as also his Coachman. It is reported, he does intend to go
to Memminger, and other Cities to view them, and then return back again
hither.

It is now certain that the Prince Elector of Saxony (but without the consent
and approbation of his Imperial Majesty) does set himself in open Arms, for
the defense of his Country. All things here do foretell and presage nothing
but fearful times of War and Combustion.

From Regensburgh the 6. of October.
Last Saturday did the Duke Augustus Paltzgraue by the Rhyne arrive here, and
has had audience with the Emperor. We shall now shortly learn who shall be
General for the ensuing War, as yet they are not agreed. It seems there be
diverse Competitors that stand for it.

Another from Regenburgh, concerning the resolution of the Prince Elector of
Saxony.
Whereas his Imperial Majesty, and the Princes of the Diet have sent a speedy
Messenger again to the Duke of Saxony, summoning him to appear himself in
person, and so to yield his verdict and opinion for the resolving what course
to take against the King of Sweden and other Enemies of the Empire, for the
establishing and furtherance of the public good:

This Messenger is returned back with Letters to his Imperial Majesty from
the said Elector, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh, wherein they do heavily
complain, that Germany within these 12. years is so spoiled and destroyed,
the Constitutions of the Empire weakened, the Peers impouerished and abused,
the Liberties suppressed, that just occasion and cause was offered to foreign
Princes and Potentates to have an insight in the affairs of the Empire.
Wherefore they for their parts do desire the abolishing of those Edicts and
Proclamations concerning matters of Religion: Otherwise if his Imperial
Majesty, and the Princes and Peers of the Diet and Union did not cease
treating concerning matters of Religion, that they must not suppose that he and
his adherents, and those that are joined with him in Religion, will take in
hand to defend and ensure them against all foreign power and invasion.

From Old-Stattyn the 4. of October.
Notwithstanding, the Peers and Inhabitants have very importunately desired
his Majesty of Sweden to besiege, and labor to incorporate both the passages
of Gartz, and Griffenhagen: Their request was thus earnest in this behalf, to
the end that the Country might be freed from the excessive tyranny, burning,
and pillaging* etc. The reason why his Majesty has not yielded to their desire
as yet is, because he has another weighty Enterprise in hand, to the which end
he has arrested and stayed many Ships, and laden the same with Men, Munition,
Victuals, Ordnance, and all necessaries. With this Fleet and Army he sailed
very lately hence (the wind being favorable) he passed by Wolgast, and went to
Straelzondt, where he will land his Army, and march to Mechlenburgh.

Before the departure of his Majesty, came Letters to him from the 6. Electors,
which Letters did answer unto what his Majesty formerly had written unto them:
whereupon they required his Majesty to depart the Confines of the Empire,
promising that they would use all means possible to obtain a Peace: But his
Majesty not regarding, but altogether slighting their propositions, did
notwithstanding proceed, to prosecute his design and enterprise, unto which
the Lord give a blessed success.

The Imperialists being advertised of the departure of his Majesty of Sweden,
fell upon this City with all their possible force and might, and upon the
Sconces and other Forts, shouting, and crying, and making a fearful noise:
but they were so received at their coming, that they were commpelled to retire
with the loss of many men.

This last week past, the Imperialists came with some Forces before Posewaldt,
which the King of Swedens Forces had taken and besconced but 4. days before;
they strongly assaulted this place, and at last set the same on fire, insomuch
that those within were not able to abide the heat, and therefore not
sufficiently defend themselves, insomuch that the Imperialists mastered the
same, and have miserably and cruely slain Soldiers, Citizens, men, women, and
children: they found in the same 14. Pieces of Ordnance, and other good
commodities.

By reason that the pestilence reigns hotly in Gartz among the Emperors
Forces, they fly apace out of the Imperial Army, unto the Bishop of Hall. The
General Field-marshall, Count Torqualto, the General Cordacke, and the Lord
Morando are all of them lately deceased.

The Boores in Bohemia continue still in their rebellion, and will not agree to
any composition, nor be brought unto any reformation. Those that went to oppose
and resist them, are returned back, by reason they found them so strong and
well ordered, armed, and united together.

Contents of a Letter written from the chief Quarter of the Administrator, at
Ouerfurt.
Nicholas Beck chief Lieutenant of the Administrator of Hall, has
incorporated the whole Earldome of Ouerfurt again, and brought the same into
state as formerly, and beset the same with very able Horse, and Footmen. The
Administrator himself is daily expected. Our Horsemen have earnestly laid in
wait for Captain Hans van Casselen, who went to leuy some Forces against us;
he had great quantity of moneys with him, also 10. Patents to leauy some other
Companies, for the Commander, General Becker. They met with him at Artem, at
the Dam, and there assaulted him; and since he would accept of no Quarter, they
shot him, and killed him, with two other Commanders.

They have also taken the Bagage and goods of the General Olueltz, which
formerly were reserved in the Fort Mansvelt. Also, the Ritmaster E^nhuysen was
taken lately (accompanied with certain brave Horsemen) by the Regiment of
Holok, in which exploit they obtained very great booty, and have kept him and
his Company prisoners.

From Straesburgh the 4. of October.
In the Dukedom of Wurtenburgh are already taken above 8. Monasteries and
Cloisters, the rest will also shortly be dispatched. There is no great strength
used, neither do they meet with any great resistance. All the moueables are
taken away, and the buildings left empty; Men do resort hither and thither
into diverse Bishoprics.

From Haluerstadt the 29. of September.
The Bishop of Halls Soldiers, as also those of the City Maeghdenburgh commit
great insolences, fly out day and night, fetch all things unto them by hook
and crook; Hereupon the Regiment of General Hulikens, with some other Forces,
has commanded to have an eye to them. Last Wednesday they encountered with them
near unto Germers-leuco: on Hulikens side was slain one Captain, one
Lieutenant, one Ritmaster, and diverse other Officers, amongst the rest one
Ripensteyn, with many men more.

Those of Maghdenburgh had some men in Ambush, so that they did greatly
endamage the Imperialists. The Maeghdenburgers came not off without sustaining
great loss. Among those that were slain on this Bishops side, were found 15.
Citizens of Egelen. The Frontiers thereabouts betake themselves to the Bishops
Forces, as also most of the Inhabitants thereabouts, do fly with all their
goods and Moueables into Maeghdenburgh.

The Forces about Wulffenbuttel do begin to stay the Corne-waggons, which
travel toward Brunswick. Now also comes tidings, that those of Maeghdenburgh
have defeated and slain the Crabates which were come into Wandsleuen.

From Brunswicke the 4. of October.
The Imperialists in Wulffenbuttel do begin to come upon this City with great
threatenings. They convey away all the Corn which is in this City. The
Commander himself lately came hither, and requires a plain Catagoricall
answer, whether or no this City is resolved to adventure body and goods for
the Emperor? he demands of them an act of assurance of their handwriting,
for confirmation of the same. Furthermore, that this Magistracy shall not
suffer any Soldiers to be leauied for the Administrator and Bishop of Hall.
They therefore do imprison all those Commanders that come hither for that
purpose. For the first point, it is resolved to make known the Proposition of
the Emperors demand unto all Officers and Companies, and all manner of
Trades. For the latter we did excuse our selves, insomuch as we could not as
yet hear of any Forces were to be levied.

From Hamb. the 5. of October.
Our Legate, who was dispatched to the Emperor is not as yet returned, so that
we cannot tell whether his Imperial Majesty will undertake the affairs of
this City, yea, or no. In the mean time his Majesty of Denmark is Master of
the River Elue, he suffers all manner of Ships and Barks to pass to and fro,
but those that ascend the River must pay toll, as much as the Hollandish Conuoy
does amount unto. His Majesty of Denmark has marked the Beacons with his own
mark, and set them upon the drought. He causes great pains to be taken about
the Blockhouse which is raised in the Haven S. Margarita, between the Steur
and Gheluckstadt, where he will command the River Elue. As soon as this work
is ended, his Majesty's great Ships will again go down to Coppenhagen. The
Magistracy of this City finding the charges excessive and intolerable, have
cashierd most of their Ships and Men; neither will the Commonalty yield any
more Contribution. It seems that our (formerly stout) Mariners have now lost
their courage; for a while since, 5. of our Ships fled from two of the Kings
Ships, not daring to resist them, or make shot against them. This day came
tidings that his Majesty is gone toward Rensburgh, to what end we do not yet
know. We understand that a Diet is to be kept there, to consult concerning the
affairs between his Majesty and this City. It should seem that the Duke of
Holsteyn is very diligent to further this place.

From Hamburgh the 10. of October.
Since his Majesty of Sweden his departure from Stattyn, we have not heard much
news: Only we do instantly receive tidings, that his Majesty of Swedens
Forces which were levied hereabouts, have taken Lauwenbergh, Winsen, and
Boitsenbergh, and that all the Imperialists have yielded themselves into the
service of the King of Sweden. It is without question that Rostick and Wismar
will be besieged, for his Majesty has taken with him all the Shallops that
were at Straelsondt.

The Alliance between Sweden and Pomerania is now effected: Stattyn is to
contribute very shortly 50000. Ryxdollers, and the wole Country 50000. more.
They have consented to yield the King for water, poundage 3. and a helfe per
Centum.

From Leypsich the 5. of October.
We understand from Berlyn, that certain Physicians are to go to the
Emperors Army near unto Gartz, to cure the Field-marshall Torqualto, who lies
deadly sick.

We are certified that his Majesty of Sweden is gone to Mechelenburgh with
those Forces, which from Stattyn he conducted with them, to besiege the
passages to Triptau, in that Dukedom. Newly comes tidings that his Majesty
has taken Colburgh.

From the Emperors Army is written, that certain 100. Crabates roamd before
the Swedish Army, 1000. of the Swedish Forces drew forth upon them, the
Crabates made show as if they would fly, whereupon the Swedish did prosecute
them the more earnestly: but they were so surprised by the Crabates, and other
of the Imperial Forces which lay in Ambush, that they were constrained to
retire with great loss, of 500. Horse, and two Ritmasters, and the chief
Lieutenant imprisonned.

From Bergen ap Zoom the 5. of October.
By reason the Dunkerkes are very strong at Sea, being 27. of them in number,
those of Sealand have sent diverse men of War against them.

The Dunkerkes daily do much hurt at Sea, they have lately taken a Ship
coming from Saint Malo, richly laden, and well mounted with 10. Pieces of
Ordnance, and 4. or 5. more they took in the Maza going from England. One
Dunkerke among the rest did a notable exploit, he met with one sailing to
Nantes with great store of Aqua vitae. This Dunkerker proffered to conuoy him
thither, being (as he counterfeited) a States Man of War, he put forth a Flag
of Rotterdam: having sailed with him one whole day, he invited the Shipper
aboard the next day, and feasted him. This Master of the Ship presented unto
the Dunkerke a Rundlet of Aqua vitae, and whilst they were making merry
together, the Dunkerke took him prisoner, and caused him to write to the Pilot
for more Aqua vitae with the Boat which was full of men. So they took occasion
to board the Ship, and brought the same into Dunkerke.

We understand that the Princess of Orange has in some measure recovered her
health at Spa: she is now at the Bath at Aken; she is not long to remain
there, but is very shortly expected in the Hage.

The Dunkerkes thought to have made a snatch at the Muscouian Ships, but fell
short: between 40. and 50. of the same were lately safely brought into
Enchuysen.

This week were two prisoners apprehended at Rotterdam, which were false
Coiners, a man and a woman. The Coin which they counterfeited was Scottish
nine pences. English six pences, and half Spanish Reals, of 24 Stiuers.

The Pastor John Otten of the upper Church at Embrike has lately been
examined: he has confessed his treason plotted against Schenck-fconce, and
what he had written to Grave Hendricke vanden Bergh to that purpose. At first
he would not confess or produce any of his Confederates: but afterward being
rackt, he named diverse, and demonstrated how this exploit should have been put
in execution.

A certain Ship belonging to the West India Company, met with a Spanish
Carauell, and brought the same into Holland, the same was laden with these
Commodities. 18000. Buck-hides. 5. Elephants teeth, 2. Pound and one hallfe
Ambigrise. 1. Great silver platter. 207. Spanish Reals of 8. 2600. Pounds
Talck. 750. Ox hides. 94. Spanish leather hides dressed. 1. Bag of unknown
goods. 2. Barrels of Sugar. 136. Testoens.


There is a Conspiracy discoued at Bommell, one of the Traitors is taken
prisoner, who has confessed that he had sounded the Moat, and given
intelligence thereof unto the Enemy.

Letters of Liccorne make mention that those of Argiers, and Tunis will not
enter fartheer into Alliance with the States, nor make peace with them. Their
Forts made shot at Captain Cleuter, who rode upon those Coasts, who answered
them again, which being heard in Argiers, they presently ran out into the
Sea after Captain Cleuter at last, 30. Ships of them in number, insomuch that
he had much ado to escape.

FINIS.

