A ROMAN CENTVRION BECOMING A GOOD Soldier of Jesus Christ.

IN FOUR SERMONS, Preached in the Cathedral Church, and in Saint Thomas
Church at Sarum.

By BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS, B.D. and Rector of Ludgershall, in the County of
Wiltes.

EPHESIANS. 6. VERSE 13. Take unto you the whole armor of God, etc.

14. Stand therefore having your Loins girt about with truth, and having on
the breast plate of righteousness etc.

LONDON. Printed by M. D. and are to be sosd by Henry Hammond, Booke-seller in
Salsbury, 1635.

TO THE MOST HONORED, Generous, and Religious, Mr JOHN POPHAM Esquire, a true
servant to God, his King and his COUNTRY.
NOBLE SIR,
Virtue which was to others an Autumn, late ripe fruit, budded to the Caesar's
in their spring time, Caesaribus virtus contigit ^me diem, says Ovid.

Dame virtue did their portion frankly pay
unto the Cesars, long before their day.
And Honor the shadow following this great body of virtue, which to most is a
winter-f^u^t scarce over ripening, is to you a Primrose, springing up in the
Prime of the days, Gloria Pophamo contigit ante diem.

Honor which toward others keeps such state
On Popham early did begin to wait.
You are as honorable in the hearts, affections and tongues of all that know
you in these parts, as if all the titles and complements of Honor which in a
state are conferred upon eminent Persons, had been already heaped upon you.
And although (as the Prince of Philosophers long since pronounced) honor in
honorante magis quam in honorato, honor be rather in him that honors then
in him that is honored, yet this Honor in you will be as indeleble a
Character, as that which accrueth by blood, is accounted by the Men of Law. For
as amongst the old Romans there was no way to the Temple of Honor but through
the Temple of Virtue, so you have gone the high way to this Honor, by those
virtues that are of a Magneticall virtue to draw to them the hearts and
respects of men; Si vis been audire, discito been loqui, and cum been loqui
didiceris, recte etiam facere conator, Hoc enim modo bonam famam acquires.
Epict^tus.
your Humanity, Humility, and Hospitality If thou will have a good name, learn
to speak fairly and when thou have learned that, endeavor to do well also;
For hy this means thou shall get a good report, said Epictetus, or as Plutarch
in his Apophthegmes expresses it more roundly, the way to a good fame is, Si
dices optima, facies pulcherrima, by sweet language and fair deeds. Your
Humanity is such, that even for that you are as Titus the Roman Emperor was
called in his time deliciae humani generis, the darling of mankind, and that
which Plutarke said of Alcibiades, Plut. in Alcibiade
is appliable to you, he was so sweet and pleasant in his daily conversing
that even to them which did either fear c^renvy him, Si quis cogitat
constituere magnam fabricam celsitudinis, is prins de fundamento humilitatis
cogitet.
his presence and aspect was pleasant and joyful And for Humility, you have
ever bin so lowly in your own eyes, that for it you have bin highly honored
in the eyes of other men. For, if any man think to erect the great fabric of
dignity, let him first think upon the foundation of humility. Dignity
delights all men but humility is the step to it. Omnes delectat celsitudo,
sed humilitas gra-dus est. Quid tendis ordem ultra te? Cadere vis non ascendere
A gradu incipe and ascendisti: Aug. de verb. Dom.
Why do thou lift thy foot beyond thy self? that is the way to fall down,
not to clime up, begin at the step, and thou have already climed up. And for
Hospitality you have ever bin so mind full to intertain neighbors and
strangers, that few great Houses in our parts can contend or compare for free,
frequent and magnificent intertainement with your Litle-coate The name of his
Mansion house.
that though you have not had the happiness with Abraham and Lot to entertain
Angels in the shape of men, Heb. 13.2.
yet it has bin your happiness and goodness too, frequently to entertain
the men that are the Angels of the Churches, and of late our reverend Diocesan,
the (...), the principal Angel of the Churches within his Diocese. And your
Hospitality has bin so seasoned with Affability, that as bis dat, qui cito
dat, he gives doubly that gives speedily, so bis dat, qui tam alacriter dat,
he entertaineth doubly, that entertaineth so cheerfully, it is the highest
commendation of entertainment in the Poet, that super omnia vultus accessere
boni, above all there were added kind countenances, and the counsel of the
wise man, In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, Ecclus. 35 9.


Howbeit it is not the Contemplation of these fair graces in you ( quid enim
sunt bona nostra, nisi dona dei? what are our good deeds, but Gods good graces
in us?) that only animateth me to present and Dedicate this piece of my
labors to you. (For as Varus said to Augustus Caesar, Quiapud te non audent
dicere, ignorant humanitatem tuam, they that dare not speak in thy presence,
are ignorant of thine humanity) nor yet the relation of that long acquaintance
that I have had with your self and your best friends, but also and much more
the just conformity and correspondence of the Person entreated of in these
Sermons with your self and your family, that so I may say with the Kingly
Preacher, there is no new thing done under the Sun Eccl. 1.9.
and that which has bin is now Eccl. 3.15
and again that with the men of Berea, you are every way as (...) as noble in
receiving Gods word with all diligence of mind and searching the Scriptures
Act. 17.11.
and other Heroical and Christian virtues as even Cornelius was. For, He for
his civil state, was a Centurion or Captain of an hundred at Cesarea, far
out of his own Country of Italy, you have the honor in your own Country to
be more then a Centurion a Deputy Lieutenant in this Country for Military
Discipline and a Colonel of diverse bands. He was a servant to the Roman Caesar
Tiberius (who by j^st computation then reigned, a wise and politic Prince, but
withal crafty, cruel, perfidious, and Lascivious, you are Domestical servant
to our Sovereign, who is alterius orhis Caesar, the Caesar of this other
Britain world (as Pope V^ban called Anselme our Archbishop alterius or bis
Papam) and who equalleth the best that were of that rank, or his political
and moral virtues of wisdom temperance fortitude, clemency and moderate
government, but far exceeds them in Religion Piety knowledge and service of
the true God, and assured hope of a Crown that is (...), 1 Pet. 1.4.
undefiled, like the stone Amiantus and unfading like the flower Amarantus
Again for Religion, He was a devout man, and one that feared God, you are
therein a true Israelite without guile, a constant Professor of the Orthodoxe
faith and Religion professed in this Church, because it is in your conscience
Gods truth, and the right way of serving him, and not for any temporising
respects of swimming with the stream, nor for any fear or favor of men. He
feared God with all his family, It has ever bin your Fathers and your own
resolution and course with that brave leader of Israel Joshua to serve God with
your whole household Ios. 24.15.
as thinking with the Emperor Constantius of his servants, that they could not
keep their faith inviolate toward him, that were perfidious to Almighty God
Eusebius de vita Constan. li. 1. ca. 11.
and to see that they be present at the set times of prayer, yea to compel
them to come on the solemn days and times into Gods house that it may be
full; He, if he had any wife in that household to oversee their ways, could not
be happier in her, then you are in your loving and religious Consort, who so
sympathizeth with you, that whither you go, she will go, where you lodge she
will lodge, your people are her people, and (which is best of all) your God is
her God, and that nothing but death can part you and her, as Ruth says to
Naomi Ruth 1.16
. He gave much alms to the people round about him, you not only like Abraham
and Lot entertain yea invite and entreat into your house your neighbors,
friends and strangers, but also daily at your gates break your bread, and open
your alms basket to the poor of the Parishes round adjoining, and refresh
their hungry bowelles. The Lord grant unto you that you may find mercy of the
Lord in that day. He with his pity and charity toward men joined piety
toward God praying to God continually, and you do not only serve God in
righteousness and mercifulness toward men, but also in holiness toward him
and invocation of his name, you have a Church in your house, and an Oratory to
serve God in, and you have your stata tempora set times, which upon none
occasion you omit or intermitte. And I have this confidence in you, that you
have also your secret times of entering into your Closet, and praying to your
Father in secret Mat. 6.
of communing with your own heart upon your bed and in private retiredness.
Psalm. 4.
Now then macte virtute good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on still
like a good plant in the house of the Lord, flourish still in the Courts of our
God, bring forth still these fruits (amongst your other fruits of Christianity,
both in your mature and old age Psalm. 92.14
be steadfast and unmooveable always abounding in these works of the Lord, 1
Cor. 15.
as you believe against all the enemies of grace, that the seed of grace sown
in the good ground brings forth fruit with patience and perseverance, Luke
8.15.
(the original word (...) imports both) and that the Lord who is faithful,
will stablish his children in every good word and work 2 These. 3.3. and 2 17.
and confirm them unto the end 1 Cor. 1.8


And that God who has begun his good work in you, will finish it until the day
of Christ, and as he does make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you
in every good work, so your reward shall be great in Heaven with him, he will
abundantly recompense his own gifts and good works in you, and crown them
with that crown of righteousness, which is laid up for all them that love the
appearing of Jesus Christ, in which blessed company that you may ever be found
shall be the servent prayers of

Your devoted Servant in Christ Iesuse BARTHOL. PARSONS.
From my Rectory at Ludgershall in the County of Wilts the 30. March 1634.
A Roman Centurion becoming a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST.
SECTION. I.
Acts cap. 10. verse. 1, 2. 1 There was a certain man in Cesares, called
Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band, called the Italian Band;

2 A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much
alms to the people, and prayed to God always.


IN the eight Chapter of this Book, there appears unto us certain glimmering
sparkles or flashes as it were of Gods purpose to call the Gentiles out of
darkness to his marveilous light; both in the turning of the Samaritanes,
(with whom before this time the Jews might not meddle: for they had no
dealings with the Samaritanes, John 4.9. and into whose ways the Apostles at
their first sending out might not go, into any City of the Samaritanes enter
ye not, Math. 10.5.) from the power of Satan to God, and also in giving the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ unto
the Eunuch, that came to Jerusalem to worship. But in this the resplendent
beams of Gods good pleasure in giving unto the Gentiles repentance unto life,
shine clearly unto us in an heavenly vision both instructing and authorizing
Peter, that he being a Jew, might enter in to Cornelius and the other Gentiles
with him, and preach Christ Jesus unto them. This whole Chapter then containing
a narration of the full illuminating of Cornelius with the knowledge of the
Messiah already come. In these two verses proposed is premised a description
of the person of Cornelius, either in his civil state, Verse. 1. There was a
certain man in Cesarea called Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band called the
Italian Band; or his religious both affections and actions, Verse. 2. A devout
man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the
people, and prayed to God always. In the former he is set out 1. By the place of
his dwelling at Cesarea. 2. By his profession and calling, He was a Centurion
of a Band, which Band is also particularly described, by the Country whence it
came the Italian Band. In the latter his religious both affections and actions
are declared generally or particularly: generally, He was a devout man, which
is also amplified by an equivalent phrase for fuller expression, and one that
feared God: and also secondly by an adjoined association, with all his
household. Particularly, by the fruits of his Religion; either in his charity
toward his brethren, or his piety toward God: his charity in giving alms,
amplified 1. by the measure, much alms; 2. by the persons, to the people. His
piety toward God in his prayers and supplications, He prayed; which are also
set out by the circumstance of the person to whom, He prayed to God. 2. of the
time, He did it always.

To prosecute these particulars in their order, I begin first with the first
circumstance of his civil state, whereby he is set out unto us, the place of
his dwelling at Cesarea.

There were two famous Cities of this name amongst the Jews: one the elder
which was called Turris Stratonis, but being amplified by Herod the Great, and
adorned with many works worthy the sight, was called by him Cesarea to win
the favor of Augustus Caesar, as reports Josephus lib. 1. de bello Iud: cap.
16 and lib. 15. Antiq. cap. 13. As also from the Emperors daughter Iulia, this
Herod built Iulias, on the farther side of Jordan, Hiero. in Matthew. 16. And it
was situate on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, between Dora and Ioppa,
The other being later, was situate in Iturea in Trachonitis, a Country of
Galile or Phoenicia, at that part of Mount Libanus where the two Rivers Ior and
Dan meet together and make the River Jordan, Hier. vbi supra. It was anciently
called Paneas, of a River of that name which ran by it, and reckoned in the
number of the famous Cities of Decapolis; but being afterward increased and
beautified by Philip son of Herod the Great, and Tetrarch of Galilee Luke 3.
it was called by him Cesarea in honor of Tiberius Caesar, and for distinction
sake Cesarea Philippi. Afterward Agrippa to flatter Nero called it Neronias:
Joseph lib. 20. antiq. cap. 8. Of these the former is here meant.

Now this rock is not so stony but if we strike it the waters will gush out,
from the verbal denomination of this place we may have a real observation, to
note the vain pride, and proud vanity of the sons of men, the Princes of
this world and their followers and flatterers, in calling houses and Cities
after their own names. And I speak not this according to man, In terminis
terminan tibus.
it is the Holy Ghosts censure of them in express terms, They call their
lands after their own names, Psalm. 40.11. And this pride is none of the new
upstart fashions of yesterday, it is as old as the ancientest City that was
built: Cain the first builder of a City (for Seth and Enoch built none, but
lived in Tents, to show that they had none abiding City here) called the name
of it after the name of his son Enoch, Genesis 4.17. That one City
Constantinople, sometimes Heathen, afterward Christian, now Turkish, has
changed its names as often as Laban did Jacobs wages, to flatter the great ones
of the earth; at first it was called Lygo, then Byzantium, Plin. lib. 4. cap.
11. afterward, new Rome: In the time of Severus the Emperor and his son
Antonius, Antonia; afterward of Constantine the Great, Constantinopolis, till
it came to the Turks possession, who took it Ann. Dom. 1453. Philip of
Macedone as Diodorus Siculus relates of him, increasing the City Crenidae with
store of Inhabitants, (...).
changed the name of it into Philippi, so calling it of himself. And Alexander
the Great his son in diverse places where he obtained victories, erected
Cities calling them by his name Alexandria or Alexandropolis, the famousest of
all which was Alexandria in Egypt. But I cannot waste time in running into
particular instances in this kind, and they would make me keep silence for
better matter.

If any one ask, to what end? The Holy Ghost that censures their fact, Cui
bono?
shows their end in it. It was that they might be as an Absoloms pillar to
keep their names in remembrance, 2 Samuel 18.18. Their inward thought is, that
their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations, they call their lands after their own names Psalm. 49.11. And as
the Holy Ghosts imputation lays this upon them, so their own profession
expresses such an intention, Let us (say the first builders of the town of
Babel) build us a City and a Tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let
us make us a name, least we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole
earth, Genesis 11.4. And such a spirit will be found in Nebuchadnezzar a successor
of theirs in Bab^l, one that had made it great; Is not this great Babylon, that
I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for
the honor of my majesty? Dan. 4.30. Howbeit this their way is but their folly
Psalm. 49 13. In vain do they labor to eternize their names in this world
which passes away and the figure thereof 1 Cor. 7.31. that which now is, in the
days to come, shall be forgotten Eccl. 2.16. they must depart in darkness and
their names be covered with darkness Eccl. 6.4. The builders of Babel are
confounded in language and scattered upon the whole earth before their tower
could be erected Genesis 11. and Babylon it self growing afterward to be the
glory of kingdoms and the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, must be
ouerhrowne as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, it shall never be
inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation Isaiah
13.19.20. Nebuchadnezzar for his pride must be put from his Kingdom and made
know that the Lord is able to abase them that walk in pride Dan. 4.28.37. And
those great houses that are built that men may dwell alone in the earth, have
either this curse upon them that they shall be desolate and without inhabitant
Isa. 5.8.9. or else to be smitten till they be consumed, I will smite the
winter house with the summer house: and houses of Iuory shall perish: and of
the great houses there shall be an end, says the Lord, Amos 3.15.

But on the otherside the generation of Gods children even in these
denominations of places, have not sought their own glory but Gods: they
whether they eat or drink or whatsoever they do, do all to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10.31. have rather desired to build to his name, then to get
themselves a name: When God looked upon Abraham and provided him a Ram, to
Sacrifice in stead of his son, he called the name of that place Iehova yreh,
the Lord will see or provide, Genesis 22.14. Jacob called the place where the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream at his going into Padan-Aram Bethel, the house of
God Genesis 28.19. and where he wrestled with him at his coming back from thence
Penuel, the face of God, Genesis 22.30. And David the first thing that he thought
upon after God had given him rest from his enemies round about, was to build an
house to Gods name 2 Samuel 7. insomuch that he voweth that he would not come
into the tabernacle of his house, nor go up into his bed, that he would not
give sleep to his eyes: or slumber to his eyelids, until he had found out a
place for the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Psalm.
1.32.2.3.4.5. Oh how far have oursacrilegious times degenerated from the
ancient and primitive zeal of those worthies! For now we are so far from
erecting consecrating and conferring any thing to Gods name and worship, that
we can dwell in Seiled houses and let Gods house lie waste Hag. 4. yea siele
our houses with the waste of Gods house, with Tobiah, chamber our selves in the
courts of the house of God, Nehem. 13.7. with Belshazzar feast and riot with
the spoils of the Lords temple Dan. 5.3. and not only with Ananias and
Sapphira pull back that which we or our ancestors have consecrated to God Act.
5. but also devour that which we never dedicated, reap that away from Gods
Gospel, that we never sowed to Gods glory. The time and the tune is changed
and it is not now, Let us give houses to God to possess, but under the
profession of the Gospel, we speak the language of Paganism. Let us take to
our selves the houses of God in possession. Psalm. 83.12. But lament this we
may, amend it we cannot, only this we are sure of, that whosoever these
devourers are, they shall bear their iniquity.

So I pass from the place of his dwelling to the second circumstance in his
civil state, his profession and calling which is a Centurion of a band. The
Roman legion consisting of 6100. footmen, of 730. horsemen was divided into
10. several cohortes or troops, Era^^ Centuriones qui singulas centurius
curebant, qui n^^c centenarij appel^a^ter vegetius lib. 2 c. 8.
and those of an unequal number as we may see in Vegetius lib. 2. cap. 6. etc.
8. The cohortes again were subdivided into Centuries, handreds over which
Captains were set called Centurions, they were Centurions who had the charge
of every band of an hundred, who are now ^alled Centenaries.

Now for his office and profession, some arts and professions are unlawful in
their very constitution and cannot stand with the profession of godliness;
such were those curious arts of Magic and sorcery used by many at Ephesus,
who when they were brought to the faith, brought their books and burned them
in detestation of their arts Act. 19.18.19; such was that craft of Demetrius
and the other Smithes that gate their living by making silver (...) for Diana,
shrines or coins whereon the Temple and Image of Diana was stamped Act. 19.
ver. 24. And such are too many vocations in ours and every Commonwealth, being
avocations from all piety and goodness, provocations to and somentations of
all impiety, riot and profaneness. Others again have a lawful and necessary
use, but are for the most part abused by the corruption, of those that exercise
them. Such was the office of the Publicanes, who being Farmours of the Roman
Tributes exacted more then their due, as we may see both by Zacheus confession*
If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusations Luke. 19.8. and by
John Baptists limitation given them when they came to the Baptism, take no
more then that which is appointed you Luke 3. Such was the calling of soldiers
lawful in it self, but seldom lawfully used: For if it were not lawful, God
would neither have commanded it so often in Scripture, Exodus 17.14. Ios. 1.14.
and 6.3. and 8.1. Sam. 23.4. and 2 Samuel 5.19. Nor the men of God Moses, Joshua
David and the rest have undertaken it, nor John Baptist have prescribed rules
to the convert soldiers how to behave themselves in their office saying unto
them do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages, Luke 3.14. but utterly have forbidden: Militare nonest delictum,
sed propter pradam militare peccatum est Aug. de verbo Dom: difficulter
continentur suo termino, facile autemalieno. Arist. lib. 2 de art text. 9.
Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur Luc. lib. 10.
the calling to war is no fault, but to war for the prey, is a fault.

But if we look to the lawful using of it, like that definition of humidum,
they are hardly contained in their own bounds, but easily in another bounds.
They fight not for the right but to get the booty, and under color of warring,
they make a trade of robbing There is no faith, or piety to be found in
Martial men, says the Poet. The corruption then of his office lay like a Lion
in the way to keep him from Christ. And besides natures backwardnes natural
to all the sons of Adam, he had the earthly Mammon a Remora to hinder him
from serving his heavenly Master, and the vain idols of the Romans (for his
name Cornelius argues him to be a Roman, and S. Augustine and S. Chrysostom
in Matthew. 8. well observe that no Centurions were made of the Jewish people) to
turn him away from the living God.

But (which is our instruction in this particular) the wind of Gods grace
blows where it lusts and none can let it, and the net of his Gospel
catches fishes of all sorts, He brings into his sheepefold Cornelius, and
the men of war that came to John the Baptist out of soldiers and swaggerers:
a Manasses out of Idolaters, a Rahab, a Mary Magdalen out of harlots; the
wisemen that came to Christ Mat. 2. and those that used curious arts at Ephesus
Act. 19.19. out of Conjurers and Sorcerers: a Matthew out of Publicanes: a
Zacheus out of oppressors: the Prodigal son out of riotours: Scribes and
Pharisees out of the generation of vipers, Matthew. 3. a Paul out of persecutors:
a Peter out of renegates and forswearers: many of the Jews and Priests out of
the crucifiers of Christ Act. 2.37. and 6.7. the good thief on the Cross out
of robbers: Jailer out of unmercifull persons, Act. 16. Saints at Corinth, out
of fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extoritioners, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
and in a word, out of stones (men as destitute of spiritual life, as the
stones are of natural) he can raise up children to Abraham, Math. 3.9. to
walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham. Romans 4.12.

Here then is spiritual wisdom both for our consolation and instruction:
Consolation, if the number of our sins terrify us, being more in number then
the hairs of our head; if the greatness of them daunt us, being as big as
the mighty mountains, and a burden to heavy for us to bear; if an accusing
conscience would be ready to cry out with Cain, mine iniquity is greater then
that it may be forgiven, Genesis 4.13. If Satan the accuser of our brethren would
set upon us to accuse us, let us comfort our selves in our God that saves
sinners of all sorts, let us fly unto him from whence comes our salvation,
and our faces shall not be ashamed: Omnino propter mansuetudinom quae est in te
domime Jesus, currimus post te etc. Bern. Sermon. 22 in Ca^^.
let us repent and be converted and all our iniquities shall be blotted out,
Altogether for the weekenesse that is in thee O Lord Jesus (says Bernard) we
run after thee, hearing that thou despisedst not the poor sinner, abhorredst
not the confessing thief, nor the mourning sinful woman, nor the woman of
Canaan when she requested thee, nor the woman taken in adultery, nor the
Publican praying unto thee, nor the Disciple that denied thee, nor yet him that
persecuted thy Disciples, in the odor of these we run after thee.

Now the instruction is both general and particular: General, to all of us
that we despair of no man, though he seem to us to be never so deep in the
snare of Satan, much less censure him to be a reprobate and cast out of the
sight of God, though in our seeming he be in the gall of bitterness and bond
of iniquity, yea a tree without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the
roots: for as the Apostle said of the natural branches broken off, that God
was able to graffe them in again, Romans 11.23. so he is able to seek and save
that which was lost, to make the savagest wolf dwell with the lamb, yea to
turn him into a lamb; and to bring into his family the prodigallest child
that is gone farthest from home. Upon this ground the Apostle would have us
that are of the household of faith to show meekness to all men, because we our
selves sometimes before we tasted of grace, were foolish, disebedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating others, Tit. 3.2.3. Even Judas himself was more the
child of hell by despairing of the mercy of God, then by delivering the son
of God into the hands of sinful men, by his impenitencie, then by his
treachery; by refusing the grace of Christ, then by betraying the person of
Christ. The Apostles indeed had in greater measure the gift of discerning of
spirits, 1 Cor. 12.10. then now men have, and could censure men to be the
children of the Devil, as Paul did Elimas, Act. 13.10. but for our part,
howsoever we may judge the ways and actions of wicked men to be sinful and
damnable, yet we may not pronounce sentence of their persons that they are
reprobates, Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his Master be
stands or falls, Romans 14.4.

The particular instruction is to Martial men, to learn to join piety to
their profession, the using of the sword of the Spirit with the material
sword, to become good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, as well as of their earthly
Masters: and to fight his battles, as well as their earthly Masters quarrels.
We see here that a Martial profession and a godly disposition may meet
together, as Hieroms said of Cornelius, His Soldiers coat and belt, and
company of attendants hurt not this Soldier, Nil nocuit militanti paludamentum
and balteus and apparitorum cetervae, quia sub habi^^ alterius alteri militabas
Epist. ad Salvinam de viduitate servanda.
because under the habit of one he was a Soldier to another. The military men
of our age are glad to hear their calling justified by Cornelius his office,
but care not to have their lives reformed after his example, we may see and
rejoice that a Roman Soldier here was so religious, but we may see and sorrow
that our Christian Soldiers every where are so vicious. He was devout and
feared God, with all his family; they think piety no part of their
profession, yea, that is is want of spirit and courage in them not to be at
defiance with God and all godliness, and not only with Esau to have their
hands against all men, but even with Rabshekah to fight against God and to
rail upon him, (...)
2 King. 18. and to thunder out their oaths and execrable blasphemies. He
opened his hands in the works of mercy to the needy with him, their feet
are as swift to shed blood as ever Herod's Soldiers, who killed the infants
of Bethlehem at his sending Math. 2. He relieved the poor with his plentiful
alms, they pill them with their rapines, and neither abstain from things
hallowed nor profane: He was diligent and daily prayer; their mouths are full
of cursing and bitterness, Christ is not in their hearts nor mouths but to
swear by his cross, passion, heart, blood, wounds, and what not? He fell
down at Peter's feet to give him honor; their irreverent profaneness is
such, that they are as ready to offer as great indignity to Christ's Ministers
and Messengers as Herod and his men of war, as Pontius Pilate and his
Soldiers did to Christ in his person, Math. 27.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. In a word,
he dedicated himself to the works of charity and piety; they like the
Soldiers of the Amalekites give themselves to nothing but to eating, drinking,
dancing, and revelling, 2 Samuel 30.16. He then of this calling, that having so
little light walked so worthily as a child of light, shall one day rise in
judgment: against them of his profession that having so great light shining to
them, do so wickedly as children of darkness.

Now this band over which he was set, is particularly described by the country
whence it came, the name which it bare, the Italian band. For the Romans
sometimes mustered Soldiers out of the Provinces subject unto them, sometimes
out of Italy it self and the territories thereof. But what makes the Italian
hand at Cesarea here? what do the Heathen amongst Gods Inheritance? the
Italian troop amongst the Jewish people? Assuredly Beloved, the people of the
Jews were a precious people unto God above all the people of the earth, Deuteronomy.
7.6. his chosen portion and his peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135.4. unto whom he
would suffer none to do wrong, but reproved even Kings for their sakes:
saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm.
105.14.15. Yea the Lord has chosen Sion and loved to dwell in it saying, This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I have desired it, Psalm. 132.13.14.
He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he
has not dealt so with any Nation, Psalm. 147.19.20. To them pertained the
adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4. In Judah is God known, his name is
great in Israel, in Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in
Sion, Psalm. 76.1.2. But when this faithful City became an harlot, when her
silver was turned into dross. Esa. 1.21 22. when they did evil in the sight
of the Lord, forsook the Covenant of the Lord their God, and followed after
strange Gods and served them, his anger was hot against them, and he delivered
them into the hands of spoylere that spoiled them, and he sold them into the
hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand
before their enemies, Judge. 2.12, 13, 14. when they were disobedient and
rebelled against him, and cast his Law behind their backs, and slew his
Prophets which testified against them to turn them to him, and wrought great
provocations, he delivered them into the hands of their enemies who vexed them
in the time of their trouble; Nehem. 9.26, 27. So that, they that hated them
were Lords over them, Psalm. 106.41. And sometimes he sold them into the hands
of their enemies that were round about them, who vexed them and spoiled them,
sometimes he brought upon them a Nation from far whose language they did not
know, nor understand what they said, Ier. 5.15. As now at this time Shiloh
being come, the Scepter was departed from Judah, Genesis 47.10. and they served
the Romans, Rerum domini:
who at this time were as the Poet speaks Masters of the world, and had by
Pompey the Great overcome Syria and India, and made them subject to their
Empire. And the Romans placed their troops in these parts, partly to keep
under the Jewish nation apt to rebellion and to shake off the yoke (for they
much scorned subjection Ioh. 8.33.) partly to with-stand the hostility of the
Parthians, who were deadly enemies to them, made outroades into their Empire,
and were famous for the killing of Crassus, slaughtering of the Roman legions
and taking of their Eagles the ensigns of the Empire.

Now Beloved, to come home with this to our selves, has God done this in the
green tree what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23.31. has he not spared the
natural branches that sinned? let us that are but the wild olive tree grafted
in amongst them and with them, partakers of the root and fatness of the
olive tree, take heed least he spare not us for our rebellions, Romans 11.21.
Assuredly the Apostle gives us a rule that must hold in all the judgments
that befell them, these things happened to them for ensamples, (...)
and they are written for our admonition 1 Cor. 10.11. Their corrections then
must be our instructions. For are not we as Isay calls them a sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters: that have forsaken the Lord, that have provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger and gene away backward: our whole head is sick and our whole
heart faint: from the sole of the feet, even unto the head there is no
soundness: but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores Isay 1.4.5.6. are not
we a nation not worthy to be beloved, as Zephaniah calls them, a nation not
desired Zeph. 2.1. have not we made our faces harder then a recke and refused
to turn unto God? Ier. 5.3. may not the Lord send an inquisition into our
streets and not find a righteous man, neither amongst poor nor great? Ier. 5.
may not the Lord have a controversy against the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land: by
swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, we
break out and blood touches blood. Hos. 4.1.2. Are not the sins of Sodom
pride, fulness of bread, abundance of idleness, haughtiness, and abomination
before God, Ezekiel. 16.49. in such excess amongst us, as they were amongst them?
that we are more corrupt in our ways so that Sodom if it now stood might be
justified in comparison of us Ezekiel. 16. See we not the falling away of many of
our people to Popery? the luke-warmner and neutrality of others, as tempering
themselves to every time? the licentiousnes and dissolutenes of all orders and
degrees, ouergrowne with pride, ouerflown with surfeiting and drunkenness,
sometimes the shame of beggars, now the glory of Gallans? How many blazing
stars of pride may we meet in every place? How many sons and daughters of
our Sion dressed up in the toys and tyres that Isay complains of Isay 3. in
the strange apparel to which Zephany threateneth a punishment Zeph. 1.8.

What a generation is there risen up in our days more then ever in the days
of our forefathers, of them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength
to mingle strong drink. Isa 5.22. that cannot be content to fill themselves
with wine and strong drink, but must needs draw others to hell with them,
give them drink to make them drunken also Hab. 2.15. of whom we may much
better reason, see we not how much they drink and devour daily? are they not
like the Angel of the bottomless pit Apollions, destroyers Rev. 9.11. then
Cyrus King of Persia did concerning the idol Bell unto Daniel, think thou not
that Bell is a living God? see thou not how much he eats and drinks every
day? History of Bell verse 6. How inordinatly and idly do men amongst us
walk from the highest to the lowest, from the Clergy to the Laity, not doing
the works of that calling wherein God has set them, but either doing that
which belongs not to them or doing naughtily, or nothing? How justly might it
be said to us which Pharaoh unjustly to the Israclites, ye are idle? Aliud
agentes, aut male agentes, aut nihil agentes.
What defrauding and oppressing is there of one another in bargaining, in
buying and selling? what slightness in making of ware? what slights of false
protestations, false oaths, false every thing in putting them off? men
thinking that every thing which may be carried without danger of the Law, may
be carried and done without danger of conscience? What general profaneness
is there in men's hearts, tongues, actions, meetings, feastings without fear,
who have (as Isay says) the Harp and the Viole, the Tabret and pipe, and wine
in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider
the operation of his hands, Isa. 5.12. nay make a scorn of his works, words,
messengers and all; and solace themselves with scurrilous songs, not only
against the prince and state, but even against Gods religion, and them that
bring it, and them that believe it, no order is spared, the just upright man is
laughed to scorn Job 12.4. Cum privilegio quod libet, licet.
Is not fornication and uncleanesse which should not be named amongst
Christians practiced by many as it were with a privilege, who in this point
think that which likes them is Lawful, and deceive themselves with vain
words as though no wrath should come upon them for this? What a custom of that
sin of swearing (that has neither pleasure nor profit in it the usual
loadstones of sin) has that unruly member of most men's tongues gotten, so
that all sense of sinning is taken away from us herein? And how does that
intoxicating weed which God (who makes every thing to good ends) made no doubt
for some use and purpose, groan under the burden of vanity, being made the
incentive of drunkenesse, the tie of good fellowship, the common courtesy of
the kingdom? I should even loose my self, if I should particularly go about
to number up our numberless iniquities. How then should not God visit us, and
be avenged on such a nation as we are Ier. 5.29? this rod has a long time
been shaken against us in sundry places, yet all but gentle corrections, of
parching heat, pinching cold, extreme drouth, excessive rain, dearth,
famine, pestilence, decay of the state of the whole land; yet in all these we
are fallen into his hands whose mercies are great, 2 Samuel 24.14. and not into
the hands of open enemies or false friends whose mercies would be cruel, whose
little finger would be heavier then Gods loins 1 King. 12.10.

But if we still walk contrary to God, what can we look for, but that after
all other his arrows of judgment drawn out of his quiver, he should pull out
this also, to call for a sword upon us, make us fly before our enemies, nay to
make them Lords over us? Though we ^hinke with Eaom^ that we are high and
secure, yet the Lord can pull us down to the ground Obad. 3. Though we think
with Tyrus that we are strong in the sea, that we sit as God in the midst of
the sea, yet the Lord can make us desolat^ as the Cities that are not inhabited
Ezekiel. 26.19. As God said to old Israel doing all abominations, go ye now into
my place which was in Shiloh; where I set my name at first, and see what I did
to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel Ier. 7.12. So may I to those who
walk fully in their ways, go ye to the primitive flourishing Churches of the
East, see what God has done to them for the wickedness of the people, how
there Mahomet has set his foot where Christ onc^ had his throne; nay we may
come nearer home, and see with our eyes and lament in our hearts and voices
that which God has done to some of neighbor Churches in Germany; who held
fast his name, and did not deny his faith, no doubt amongst other ends that he
had to visit them for denying him in their works, for loving the works of
darkness and drunkenness (the weed that most had over-runne their field) in
such a clear light of the Gospel, Tune tua res agiter paries cum proximus
ardet.
when our neighbors house is on fire our own is in danger. Fear and jelously
is on every side Simeon and Levies policies and practices that may catch us in
a sn^re under color of friend ship are not unknown When we look up to God
and his Gospel professed amongst us, there is hope that he will give glory,
not unto us, not unto us, but unto his name, least the heathen say where is now
their God, Psalm. 115.1.2. Least his great name should be blasphemed amongst the
adversaries of his truth. But when we cast our eyes upon the lives of most of
us that profess the Gospel and glory to be called Christians, who are yet
become abominable and reprobate unto every good work; What can we think but
that it is just with God to bring a strong nation upon us, not only to take
way our place and nation, but also our Gospel and candlestick; that he may
give his Gospel to a people that will bring forth better fruit?

Let us then (as Zephany counsels the Jews) gather our selves together by
true repentance, recollect and reunite our thoughts and wits formerly
dispersed, that we may consider of our ways before the decree come forth,
before the day pass as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come
upon us, before the day of the Lords anger come upon us: let us seek the Lord,
which has wrought his judgments, let us seek righteousness and meekness:
it may be we shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger Zeph. 2.1.2.3 and as
Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, let this be acceptable counsel to us, to break
off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor, Dan. 4.27. that so the Lord may not only let us dwell in our good land,
and sit every man in peace under his own vine and fig tree, eating the labors
of his hand, but also enjoy still the abundance of the blessing of the Gospel
of Christ: What though the major part of men amongst us lie in wickedness? yet
let us that now stand before the Lord this day resolve with Joshua that we and
our household will serve the Lord, Joshua 24.15. and depart from iniquity,
which every one that calls upon him must do. We know that many times the
righteous deliver the land according to that of Philo Iudaeus, the wise man is
the fools redemption. Sapiens est flulti redemtio.
God would not have destroyed Sodom if ten righteous men had been in it, Genesis
18. he could do nothing against it till Lot was gone out of it, Genesis 19. he
promised to pardon Jerusalem if there could be found but one man that executed
judgment and sought the truth Ier. 5.1. and he gave S. Paul the lives of all
them that sailed with him in the ship in his dangerous voyage Act. 27.
Scornful men (says Solomon) bring a city into asuare, but wise men turn
away wrath. Pro. 29.8. Howbeit if Gods anger were so kindled against this land
and people, that he should bid his servants as he bad Jeremy, pray not for
this people, neither lift up (...) nor prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me, for I will not hear you, mine anger and my fury shall be
powered out upon man and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon
the fruit of the gro^nd, and it shall burn and shall not be quenched, Ier.
7.6. and 20. that he should protest as he does to him, that, though Moses and
Samuel stood before him, yet his mind could not be toward the people Ier. 15.1.
yet in such a time and case, Noah Daniel, and Job, every righteous man amongst
us, should deliver his own soul by his righteousness Ezekiel. 14.14. God will
spare them that fear him as a man spares his own son that serves him when
the day comes that shall burn as an ^ven, and all the proud, yea and all
that do ^^i^loodly shall be stubble, and the day that shall burn them up,
that it shall leave them neither root nor branch, M^l. 4* 1, to those that
fear the Lord we will hearken, and a book of remembrance shall be written
before him, for them that fear him and thinks upon his name, and they shall be
mine says the Lord, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare
them as a man spares his ow^e son that serves him, Mal. 3.16. If he would
deliver them in six troubles, yea in seven there should no evil, touch them:
in (...) he would redeem them from death: and at w^^re from the power of the
sword: they should be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither ^^^^ld they
be afraid of destruction when it comes. (...) destruction and famine they
should laugh: neither should they be, afraid of the beasts of the earth: for
they should be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the
field should be at peace with them. And they should know that their Tabernacle
shall be in peace, and they visit their Tabernacle and should not sin. They
should know that their seed should be great and their offspring as the grass
of the earth. They should come to their graves in a full age, like as a shocke
of corn comes in, in his season Job 5.19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26. Or else if
he should suffer his own servants to be inwrapped in the common calamities
that he brings upon a sinful nation and to drink of the same Cup in
outward show with them, yet he does but thereby chasten them in this world,
that they may not be condemned in the world to come, and he knows how to
sweeten all these corrections so to them, that they shall work together for
their good, that they shall not separate them from the love of him, but that in
all those things they shall be more then conquerours through him that has
loved them. Romans 8. The same outward kind of death it self with sinful men
in a common scourge (as no doubt many of the 70000. that died in the plague for
David's numbering the people were the dear children of God) cannot separate them
that love God, from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus; but is so
sanctified to them in Christ's death upon the Cross, that it puts an end to
their miseries he^re, and a beginning to their happiness that never shall have
end, that it makes them rest from their labors, and is a passage and portall
into Gods eternal rest.

I do but yet haerere in cortic^ I am but in the rind of this text Cornelius
civil state, and with Abraham sit in the door of this tent: but I see I
should trespass against the time and your patience, to enter farther into it
to make provision for you. I conclude therefore with prayer.

THE SECOND SECTION
Acts 10. verse. 2. A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house,
which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always.


The Cathedral Church in Sarum. S. Thomas Church there.
THough the place where I first took in hand this text be changed, yet the
Auditory being not changed, I will proceed in the handling of it according to
the measure of the grace given unto me. When I first entered upon the first
verse here, it seemed unto me like that place whereof the Children of the
Prophets complained to Elisha, that, the water was naught and the ground
barren, 2 King. 2.19. But as the Prophet by casting salt in the waters there
(the Lord working mightily by so weak a means) healed both the deadly taste
of the waters and barrenness of the ground, verses 21.22. So by the salt of
Gods working (that his power might be perfected in his servants infirmity 2
Cor. 12.) it was so seasoned and sanctified to you that it yielded both the
bread that perishes not, and wholesome and heavenly waters of life for the
satisfying of them that hungered and thirsted after righteousness. I made a
general division of the text into his civil state, verse. 1. and his religious
both affections and actions, verse. 2. of the former I have spoken formerly and
largely; Si tantivittum, quanti margarit^m. Tertull.
and if glass be worth so much, how much is pearl worth: If the particulars
of his civil state by comparing spiritual things with spiritual, did so
plentifully afford us spiritual instructions: much more will the particulars
of his religious both affections and conversations by opening and interpreting
of them be profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness 2 Timothy 3.16. And although it were profitable for
you that I should speak of the same thing in a summary repetition of that
which I then delivered, yet hoping that at that time you not only heard it,
but also hid it within your hearts, I will pass and proceed to his religious
affections and actions verse. 2.

I begin with the first ingenerall, A devout man. (...)
In our common manner of speaking devotion is often restrained to the act and
exercise of prayer, but here it must not be so limited. As a man that is
religious, that does live godly in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy 3.12. Soberly and
Righteously in this present world, (...)
Tit, 2.12. Such an one as old Simeon, whom the Holy Ghost calls just and
devout Luke 2.25. and such as the Proselites that followed Paul and Barnabas
were, (...).
who are called religious Act 13.43. as on the contrary is ungodly irreligious
man, an ungodly and prophaneman, 1 Timothy 1.9. ungodly and sinner, 1 Pet. 4.18.
He is here commended then for that affection and virtue which is called (...),
(...)
religion or worship of God, Iam. 1.27. (...), Godliness 1 Timothy 4.7.8. and
John 5. and most properly and fully, (...). Aug. Epist. 29.
(...), and is defined to be a virtue infused into our souls from God by his
spirit whereby being made religious and godly we both acknowledge and worship
God aright, Pietas proprie del cultus intelligi solet quam Graeci (...) Vocant.
Aug. de civit. lib. 10. c. 1. Est verax dei cultus non falsorum to^ deorum,
quot daemoniorum lib. 4. cap. 23. ibidem. Religio est quae superioris cujusdam
naturae, quam divinam vocant, curam ceremoniamque affert. Quae est pietas nisi
cultus dei? quis vero Deum colit, nisi qui ej voluntary subjectus est, and
sicut oculi Servorum in manibus dominorum suorum, sic oculi cord^^e^us ad
dominum Deum suum? Bern. in Natal. Dom Sermon 4. Virtus vna, specialis, moralium
virtutum nobilissima, quae secundum proprios actus deum tantummodo respicit,
lice^ secundum actus aliarum virtutum ab ipsa imperato ^etiam proximum
complectitur. 22. qu. 81. Prompta and parata voluntas exequendiea quae ad
divinum pertihent cultum. ibidem qu. 82. Religioest status hominum ad
perfectionem Christianam per paupertatis, continentiae and obedientiae vota
tendentium. controv: G^^. 5. lib. 2. cap. 2.
according to his will revealed in his word. For that is true religion which
gives to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, that due worship and
honor which he prescribes and requires in his own sacred Oracles.
Godliness (says Austin) is properly understood to be the service of God which
they call (...), and again Godliness is the true service of God, not of so
many false Gods as Devils.

And in his book of 83. questions, Chapter 31. Religion is that which brings
service and ceremony to an higher nature, which we call divine. Which he
seems to borrow of Tully, lib. 2. de invent.

And Bernard his Scholar and a sweet singer of Israel sings the same tune,
What is Godliness but the service of God? Now who serves God, but he that is
voluntarily subject unto him, and as the eyes of servants are upon the hands of
their Masters so the eyes of his heart are upon the Lord his God.

And Aquinas the Schooleman being like that Scribe in the Gospel, not far
from the Kingdom of God defines religion to be one virtue, a special one,
the noblest of all moral virtues, which according to i^s proper acts only
respects God, although according to the acts of other virtues commanded by
it, it also comprehends our neighbor. And devotion to be, a prompt and ready
will to execute those things that belong to Gods service, much better then
Cardinal Bellarmine, who would feign appropriate the name and nature to the
orders of their special religions, Religion (says he) is a state of men that
aim at Christian perfection by the vows of poverty, continency, and obedience
as though there were none religious but their Regulars, whose religion is in
vain and who worship God in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. Matthew. 15.9. Now this name religious, Religit nos religio vni omnipotenti
deo; de vera relig. cap. 55. Ipsa religio areligando and in fascem vinciendo
nomen accepit. Quia religiosus retractat and tanquam relegitea quae ad divinum
cultum pertinent. a religendo. Deum eligentes vel potius religentes, amise^^mus
enim negligentes, hu^c ergo religentes; vnde and religio dicta prohibetur ad
cum dilectione tendimus, ut perveniendo quiescamus
they deduce and draw either a religando from binding, as Augustine says, Let
Religion bind us to Almighty God only, and Hierom in Am. 9. says, Religion
has taken its name from binding and tying into a bundell, or else a relegendo,
because a religious man handles and recounteth those things which belong to
Gods worship. Or else as Augustine. Lib. 10. de civit. Dei cap. 4. a relegendo.
Choosing God, or rather choosing him anew, for we had lost him negligently,
therefore choosing him anew from whence religion is said to be derived, we go
to him by love, that when we come to him we may rest.

Now it is the manner of the Holy Ghost to insist upon the same thing, to
speak it again in other terms, no doubt both for the farther expression of
it to us, and also impression of it in us, as; Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven and whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1 so here
Cornelius is not only called a devout or religious man, but the same thing is
amplified and uttered in other words importing the same sense, and one that
feared God: For by a fearer of God, the part being figuratively put for the
whole we must understand a religious worshipper of God, as Jonas says of
himself to the mariners, I fear the Lord God of heaven, Jonah 1.9. that is,
(...).
I worship and serve him as Lydia is called a woman which worshipped God, Act.
16.14. so Hierom expounds it, In hoc locotimor pro cultu potest intelligi. i^
1. Io^.
In this place fear may be understood for service.

So that which God says, thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Our Savior citing it interprets it to be worship, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4.10. As also
alleging that of Isaiah 29.13. their fear toward me is taught by the
precepts of men, he says, in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the Commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. putting fear and worship for
all one; in which sense the Psalmist speaks Come ye children hearken to me
I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. that is, the worship and
service of the Lord. Connexa sunt timor atque religio, nec manner potest
alterum abque al^ero. Beru. sermon. de donis sp. s. cap. 4. Timordomini est prima
gratiarum, and religionis exord^^m.
Fear and religion are knitte together neither can the one remain without the
other, and the fear of the Lord is the first of all graces, and the beginning
of Religion.

Now before I come to the instructions hence to be learned, I must clear the
doubts that here are raised. First how Cornelius is here commended for his
fear, since elsewhere fear is condemned proceeding from the spirit of
bondage, and not standing with that perfect love which is in the Sons of God
toward him? Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
father: and again 1 Ioh. 4.18. there is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear, because fear has torment: he that fears is not made
perfect in love. The Master of the sentences Distinct. 34. lib. 3. and the
Schoolmen his Disciples make, some of them 4. some of them 5 sorts of fears a
natural, an humane, a servile, a filial, and an initiall fear: I fear to
loose time in following of them, and will content my self to go the beaten
way of that distinction of fear, into a servile and a sonne-like. The servile
fears Gods punishments, the sonne-like his anger and displeasure, that,
because it has sinned against him and deserved the whippe, this, that it may
not sin against him and loose his love; that dreadeth his tribunal as an
angry judge, Alind est timere quia peccaveris, aliud ne pecces Ambr. lib. 10.
epist. 48.
this reverenceth him as a loving father. It is one thing to fear because thou
have sinned, another thing to fear that thou may not sin.

The servile as it is in the reprobates and Devils breeds and begets in
them desperation of Grace and mercy, expectation of hell and torture: but as it
may be in those that are ordained to salvation, it works to their salvation
by being an external means of their repentance, Vide Magistrum
sententiarumlib. 3. Distinct 34. f. and Beru. sermon. 4. de mode been viuendj. Et
timebat. cum dilectione, and diligebat cum timore. Qui Deum been timet and
amat, qui amat and timer, res illae funt in caelel^i devotione sociatae.
Servilitimore timetur ne judicetur in tormentum supplicii, altero ne amittatur
gratia beneficii. Timor non est in charitate quia perfecta charitas foris
mittit timorem, sed illum servilem, quo cum se quisque ab opere malo abstinet,
poena terretut, non iustitia delectatur; hunc charitas foris mittit, quam non
delectat iniquitas, etiamsi proponatur impunitas. Non illum quo timet anima ne
amitta^ ipsam gratiam qua in illa factum est, ut eam non peccare delectet, quo
timet ne deus came deserat etiamsi nullis dolorum cruciatibus puniat. Hic timor
castus est, non eum ch^ri^as ecijit sed ascis^it, de illo quoque scriptum est,
timor domini castus est, permanens in seculam seculi. Aug. epist 20. Timet illa
ne vir infestus adveniat, ista ne oftensus absced at, ibidem.
faith and charity as the bristle leads the thread into that which is sowed,
it is the comparison of Augustine, and Bernard. And this servile fear
proceeding from the spirit of bondage cannot take possession in that soul that
has received the spirit of adoption, perfect love casts it out, as the
thread entering drives out the bristle that lead it, the other the son^ke fear
agrees with the spirit of adoption, and they dwell together like brethren in
one as Anselms, said of old Simeon Luke 2. He both feared with love, and loved
with fear; and as Cassian in Psalm. 32. He that fears God well, loves him
also, he that loves him fears him also, those things are joined together in
the heavenly devotion: Thus the Fathers distinguish, and reconcile these
doubts. A man fears with a servile fear, least he^ should be judged to the
torments of punishment, with the other, least the grace of Gods benefits should
be lost, fear is not in charity, because perfect charity casts out fear,
but that servile is when a man abstaineth himself from an evil work, he is
terrified with punishment, not delighted with righteousness. This charity
casts forth, which delights in none iniquity, although an impunity were
set before it. Not that whereby the soul fears, least it should loose that
grace which has wrought in it, that it should not delight in sinning, whereby
it fears least God should forsake it, although he should punish it with no
tormenting sorrow. This is a chaste fear, charity casts not this out, but
joyneth it to it self, of it also is it written, the fear of the Lord is
chaste, and remains for ever and ever says Austin; And he illustrateth it by
this comparison there, an adulterous and chaste wife, both fear their husbands
but with this difference. She fears least her husband should return angry,
the other least he should depart away displeased; she will say, I fear mine
husband least he should condemn me^, Illa dicer, timeovirum. ne damnet, ista
dicet, timeo virum ne deserat; pone haec in animo, and invenies timorem quem
foris mittit charitas, and alium castum timorem permanen^em in seculum seculi.
Aug. in Epist: Ioh. tract. and in Evang. Ioh tract. 43. Est timor servilis and
est timor castus, est timor ne patiaris poenam, and alius timor ne amittas
justitiam. Timor ille nepatiaris paenam servilis est. Quid magnum est
timerepaenam? Hoc and nequissimus servus hoc and crudelissimuslatro. Non est
magnum timere paenam sed magnum est amare justitiam; qui ergo amat justitiam
nihil times. Timet plane non ne incidat in paenam sed ne amitta^ justitiam.
Ipse est timor domini castus, ipse permanet in seculum seculi non ^um tollit
charitas, nec foris mittit, sed magis complectitur, and comitem tenet, simul
and possidet.
the other will say, I fear mine husband least he should forsake me. Consider
these things in thy mind, and thou shall find a fear which charity casts
out and another chaste fear abiding for ever and ever. And in his 43. tract,
upon John, There is a servile fear, and a chaste fear, there is a fear least
thou should suffer punishment, and another fear least thou should loose
righteousness. That fear least thou should suffer punishment is servile;
And what great matter is it to fear punishment? This does the lewdest servant
and the cruellest thief. It is no great thing to fear punishment, but it is a
great thing to love righteousness. He therefore that loves righteousness,
fears nothing. He fears plainly, not least he should fall into
punishment, but least he should loose righteousness. It is the chaste fear of
the Lord, it remains for ever and ever, charity takes not away, nor casts
it out, but rather imbraceth it, and keeps for a companion, and possesses it
together.

And Bernard says, that the chaste holy fear which fears not God for the
pains or torments of hell, but with reverence and love abides for ever; but
that which fears him for the pains of hell is servile, and perfect charity
casts out it. Sens. de mode been vivendj sermon. 4 and sermon. 19. Gilleberti
super Cant. Secondly, in that the religion and works of Correlius are here
well reported of before Christ Jesus was preached unto him, the Rhemists would
hence collect, that men knowing God the Creator, and not believing in Christ,
may, before justification and faith, do works pleasing to God, and acceptable
preparatives to the grace of justification, and which coming of Gods grace
deserve of Gods hands congruity toward justification, Rhemists on the place:
but they gather that which the holy Ghost never scattered here. For Cornelius
was not without faith, otherwise how could he please God whom without faith it
is impossible to please Heb. 11.6. He knew not that the Messiah was already
come and had fulfilled all things that were written of him; but he believed as
a true Proselite in the Messiah to come, and like old Simeen, he waited for the
consolation of Israel Luke 2. That he was of the Jewish religion both his
conformity with them in prayers verse 30. and their good opinion of him verse
22. demonstrateth. Cornelius cuius el^^mosynae ante baptismum Angelo testante
laudantur, non operibus ad fidem sed fide venit adopera; Si enim ante baptismum
deo non credebat, quomodo oraret aut quomodo hunc deus exaudiret? Greg Per^idem
venit ad opera in fidevero solidatur peropera. Nec tamen sine aliqua fide
donabat and orabat. Nam quomodo inv^cabat in quem non crediderat? Aug. de
praedest, sanct. cap. 7.
Cornelius whose alms (says Gregory) before his baptism are commended by the
testimony of the Angel, came not by his works unto faith, but by faith came
to works; For if before his baptism he did not believe in God, how did he
pray, or how did God hear him, by faith then he came to works, but by works
he was established in the faith. And Austin says, that be did not give alms
and pray without some faith. For how did he call upon him, in whom he had not
believed.

We see here then in what sense and sort Cornelius is a devout man, and a
fearer of God. Now our learning lying in all that is written, we must learn
hence to be followers of Cornelius, and walk as we have him for an ensample,
what we hear and see in him we must do, be religious and devout worshippers
of God, serving him in fear Psalm. 2. Sanctifying the Lord of hosts, and
making him our dread and fear, Isa. 8.13. For what else does the Lord require
of all his Israel but to fear the Lord his God to walk in all his ways, and
to love him and serve him with all his heart and with all his soul, and cleave
to him? Deuteronomy. 10.12.20. and cap. 6.13. to fear and serve him in sincerity and
truth Ios. ^4.14. And being the Lord yea the Lord of Lords, of necessity fear
is due to him, as he reasons himself, a son honors his Father and a
servant his Master: if then I be a father where is mine honor? if I be a
Master where is my fear? Mal. 1.6. Fear the Lord all ye his Saints, Psalm.
34.9. And this is not an old Commandment belonging only to them that were
under the old Covenant, but renewed also to us that are under the Covenant of
grace, pass the time of your Sojourning here in fear 1 Pet. 1.17. Nay it is
not only the voice of God by his Apostle but by an Angel speaking with a loud
voice fear God and give glory to him, and worship him that made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters, Rev. 14.7. Yea by many
Angels, who will not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy name? for thou only
art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments
are made manifest Rev. 15.4. Religion and the fear of God has ever bin the
fairest flower in the Garland of all the worthies in Scripture, that have gone
before us, and remembered either before or without all their worldly riches,
honors triumphs and trophies.

When God had tried Abraham the father of the faithful to the uttermost and
would give him the highest commendation, it is in these terms, I know that
thou fear me Genesis 22.12. Joseph would make himself known to his brethren
for one that feared God, Genesis 42.18. and so was of their spiritual kindred,
before he revealed himself to be their brother after the flesh. And the
greatest title that God gives to Moses after all the great things he had done
by him is this, Moses my servant, Ios. 1.2. It is the first thing in
description and commendation of Job, that he was a perfect and upright man, and
one that feared God Job. 1.1. and of old Simeon, who had the honor to see
Christ both carnally and spiritually, that he was a just and devout man, Luke
2.25. And this duty of religion piety, his service, worship and fear, God is
not content to prescribe by precept, propose by pattern, but he does also
press it to us by the profit of it, by the blessings earthly and heavenly,
spiritual and temporal, of this life and the life to come that shall be
heaped on them that fear him, walk in his Commandments and lead a godly
life: I need not gather them, as they are scattered up and down in Scripture
the Apostle has conjoined and comprehended them together, 1 Timothy 4.8. having
bid Timothy exercise himself to Godliness and piety he adds that it is
profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come: so happy shall they be so well shall it be with them that
fear God and walk in his ways, Psalm. 1.28.1.2.

But because we are so forward to flatter, nay to deceive our selves with
shows of piety, when we deny the power thereof, with false imaginations of the
fear of God, when we do not make him our dread and our terror; I will give
you some of the principal marks of true piety and the fear of God, whereby we
may learn whether we do but lispe out the Sibboleth of Godliness from the
lips and mouth, or else do indeed sound out the true Shibboleth of piety,
fearing and serving of God from the heart and inward affections, Iud. 12.6. I
will I say give you some principal marks, for it is long if not impossible to
describe and discern all, as it would be in directing a travailer to acquaint
him with every petty mark in his way, and not to be content with relating the
most eminent to him: Now the marks for discerning true piety and the fear of
God in us, are either general or special. There is a total or general shunning
the ways of wickedness, and running the ways of Gods Commandments. The wise
man exhorting to fear God, does presently add as a means or mark thereof,
and depart from evil, Prove. 3.7. yea he says more plainly, that the fear
of God is to hate evil, Pro. 8.13. And when Job is commended for the fear of
God, this is presently added as a true sign thereof that he eschwed evil, Job
1.1. when the Preacher would tell us what is the conclusion of the whole
matter, and the whole duty of man, he says, it is to fear God and keep his
Commandments, Eccl. 12.13. making that an undoubted evidence of Gods fear, as
God himself wishing, there were an heart in the Israelites always to fear
him, expresses what it is to fear him in the words following, and keep his
Commandments, Deuteronomy. 2.29. He that fears God neglects nothing, Qui timet
Deum nil negligit, timere deum est nulla quae facienda sunt bona praeterire.
Greg. in Mor. Solus est Dei timor qui mentes corrigit, fugat crimina,
innocentiam servat and omnis boni tribuit facultatem. Chrysostom. in homil. de Ioh.
Bapt.
to fear God is to omit no good things that are to be done, says Gregory.
And Chrysostom again. It is only the fear of God that corrects men's
minds, chaseth away crimes preserves innocence and gives an ability to do
all good.

On the contrary when we will wallow in wickedness, drink up iniquity like
water, lie in sin and love it, love it and leave it not, when they consent
unto the thieves, and are partakers with the adulterers when they give their
mouths to evil and frame deceit with their tongue, when they speak against
their brother, and slander their own mothers son, Psalm. 50.20. Nay when they
set their tongues at liberty to blaspheme Gods great and fearful name, when
they suffer their hearts to be overcome with surfeting and drunkenness, when
their hands are full of iniquity, and their feet swift to shed blood, when
they can defraud and oppress one another in bargaining, selling, and buying,
when nothing stands in their way that makes for their pleasure, profit,
advancement, revenge or the like, or yet when they will not go to a thorough
reformation of themselves, but flatter and favor themselves in some darling
sin like Naaman that would serve God and yet be borne withal in going to the
Idols temple, and bowing there to please his earthly master, and like Herod who
would hear John Baptist willingly, do many things readily and yet keep his
Minions too, Mark 6. there is no sound service or sincere fear of God in
them, though they make a show of Godliness in standing before God in his
house, either taking his word in their mouths and preaching his statutes, or
hearing his word and will, and showing much love with their mouths, making
many prayers unto him, partaking of his spiritual meat and spiritual drink,
and performing all outward obsequies and services unto him; his Saints that
truly fear him, do sincerely hate all false ways, Psalm. 119. And as Abraham
reasoned of the men of Gerar the fear of God is not in this place therefore
they will slay me for my wives sake, Genesis 20.11. So on the other side we may
reason again, e Converso^.
men professing to know and worship God, give themselves the raines of liberty
to take their pleasures, run into all excess of riot, and rush into sin
like the bard horse into the battle, some in one kind, some in another,
therefore the fear of God is not truly in their hearts.

But I come to the special marks of piety and the fear of God, they lie
either in duties immediately respecting God, or men in God. The duties which
immediately respect God as marks and tokens of piety and fear of him, are
either a believing of God and his word, or a renouncing of our selves in the
things of this life for Gods sake, and cause upon the sight of that great work
which God did upon the Egyptians in the red Sea, Moses says, the people feared
God, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses, Exodus 14.31. conjoyning these
together and making their believing of God an undoubted sign of their fearing
of God; as on the contrary, when men deny the words of the Lord, give no
credence unto them, say it is not he, his Prophets shall become wind, his
word is not in them, Ier. 5.12.15. and that the Lord has not sent them but
they speak of their own hearts, there is no fear of God before their eyes,
they are as the Psalmist calls old Israel a stubborn and rebellious
generation, a generation that set not their heart aright; and whose spirit was
not steadfast with God, Psalm. 78.8. for not believing in God amongst other their
sins verse. 22.

Again the renouncing of our selves (whereby we must manifest our piety and
fear of God) lies either in the forgoing of that which is most dear unto us
in the pleasures and profits of this life, or the undergoing of that which is
most grievous unto flesh and blood for his names sake. Abraham's not withholding
his son, his only son from God, is a sure sign of his fearing of God,
Genesis 22.12. The Disciples sent out by our Savior to preach must again show
that they fear God, by their willing suffering whatsoever shall be inflicted
upon them, for the working of his work, by their not fearing of them that can
kill the body, Matthew. 10.28. such an heroical spirit was in Paul, Act. 20.24.
I pass not for all, and in Chrysostom against all the threatenings of the
Empress Eudoxia, (...)
If the Empress will banish me, let her banish me, the earth is the Lords and
the fullness thereof; If she will saw me a sunder, let her, I have Esaias for
an example, If she will throw me into the sea, I remember Jonas; If she will
cast me into the furnace, I have the three Children that suffered this: If
she witl cast me into wild beasts, I remember Daniel cast into the Lions
den: If she will stone me, let her stone me, I have Steven the
protomartyr: If she will take my head, let her take it, I have John the
Baptist: If she will take my goods, let her take them, Time Deum qui super
homines est, and homines non formidabis, Aug in Ps.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb and naked shall I return, Epist^ad
Cyriacum Ep. Fear God who is above men (says Austin) and thou shall not fear
men.

The duties respecting men in God, whereby our fear of God must be discovered
and descried are in putting on the bowels of mercies and kindness toward them,
in distributing to their necessities. Though Joseph at first showed a stern
countenance to his brethren, spoke roughly unto them and put them in ward, yet
in the end, the fear of God even constrained him to deal favorably with
them, and to let them have food for the famine of their houses, Genesis 42.8.
Obadiahs provision for the Prophets of the Lord, in the days of persecuting
Iesabel is a proof of his fearing the Lord greatly, 1 King. 18.3. Thus have I
out of a multitude of the marks of piety and the fear of God, selected for
you some of the choicest, as special flowers out of a Garden of all sorts.

I have showed you the duty here, that we should all take Cornelius for an
example of piety and the fear of God, but if mine eyes were a fountain of
tears I cannot sufficiently lament our defect in this kind. In our evil
days whereinto we are fallen there is more then just cause of renewing that
old complaint of David, help Lord, for the Godly man cease, for the
faithful fail from among the children of men Psalm. 12.1. and of Micah Chap.
7. ver. 2. the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright
amongst men, as then, so now there is no fear of God before men's eyes, Romans 3.
Jobs complaint of his friends is too true of our times, men forsake the fear
of the Almighty, Job 6.14. As Eliah a worshipper of God complained that he
was left alone 1 King. 19. the multitude was gone after Baal; so may those that
worship God in spirit and truth and fear him in their hearts complain, that
they are but as the shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three berries in the top
of the uppermost bough; four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof
Isay 17.6. in respect of the multitude that worship and serve they know not
what, that wonder after and worship the beast, Rev. 13. or else that are
without God in the world receiving and reverencing no God, Psalm. 14.1. We so
scrue our earthly Mammon that we cannot serve our heavenly Master, we so obey
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, that we cannot do the will of our
Father, we are so ruled by the Prince of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2, 2. that Christ cannot rule over us.
We are so a fraid of men, who shall die, and the sons of men, who shall be
made as grass, we so fear continually every day, because of the fury of the
oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, Is. 51, 12, 13. we so fear their
fear and are afraid, that we do not sanctify the Lord of hoasts himself and
make him our fear and our dread, Isa. 8.12.13. as Tertullian complained of
heathen Rome. Majore formidine and calliditate Caesarem obseruatis, quam ipsum
de Olympo Iov em adeo in isto irrelizion erga deos vestros deprehendimini, quum
plus timoris humano domino dicatis citius denique apud vos peromnesdeos quam
per vnum genium Caesaris pejeratur. Apologet. cap. 27.
With greater fear and cunning ye observe Caesar, then Jupiter himself out of
heaven-even in this ye are found irreligious toward your Gods; when you give
more fear to an earthly Lord, and lastly with you they will sooner forswear
by all the gods then by Caesar's Angellonely.

If the greater number amongst us depart from evil, do any good, Gods fear
is not the motive, the fear of men, shame of the world, danger of laws,
popular applause and vain glory work upon them; but let them be free from
these, and they will not fear God, as Dalilah said to Sampson how can thou
say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? Iud. 16.15. So may God to
us, how can we say we are religious worshippers of him, serve him with fear
and reverence, when we are slow of heart to believe either his promises or
threatenings, when we say that he will do neither good nor evil, when we will
not forsake our least pleasure or profit for his sake, undertake the least
persecution a little evill-speaking against us for his cause, when we are ready
to take our brethren by the throat for the least farthing, and cannot be
content to part with a cup of cold water, the least kindness that is, to a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet? Nay we are so far from the nature of being
religious, devout men, such as fear God, that the very name is flouted at,
abhorred amongst us. Mis-creants are ready to reproach those that fear and
serve God with those names that should be a crown of rejoicing. Those are (say
they in disgrace of them that seek to serve God) holy brethren, zealous
followers, men of the spirit, devout Disciples and professors forsooth. But as
Job said, if mine adversary would write a book, I would take it upon may
shoulder and bind it as a crown to me, Job 31.35.36. So we say, if Godless
men would load us with names of this nature we would wear them as ornaments,
not bear them as crosses. I speak not this to patronize any that serve not
God in the peace of his Church, I am known well enough to be no follower of
their follies, but I complain of the little religion, and fear of God that is
in them that would upbraid either the true or seeming worshippers of God, with
the names of their holy profession, as though they would make that their shame
which is or should be their glory.

But I pass to the next amplification by the adjoined association, he feared
God with all his family. His religion was not a candle put under a bushel but
on a candlestick, that it might give light to all that were in his house,
Tanquam sol radiis suis illustrans minorafidera
he was as the Sun inlightening with his beams the lesser Stars. Hic
quotquot familias negligimus, says Chrysostom. Let us here beed all of us
that neglect our families. He would not have his family like a motley cloth
or a medley color, some of one die, some of another, some religious others
profane or idolatrous, some honest and sober, others swaggerers, and
unthrifts, some civil and peaceable, others cut-throates and rak-hels, but he
would have them all in one livery, uniforme and suitable, not like the image
that Nebuchadnezar saw, whose head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms
of silver, his belly and his thighs of brasse^ his legs of iron; his feet
part of iron and part of clay, Dan. 2.32.33. He gives us an example then of
that duty which the Master of the family owes to his household, whether
children or servants, he must be that in the body politic of his own house,
which the heart is in the natural body of man; as it communicates life and
vital spirits to the rest of the members, so must the Master of the household
impart the spiritual life of grace to all that are members of his body
politic, and his house in the exercises of religion and practice of piety
must be a Church as Philemons was, for so S. Paul speaks to him, the Church
that is in thy house verse. 2. Augustine in Psalm. 50. speaks to his auditory,
Regite domos vestras regite filios vestros, regite familias vestras. Quomodo ad
nos pertinet in Ecclesia loqui vobis, sic ad vos pertinet in do^mibus vestris
agere, ut bonam rationem redda^s de his qui vobis sunt subditi.
2. Govern your houses, govern your sons, govern your families: As it
belongs to us to speak to you in the Church: so it belongs to you to
handle the matter so in your houses, that you may give a good account of those
that are under you.

It was not the praise of men but the praise of God himself concerning
Abraham, I know that he will command his children and household after him to do
justice and judgment, Genesis 18.19. And Jacob his grandchild walking in the
steps of the faith of his father Abraham is not content (at his going up to
Bethel at the Lords Commandment to build an altar there) to worship God
sincerely himself, and suffer the dregs of idolatry to stick upon his family;
but he speaks to them to put away the strange gods that are among you and be
clean and change your garments. Genesis 35.2. Joshua being doubtful what the
body of the people Israel would do makes a resolute profession not only for
himself but also for his house, that they would serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15.
Bathsheba was neither privileged by her sex, being a woman, nor by her
dignity being a Queen from teaching her son, but we find a prophecy of
king Lemuel which his mother taught him, Pro. 31.1. Lois the grandmother, and
Eunice the mother having the faith dwelling in them teach Timothy the holy
Scriptures from a child, (...)
2 Timothy 3.15. The father amongst the Israelites, must show his son why he
keeps the service of the Passover, Exodus 12.28. Why the feast of unleavened
bread, Exodus 13.8. Why he consecrateth the first borne unto the Lord, verse. 13
and generally he must rehearse all the words of Gods law to his children, Deuteronomy.
6.7. as the Psalmist says, he established a testimony in Iaacob, and appointed
a Law in Israel which he commanded our fathers that they should make them
known to their children, Psalm. 78.5. And that we may not think this a legal
precept abolished in the time of grace, the Apostle gives a general charge to
all Christian parents to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. as no doubt but that those children of the elect Lady
walking in the truth were seasoned by her with saving knowledge, Nee ideo
laudanda es quia filios hobes, sed quia pie nutrire atque educare studes cap.
14. Non est paxuiapud deum meriti been si^ios educare, Hiero. ad Salvinam de
vidu. Servanda.
2 Epist. Ioh. 4. That same book de bono viduitati, whether Austine. or any
others, says the widow to whom it was written, thou art not therefore to be
praised because thou have children, but because thou indevourest to nurture
and* to bring them up godly, and S. Hierome, it is no small good deed in the
presence of God to bring up thy children well.

But to come home, unto our selves, Beloved, we cannot in most places be
praised for seasoning and sanctifying our families with the knowledge of Gods
ways, and obedience to his will. The old people of the Jews were so admirably
diligent in teaching their children the Scriptures that Josephus lib. 2. contra
Appionem says, Nostrorum quilibet de legibus interrogatus facilius quam nomen
suum recitat vniversas; quipe mox a primo ^ensu discentes in animo velut
insculptas habemus.
Every one of our people being asked concerning the Laws, rehearses them more
easily then his own name, for having learned them as soon as we come to
understanding, we have them as it were engraven in our mind: but amongst us it
is herd to find a child or a servant in a family that has learned any
pattern of words, in faith and love which are in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.13. or
laid any foundation of the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, Heb. 6.1. as
the Apostle speaks concerning catechisme-learning. Job was no doubt as
careful to sanctify his children aforehand, that they might not sin as
after their feasting, least they had sinned, Job 1.6. But it never troubles
many amongst us to have sons and servants like to Elies children wicked men
such as know not the Lord. Nay may not the Lord send his messengers to us as
he sent the man of God to Elie to expostulate with him, for honoring his
children before God? 1 Samuel 2.27.29. may not the Lord threaten us, as he did
him, to judge our iniquities, because we suffer our children to run into
slander and stay them not? 1 Samuel 3.13. may not old Elie be justified in
comparison of us, for when he heard evil of his sons he gave them a cold
admonition, do no more so my sons, for it is no good report I hear of you,
1 Samuel 2.24. But having both the power of a Father and he a Judge procceded not
to correction, whereas we are so indulgent, so cockring, that we will not
displease our children at any time, in saying, why have you done so? 1 King. 1
6. that though our children be like to Abselom, murderers, whore-masters,
rebels, yet they must be entreated gently, 2 Samuel 18.4. Constantius the
Emperor father of Constantine the great having made trial of his servants
which would sacrifice to Idols which would not, but be constant to the
Christian faith, banished all the turn coats out of his Court with this
Apophthegme. How will they keep their faith inviolate toward the Emperor, who
are perfidious to God: Quomodo fidem Imperatori praestabunt qui deo sunt
perfidi? Eusebius.
But in our entertainning or re^ayning of servants we respect in them
pe^sonablenes, serviceablenes, and such formality, of their religion is the
least and last care, and we bear with them well enough though they be
swaggerers, swearers, drunkards, cursed speakers at defiance with God and all
Godliness, Men are combred about the many things of this world to provide them
for their families and children, they rise up early, lie down late and give
themselves no rest to scrape together abundance of worldly pelf for them
whether by right or wrong, of which Saint Austin says well, Quam curam geris
filiorum ut cos obruaslachry mis miserorum? non est hoc filios amare sed potius
necare Nolo tetalem patrem sentiant filij tui, nolo sic provideas, ut magis in.
videas homil. 45. Vnum necessarium. Parents qui filiis ditandis omnem curam
impendunt, little autem mores negligunt (quanto magis salutem dico ego) similes
suntiis qui magnam calceorum curam habent, and interim pedem ipsum parui
pendunt.
What care take thou of thy children that thou may overwhelme them with the
tears of the oppressed. I would not have thy children find thee such a
father. I would not thou should so provide that thou should hurt them.

But with Martha they neglect that one necessary thing, that one pearl of the
kingdom of heaven for the buying of which they should sell all the riches.
Plutarch said excellently; Parents that bestow all their care upon enriching
their children, and neglect their education ( how much more their salvation say
I) are like unto those that have great care of the shoes, and in the mean
while little regard the foot.

I conclude all with aword of exhortation, let us then with David walk with an
upright even foot in the midst of our houses, harboring the good there in,
banishing the evil there from, Psalm. 101. Let us not entertain any to serve
us that will not serve God with us, Let us labor so to sanctify our sons
and daughters that they may be the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty,
and that we may rejoice to see them walking in the truth; let us teach them the
Scriptures, and the form of wholesome doctrine; I mean their Catechism, that
they may be wise unto salvation and let our houses be as Churches and
assemblies of Saints wherein the word of God may dwell plenteously, prayers may
be powered out daily, and holy hymns sung to the great and glorious name of the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, etc.

THE THIRD SECTION
Acts 10. verse. 2. A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house,
which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always.


THe tree (says our Savior Math. 12.33.) is known by his fruit, either to
be a good tree by the good fruit growing thereon, or an evil tree by the ill
fruit it bears, and he adds there verse 35. by way of declaration as it
were, that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, (...)
brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure,
brings forth evil things. Those good trees then that are planted in the
house of the Lord, by the rivers of the waters of his sanctuary, flourish in
his Courts, and being forth fruit in due season, and with perseverance unto old
age, Psalm. 92.13. and 1.3. Such a good tree was Cornelius, showing himself so
here in the fruits of his religion, both in pity toward his brethren, he gave
much alms to the people; and in piety toward God, he prayed God continually.
And as God will have mercy and not sacrifice Hos. 6.6. prefers a duty of
charity toward our brethren commanded in the second table, before a duty of
outward service toward himself commanded in the first table, when the case so
stands that one of them must be omitted for observing the other: so here in
ranking and ordering of those duties, he gives the priority of place and time
to his works of mercy, although his works of piety toward God must have the
priority of nature and dignity acconding to that method of prudence prescribed
by Logicianes, Methodus prudentiae.
when they handle things the later in nature in the former place, (...)
and the former in nature in the later place. Without any repetition then or
prosecution of my former division of the several parts of this text, in two
Sermons upon it already I follow the Method and foote-steps of the Holy Ghost
in manifesting and proving Cornelius religion by the fruits thereof, either in
his charity or in his piety: For these two clauses do both amplify and prove,
Amplificare and probare
both express and press unto us the former commendation, that he was a
religious man and a fearer of God, Conjunctim.
and will handle them both jointly together as they serve to enlarge and
enforce the commendation given, Divisim.
or distinctly apart as they ly in themselves without such reference.

Who gave much alms to the people and prayed to God continually. It was no
small thing but enough and enough that the Holy Ghost had already commended him
for a religious man and a worshipper of God. For what the Poet said of Justice,
Justice contains all virtues in it self, Iustitia in sese virtutes continet
omnes. Religio in sese virtutes continet omnes.
I may much more say of religion, that it contains all virtues in it self.
But least any should say with Zachary, Luke 1.18. whereby shall I know this?
the holy Ghost does show this by the fruits of his religion and first by his
charity and compassion. Now to make this profitable for our instruction in
righteousness, I say with the wise man, the thing that has been is that which
shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and there is no
new thing under the sun, Eccl. 1.9.

As Cornelius then so we now, we (that must be followers of them who through
faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12) must show our religion by
our deeds of compassion, our faith in God by our charity toward men: for as
Saint James says, who is a wiseman among you? let him show out of good
conversation his works with meekenes, Iam. 3.15. So I, who is a religious man
amongst us? Let him show out of a good conversation his works in distributing
to the necessity of the poor. For as if any man seems religious, and
refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is
vain, Iam. 1.26. So much more if any man seems religious and opens not his
hand to the poor and needy with him, his religion and profession is in vain.
Religion lies in and is showed by the works of mercy as he adds there,
verse 27. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction. The Psalmist in the 112.
Psalm having commended the man that fears God, the upright and godly man
(for so many terms and titles he gives him) by his prerogatives, he
describes him also by his properties whereof this is the principal, a good
man is gracious and full of compassion, verse 4. his ingemination of his words
shows the estimation of this note, for both verse the fifth he says, a good
man shows favor and lends, and also again according to that of the Poet
(I will foretell this one thing to thee, and repeating it again and again I
will admonish thee) verse 9. he has dispersed and given to the poor. Vnum
illud tibi nate dea, praeque omnibus vnum praedicam, and repetens iterumque
iterumque moncho.
It is a question put by Gods people that would feign seem religious,
wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most high
God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old?
will the Lord be pleased with thousand of Rams, or with ten thousand of rivers
of Oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul? Micah. 6.6.7; by what acts and excercises shall
I show my self religi^us? will plenty of outward services and sacrifices serve
the turn herein? but it is resolved by the Prophet, ver. 8. that all this will
not do it with ut doing of moral duties, amongst which to love mercy is a
maine one, he has shew^d thee O man, what is g^od, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God? More vulgihoc nomen pietatis etiam in operibus misericor diae,
frequentatur quod ideo arbitror evenisse quia hoc fieri praecipue deus mandat,
eaque sibi vel pro sacrificiis, vel prae sacrificiis placere testatur Aug. lib.
10, De civit. deicap. 1. (...).
after the vulgar fashion this name of Piety is frequently used in the works
of mercy which I think therefore comes to pass, because God especially
commands these to be done, and witnesses that they please him either in
stead of sacrifices, or before all sacrifices, Every child of God is truly
religious, and every truly religious man is the child of God, these are (...)
follow one out of the other, now that we are the one, the children of God and
therefore the other (religious and holy before God) is seen and showed by
putting on the bowels of compassion, Col. 3.12. The Apostle seeks out no
farther, no better evidence of the Hebrews religion and love to Gods name then
this, that they had ministered to the Saints and still continued therein, Heb.
6.10. How shall it be known that Tabitha is a Disciple, Termini convertibiles.
a Christian (for these are convertible terms, the Disciples were called
Christians, Act. 11.26.) but by her fullness of good works? and how that she
is full of them, but by alms deeds the best of works? Act. 9.36. there was
at Ioppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha, this woman was full of good works,
and alms deeds which she did. Nulla reperinde ac misericordia colitur, (
Nazianz. orat. de cura pauperum) quoniam nihil aliud tam peculiare est deo quam
illa; utpote ante quem misericordia and veritas gradiuntur. Beneficentia deo
similes facit ( Chrysostom. in 3 Tit) haec est charitatis matter, proprium
Christianae virtutis insigne, per quam discipuli Christi noscuntur. Nihil adeo
divinum habet homo, quam benefacere Nazi. orat. de cura pauperum. Vbi deus
curam misericordiae invenit, ibi imaginem suae pietatis agno scit. Leo ser. 10.
de Quadragesima.
God is worshipped by nothing so much as by alms, (says Nazianzen oratione de
cura pauperum) because nothing is so peculiar to God as it is, to wit, before
whom mercy and truth do go. And Chrysostom says, Bountifulness makes men
like to God, this is the Mother of Charity, the proper badge of Christian
virtue, by which Christ's Disciples are known. And Nazianzen, (ubi supra) Man
has nothing so divine and excellent as to do deeds of charity. And Leo
likewise, where God finds a care of mercy, there he acknowledges an image of
his own goodness.

And so I pass from these words as they both declare and demonstrate Cornelius
religion and service of God, to the handling of them as they lie in themselves;
wherein we may consider first the person Cornelius, secondly the act, he gave,
thirdly the matter giving alms, fourthly the measure, much alms, fifthly the
persons receiving, to the people, here a little and there a little of every
one of these will take up my whole time now, and put off the last clause to a
fuller handling at another turn.

The fiest point is of the person giving the alms Cornelius. Cornelius was
rich in revenewes, high in rank, being both a Commander of a company and a
Master of a family, and is here a pattern and president to every rich man in
this world, great man in place, and goodman of an house, to go and do
likewise, as our Savior said to the Lawyer about a work of mercy, Luke
10.37. Timothy has a special charge laid upon him to charge the rich men in
this world to do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate 1 Timothy 6.18. They that have this worlds good must not shut up
their bowels of compassion to their needy brethren, but do good unto them, 1
Ioh. 3.17. Our Saviors, I say unto you make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, Luke 16.9. is especially spoken unto rich men: And they
especially at Corinth that had abundance, must out of their abundance supply
the want of the Saints that were in poverty 2 Cor. 8.14. And that work of
mercy to bring the poor that are cast out to our house Isay 58.7. properly
belongs to him that is Master and owner of the house, Abraham and Lot being
blessed of God exceedingly, and become great in substance, do so abound in the
work of Hospitality (a branch of this tree of alms doing) that they tarry not
till strangers come to them for intertainement (which yet now adays is held an
high point of Hospitality to lie open to all comers) but they seek occasions
to exercise it, run to passengers, bow to them, entreat them to be
entertained, profess that they do them a favor in it, and even press upon
them till they obtain, Genesis 18.2.3. and 19.2.3. Job the greatest and richest
of all the men of the East, makes the fatherless eat of his morsels, and as
a father brings them up with him from his youth, guides the widow from his
mothers womb, covers the poor with a garment, so that his loins bless him
for being warmed with the fleece of his sheep, and suffers not the stranger
to lodge in the street, but opens his door to the travailer, Job 31. So
rich was this rich man in every good work of mercy! Rich men then must out of
their abundance cast much into the poor man's treasury, for as Saint Austin
says, Superflua divitum necessaria sunt pauperum, res alienae possidentur,
cumsuperflua possidentur Aug. in Ps. 147.
the superfluities of rich men are the necessaries of poor men. Men possess
other men's goods when they possess superfluous things.

But as Peter said unto our Savior, Lord speak thou this parable unto us or
unto all? Luke 12.51. So it may be said unto me; does alms giving belong unto
rich men or unto all men? I say then, this burden lies upon them principally,
but not only, they must come with their great gifts, but even the poorer sort
must not be wanting in their mites, they must as it were bear the heat of the
day, but every one in his order must bear his part, give alms of such things
as you are able, Luke 11.41. as our new translation of that text has it, of
such things as you have. He that has two coats let him impart to him that
has none, and he that has meat let him do likewise, Luk 3.11. He that
labors with his hands for his living must out of that give to him that
needs, yea he must labor to that end, Ephesians. 4.28. Our blessed Savior though
he lived (not of begging as the Papists say, Dicit aliquis, pauper sum ideo
eleemosynam dare non possum, ut nullus se pauper excusare poster, dominus
noster procalice frigidae aquae mercedem seredditurum promisit. Aug. Ser. 137.
detemp. Impar facultas, sed nonimpar charitas, Idem in Psalm. 121. Si potes
dare, da, finoni p^ter af^a b^lemte fac: Coronat deus intusbonitatem, ubinon
invenit facultatem, Nemo dicat, non habeo charitas delacculo non erogatur.
Nulli parvus est census, cui magnus est animus, Nec de rei familiar^s mensura
pendet modus pietatis; Majora quidem sunt impend^a divitum, and
minoramediocrium, ed nec d screpat fructus operum ubi non d^est affectus
operantum Leo sern deapparit. domin^. n decretis distinct. 86.
but) of the voluntary contribution of certain devout women which ministered
unto him, Luke 8.3. yet he gave alms out of his bag to the poor, Ioh. 13,
29. if thou have but a little, be not afraid to give according to that little,
says Tobit to his son chapter 4.8. Some man (says Austine) will say, I am
poor therefore I cannot give alms; That no poor man should excuse himself,
our Lord has promised that he will render are ward for a cup of cold water.
And again, Men's ability may be unlike, and yet their charity not unlike; and
upon the 103 Psalm, If thou can give, give, if thou can not, show thy
self affable and courteous, God crowns the good mind within, where he
finds not ability without. Let no man say, I have not, Charity comes not
out af a bag. And so Leo the great. No man's revenue is little whose mind is
great, neither does the measure of a man's charity depend upon the measure of
his estate. Indeed the expenses of rich men are greater, and of mean men
lesser: But there is no difference between the fruit of the works, where
there is no defect in the affection of the workers. I end this point with Saint
Ambrose, that the Commandment of mercy is common to all offices and ages,
neither is the Publican or Soldier, the husbandman or citizen, the rich, or
poor excepted, but all are to be admonished that they be ready to give to him
that needs.

But here may grow a question whether children and servants that are under the
power of their parents and Masters, whether wives that are in subjection to
their husbands, may give alms? Thomas Aquinas (22. qu. 67.) answers, that if
they have any proper goods of them but not of their own either by gift or
getting, they may give alms of their fathers, Masters or husbands goods
without their consent save in case of extreme necessity, wherein a man may take
another man's goods to give alms with, but otherwise Augustine says, if thou
have, give of thine own, if thou have not, it is better to give to none, then
to spoil another. Sihabes da de mo, si non habes, melius nulli dabis quam
altero spoliabis sermon. 19. de verb. Apo. Quid confert tibi eleemosyna, quae de
substantia praestatur alterius? timendum non est, quod deus non habeat unde
pauperes suos pascat, insi tu alien diripias. idem de vita Christiana cap. 12.
And again he says, What does the alms avail thee, Which is given out of
another man's goods? We must not fear that God has not enough to relieve his
poor, unless thousnatch away another man's goods.

But concerning the wife, I say with our Savior in another case, that if it
were so with her altogether, it were not good to marry, Matthew. 19. and that
she were in worse condition then servants, who may give of their own, whereas
she has nothing that is properly by law her own. And did not Abigal bring a
large alms of her husbands goods to David? 1 Samuel 25. which if we will say,
she did not so much freely, as in case of necessity for fear did not Ioanne
the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and many other women voluntarily minister of
their substance to our Savior? Luke 8.3. does not the wise man commend the
virtuous woman for stretching out her hands to the poor and reaching out her
hands to the needy? Pro. 31.20. And does not the Apostle command women to
adorn themselves with good works, 1 Timothy 2.10. of which alms are a great
part. She then by the marriage band has such a right of use in her husbands
goods, though the property be in him, Magna pars.
that she may give alms, doing it with discretion, and moderation, so that
she do him good and not evil, Prove. 31.12. and without any pride or
arrogance, as though she would usurp authority over him, 1 Timothy 2, 10. And now
ye rich men of the world, I speak unto you, and not I but the very time also,
open your hands to the poor and needy that is with you, and out of your
abundance supply their wants; as God now tries their faith and patience by
this scarsity: so he tries your charity; Cur tu divitiis circumfluis ille
eget? Basil. orat. 14 de divit. and paup.
why do thou abound with riches, and he want? (says S. Basil) Surely that
thou might receive the reward of thy faithful dispensation, and he also
after many conflicts and victories, might have the Crown of his patience. Let
not the paining of your backs with costly apparel, the pampering of your
bellies in gluttony, and drunkenness, the satisfying of your pleasures in
chambering and wantonness, Hunting Hawking, Dicing, Smoking and the like, the
revenging of your offenses in contentions and endless Law-suites, the
buildings of your Babels to keep your names alive upon earth, the insatiable
covetousness to fill your coffers and load your selves with thick clay,
devour the poores portion, and make you either unwilling or unable to do good
and distribute. Remember, that being Gods stewards and not Lords in fee-simple
of these earthly things, your account of your stewardship will be fearful, In
pios usus. In proptios a^t mal^^.
when so little to pious uses, so much to the own or ill uses shall be brought
in. Then, you that in stead of making you friends of the earths Mammon, have
made you enemies thereof, shall in stead of being received into the everlasting
habitations, be shut out in outward darkness, thou have not bin merciful and
thou shall not find mercy, thou have not opened thy gates to the poor, and
thou shall be shut out of the gates of heaven, thou have not given thy bread,
and thou shall not receive the bread, of life, says Basil orat. divit.
Beloved we should be unthankefull, injurious to the memories of those that have
done worthily in this kind, if we should not acknowledge to the glory of Gods
Gospel and the stopping of the mouths of Papists exclaiming against our
religion for barrenness in this work, that the public work of charity in
building of Temples, Colleges, Hospitalls, Schools, Almeshouses, in giving of
Lands and stocks for the maintenance of religion and preaching, for the good
of Cities and corporations, and for all other pious uses, have been found more
(upon an exact survey printed and published) since the dayspring of the
Gospel in this last Century has visited us, then can be produced for many
hundreds of years in Popery, when merit-monging was at the highest and that we
have both better laws for the provision for the poor, and better execution of
them then former times had. And it must even with an holy boasting (as Paul
does about the Corinthians ministering to the Saints 2 Cor. 9.2.) be
acknowledged that amongst us, there are many Philemons that refresh the bowels
of Gods Saints, many Onesiphorusses that minister unto his servants, many
Iohaunes Eleemosynaris who with Titus think that day lost wherein they give
not an alms, (as Leontius reports in his life,) many Dorcasses that are full
of almes-deedes, give coats to poor widows and others, in a word a good
number reserved by God that open their hands and their hearts to their needy
brother. But yet the greater part of great ones amongst us, lie in the
wickedness of unmercifulness, have their hearts hardened, their bowels shut
up that they cannot compassionate the poor, their eyes evil, their tongues
full of bitterness, their hands withered like his in the Gospel, that they
cannot reach them out to the poor. Every where we may find Caines, that
think themselves no keepers of their brethren, churlish Nabals that roar out
with him, shall I take my flesh whom I have killed for my shearers and give it
unto men, whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25.11. rich gluttons that can
let the poor lie and dye at their Gates, Iudasses that care not for the poor,
no not so much as for a show of caring for the poor which was in him. I say to
them with Saint Basil the fruit which thou shall reap, shall be like the
seed which thou have sown, thou have sown bitterness and thou shall reap
bitterness. Thou have sown cruelty, and thou shall reap cruelty, Thou have
shunned mercy, and mercy shall shun thee; Thou have hated the poor, and he
in like manner, who being rich was content for our sakes to becomes poor,
shall hate thee, Basil vbi supra. I have bin somewhat long in the person
giving, I will be shorter in the act here who gave.

The original is a doer of much alms, (...)
he was not a patient but an agent in this business, his alms were not
extorted by force of man's law, but came voluntarily from him in obedience to
Gods Law: were not imposed upon him by a rate, or taxation, but proceeded from
the voluntary determination, of his heart, and it not^th unto us the willing
cheerfulness, the ready speediness that must be in our alms doing, willing
cheerfulness, for thou shall surely give, and thine heart shall not be
grieved when thou give, Deuteronomy. 15.10. Every man according as he purposes in
his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. This is it that makes our alms accepted, if
there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Chrysostom tom. 4. if we give
cheerfully it will be a double alms, In dictum oportet haereses esse, si
alacriter demus, duplexerit eleemosyna, etc. Petentem viduam expectare noluit,
ut non solum ex munere, sed ex celeritate muneris bonorum operum meritum
augeret, Greg. Mor. li. 21. cap. 11.
both because we give, also because we give cheerfully. Upon Jobs word that
he made not the the widows eyes to wait Gregory says, He would not have
the asking widow to wait, that not only by the gift it self but also by the
quickness of the gift be might increase the worth of his good works.

And this cheerfulness discovers it self both in countenance, according to
that Eccl. 35.9. In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, Pro, 22.9. he
that has a bountiful eye, shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread to
the poor, and also in words, according to the wise man's counsel, let it not
grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a frindly
answer with meekness Eccle. 4.8. and 18.15. blemish not thy good deeds,
neither use uncomfortable words when thou give any thing: again, the ready
speediness, for we again must not say to our neighbor, go and come and to
morrow I will give, when we have it by us, Pro. 3.28. The Greek proverb says,
speedy favors are sweeter, and Seneca, It is the property of the willing doer,
(...) Proprium est libenter facienti cito facere.
Nay we must be so far from putting off in these works of mercy, that we
must not still carry till we are sued to, but must prevent our suitours, like
our heavenly father who preventeth the King with blessings of goodness Psalm.
21.3. This is perfect mercy, that we prevent the suites of the needy, Haecest
perfecta misericordia, Aug. homil. 39. romans 10. Ingratum est beneficium quod
diu inter manus dantis haefit Seneca de benef.
and releeve the hungry before they ask, and that mercy is imperfect, and
needs mercy which is extorted by importunate prayers; says S. Austin. That
is an unwelcome benefit (says Senca) that stuck long in the hands of the giver.

Bis dat qui cito dat.
Away then with this grudging giving which God loves not, this browe-beating by
sour looks, this chiding by Nabals language, this turning away our
countenances, this upbraiding churlishly which makes an alms a fools gift,
Eccl. 18.18. which makes rather a satisfaction for our injury, then a work of
mercy as Chrysostom says, hom. 36. in Mat. 10. with this delaying which
makes us near to denying as Seneca, he that delayeth is next to him that
denies he that does do alms, qui moratur neganti proximus. (...)
must do none of these.

But I am brief as I promised and come in the third place to the matter given,
alms; it signifies properly mercies or compassions, (...)
the cause from whence they must proceed being put for the effect, mercy for
alms, and they are not only so called but by a general name both Heb. 13.16.
well doing, (...)
doing of good, the denomination being made from the more excellent part, and
also righteousness, Psalm. 112. because they are a fruit of righteousness 2
Cor. 9.10. a stream of that fountain, A praestantiori parts
a special of that general, a sign of righteousness according to that of
Prove. 12.10. a righteous man regards the life of his beast, etc. and an
outward act of releeving those whom we inwardly commiserate. (...) Iustitiam.
Hence it is that not only the vulgar Bible translateth (...) Iustitiam
righteousness, Mat. 6.1. take heed that you do not your righteousness before
men; but also the Seventy Interpreters in the old Testament where it is
Hida^hah righteousness, in the Hebrew turn it, (...)
deliver the poor his pledge and it shall be righteousness to thee before the
Lord, and (...), as Deuteronomy. 24.13. And there are called mercies or compassion, as
also in the Hebrew Chased, pity, compassion, to show and signify that in
alms giving we must not only open our hands but our hearts, (...)
that the outward action must flow from out inward affection, our contribution
from our compassion, misericordia est animi condolenti affectus cum additamento
beneficti.
for Mercy is an affection of a pitiful heart, with an addition of some
benefit, hence are those manner of speakings in scripture, he that has mercy
to the poor is happy, Prove. 14.21. he that has pity on the poor lends
unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. to love mercy, Mic. 6.7. He that shows mercy
Romans 12.8. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, Isa. 58.10. and 1 John
3.17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, bowels of mercies, Col. 3.12.
Thus as Job was greived in his soul for the poor, Job. 30.25. So the Apostle
requires that we should be kindly affectioned one toward another with
brotherly love, Romans 12.8. and weep with them that weep verse, 15. He gives
perfectly, Ille perfect tribule, qui cume^ quod afflicto porrigit, afflict^
quoque animunin se sumit, ut prius in se dolentis passionem tra^sferat, and
tune contra dolerem illius per ministerium concurrat plus cumpati quam dare.
Praebere quod est extra seipsum. Aliquid de semetipso dare. Affectus nomen
imponit operi quum misericordiae causa largiaris.
who with that which he reaches out to the afflicted, takes also upon
himself the mind and affection of the afflicted, so that first he translateth
upon himself the passion of him that is grieved, and then by his ministering to
him, gives supply against his grief, Greg. moral. and he says that it is
more to have compassion then to give an alms, because he that is
compassionate, gives somewhat from within himself but the alms doer gives
from without himself. And Saint Ambrose in offic. says, that the name of the
affection is put upon the work when thou give for mercy sake. That our alms
then may be the alms that God has required, let our inward affection go
with the outward action, let our greiving for our brothers misery, work in us
a releeving of his necessity, as our Savior having compassion on the people,
fed the hungry, gave sight to the blind, and healed the sick: for want of
this, either we distribute not at all, or not well, cheerfully in heart,
countenance, and tongue, and readily in the work done

Now to stir us up to this work of works, this action both of mercy and
righteousness too: in searching the Scriptures, I find a cloud of motives,
but because the time straiteneth me, I will only insist, on these three, the
estimation of our works of mercy now, the commemoration of them hereafter,
and the remuneration of them forever. For the estimation of them it is such,
that what we do unto our brethren therein, is accounted done unto Christ,
what we deny unto them, is reckoned to be deneyed unto him, Matthew. 25.40.45.
As when the lowest and least member of the mystical body of the Church is
touched, Christ the head thereof is grieved, Act. 9.4.5. So when the least
work of mercy, a Cup of cold water is given to a Disciple in the name of a
Disciple, Christ the master is relieved, he that has pity on the poor
lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17.

Manus pauperis est gazophylacium Christi. and quicquid pauper accipit,
Christus acceptat.
The poor man's hand is Christ's treasury, and what the poor receives, Christ
himself accepts, says Peter Chrysologus. For the commemoration hereafter,
they shall be had in remembrance at the last day, either before or without any
mention of our other works; Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for I was an hungered and ye
gave me meat. I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye
took me in: naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye visited me: I was
in prison and ye come unto me, Matthew. 25.34.35.36. Our praying, preaching,
participating of the Sacraments, Chastity, temperance, honoring of Parents,
loving of truth, yea Martyrdom it self, shall seem to be omitted and our
good deeds in communicating to the necessities of Gods Saints, principally to
be remembered, God concealeth all the other good deeds of righteous men, Tacet
Donlinus omnia caetera recte facta justorum and solas eleemosynas commemorare
dignatus est, tacuit omnia male facta iniquorum, and solam steriitatem
eleemosynae increpandam esse judicat, Aug. tom. 10 homil 28. In regno caeli
coram omnibus Angelis, in conventu resurgentium quod Abel pass^s sit, quod
mundum conseruavit Noe, quod Abraham fidem servavit, quod Moses legem tulit
quod Petrus crucem Jesus resupinus ascendit, deus tacet, and clamat folum, quod
pauper comedit, dicens esurivi. Si vis esle mercator optimus, fae^crator
egregius, da quod non pote^ ret^nere, ut recipias quod non potes amittere, da
modicu^ ut recipias centuplum da temporalem possessionem, ut consequaris
haereditatem aeternam, Aug in Ep. Mercatura tua negotiatioque caelum est, da
panem and accipe Paradisum, parva da and magna suscipe, da mortalia and recipe
immortalia Chry. hom. 9. de panit Non tam propter pauperes, quam propter
impendentes eleemolynas d^us instituit, Chrysostom hom. 37. adpopulum Antiochenum.
and vouchsafes to reckon up our alms only; he concealeth again all the
evil deeds of wicked men, and judges that only barrenness in doing
almesdeedes is to be rebuked, says Austin, and Chrysologus again, In the
Kingdom of heaven before all the Angels, in the assembly of them that rise
again, God concealeth that Abel suffered, that Noah preserved the world, that
Abraham kept the faith, that Moses gave the Law, that Peter went up to the
cross of Christ with his feet upward, and he only speaks of that which
the poor eats, saying I was hungry and ye fed me, etc.

Now for the remuneration of them hereafter, although we give nothing but what
we have received, though we be not owners, but Stewards of these earthly
goods, yet Christ will reward (not in merit but in mercy) our alms in earth
with treasure in heaven, the bestowing of our earthly Mammon, with a receiving
of us into the heavenly habitation, Luke 16.9. We shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just, Luke 14.14. If thou will be an excellent Merchant, a
notable Usurer, give that which thou can not hold, that thou may receive
that which thou can not loose, give a little that thou may receive an
hundredfold, give thy temporal possession that thou may obtain an
everlasting inheritance, says Austin, and Chrysostom likewise, thy
Merchandise and traffic is heaven, give bread and receive paradise, give
little things and receive great things, give mortal things and receive
immortal things. In doing then some good unto the poor, we do more unto our
selves; For (as Chrysostom says) God has ordained alms not so much for the
poor, as for the bestowers sakes, as Lucullus that magnificent Roman answered
some Grecians marvelling why he entertained them so bountifully, somewhat, O
Guests, for your sake, but the greatest part is for Lucullus own sake.

Nonnihil, oho spites vestra causa, sed maxima pars Luculli gratia Plut. in
Romans Apop.
Saint Austin says, the poor may say unto thee that I in receiving alms give
no less unto thee, then thou in bestowing them give unto me. For if there
were not some to receive thine alms, thou could not give earth and receive
heaven. Let us then so esteem this estimation, so remember this commemoration,
so have an eye to this recompense of reward, that we may never be weary of
this well-doing.

And so I come to the measure, he gave much alms. He was not like the Lions
den in the fable that received all things, but let nothing go but as he had
received plentifully of God, so he did minister plentifully to the wants of
his poor brethren. The rich men of the world then must do that which they see
in him, be rich in distributing according to Paul's precept 1 Timothy 6.17* and old
Tobias to his son, if thou have abundance, give alms accordingly, Chap. 4.8.
To this purpose is that commendation of the Godly man, that he has dispersed,
sowed his alms liberally, as the husband man does his seed, and of Dorcas,
Act. 9. and the Apostle would have it a matter of bounty not of covetousness,
2 Cor. 9.5. opposing it to covetousness as being contrary to it. And to set an
edge to us herein, let us remember that our liberality in this kind is not our
loss, but our gain. He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he
that swoeth bountifully shall reap bountifully 2 Cor. 9.6. according to that
of the Wiseman, there is that scatteret hand yet increases Prove. 11.24. Upon
the multiplying of the loaves wherewith Christ fed the poor, Cyrill says,
lib. 1. in Ioh, cap. 18. Liberality is commended to us in this Miracle, and it
is said as it were with a loud voice, Liberalitas nobis hoc miraculo
commendatur and quasi magna voce dicitur, Quanto plura dabi^liberaliter and
misericorditer, tanto tibi, plura largius confluent. Eleemosyna non depauperat
s^d ditat, promissum enim est, date and dabitur vobis, Chrysostom. Vt dives sis, tua
largiter da, ut colligas disperge, imitate seminantem seminain benedictionibus
ut de benedictionibus metas. Homil. 53. and 68. ad popul. Antioch. Exhaurire
fontem liberalitatis, Cicero. Ne liberalitas liberalitatepereat. Hierom. ad
Paul. Dabo egenti, sed non ut ipse egeam, succurro perituto, sed non ut ipse
perea^, Se^eca.
by how much thou shall give many things liberally and mercifully, by so much
many things shall increase more largely to thee. And Chrysostom, Alms
impoverisheth not but inricheth, for it is promised give, and it shall be given
to you, and again that thou may be rich, give thine own freely, that thou
may gather, scatter, imitate the sower; sow plentifully, that thou may
reap plentifully.

But yet our liberality must be proportioned according to our ability, unless
in case of urgent necessity, wherein we must exceed our ability, 2 Cor. 8.3.
according to thy ability stretch out thy hand and give, Eccl. 14.13. Give unto
the most high as he has enriched thee, Eccl. 35.10. and the Apostles rule is,
as God has prospered every man, 1 Cor. 16.1. We must take deed that we do not
draw out the fountain of liberality as Tully says, and that our liberality
perish not by liberality, says Hierom, It is the wise Moralists rule, I will
give to the needy, but not that I should need my self, I will help him that
is ready to perish, but not that I should perish my self.

Let the rich churles of our times consider this who like him that having vowed
Hecatombes to Jupiter for his deliverance, served him at last with Date-shels,
so they owing great gifts to Gods treasury come in with their mites and moates.
Their proportion for their alms is after S. Paul's prescription to Timothy for
his diet, use a little wine says he, give a little alms say they, Clouds they
are that can yield but a drop or two, and fly away, not a whole shower; their
liberality is limited to a Christmas season, afterward their Gates are shut
like Ierich^es Gates, as though all other times were out of season, but they
must know that that rule meets them, unto whomsoe^er much is given, of him
shall be much required, Luke 12.48.

I must entreat your patience for the finishing of the last clause, which is
of the persons receiving his alms, the people. It is meant of all sorts
amongst the people that needed and asked alms, for we must give to them that
need, Ephesians. 4.28. to every one that asks, Luke 6.30. but not to him that
asks every thing, Omni petenti, sed non omnia petenti, ut August. lib. 1. de
sermon, domini in mont^.
if we desire to have them distinguished into their kinds, we shall find
six sorts named by our Savior, Matthew. 25.35. The hungry, thirsty stranger or
harbourlesse, the naked, sick and prisoner, to these we may add out of Esaias.
58.6.7. The oppressed and exiled, especially those which suffer those things
for the truths sake and out of Nehe. 5.11. Luke 14.12. Those that are indebted
above their abilities, the Lame, the blind, the maimed, the decrepite, the
aged, the poor widows and fatherless: if we desire to know what order we
have to keep in doing these works of mercy, to these poor of all sorts, we
have a rule of Saint Austin, Seeing thou can not do good unto all, thou must
especially provide for those, Cum omnibus prodess^ non possis, his potissimum
consulen dum est qui pro locorum et temporum, and quarumlibet rerum
opportunitatibus constrictius tibi quasi quadam sort junguntur, in Doct.
Christ. l. 1. cap. 28,
who according to the conveniences of places and times, and all kinds of
matters and affairs are more narrowly linked unto thee, as it were by a
certain Lot; as to open this a little, in doing mercy we must prefer our
Wives before all other, our Parents before our Children, our Children and our
family before others, our spiritual kindred before our kindred in the flesh,
our kindred before common friends and neighbors, these before strangers,
strangers before enemies, and so excepting our parents and those under our own
charge; we are to prefer those that are linked unto us in many of these
bands, before others but singly tied to us, as a Godly kinsman, before one
religious but not of our kindred* or one of our kindred but religious, a
kinsman, neighbor, and friend, before one that is but kinsman, neighbor, or
friend, Gregory comes here this when he says, Inliberalitate modus
adhibendus est personarum ut primum justis deinde peccatoribus, quibus tamen
prohibemur dare, non quia homines sed quia peccatores in Ep.
that In liberality regard is to be had of the persons, that first we should
give to righteous men, then to sinners, to whom yet we are forbidden to give,
not because, they are men, but because they are sinners.

But in cases of extreme necessity, we must break these ranks, and releeve
even our enemies ready to perish, before our kindred and friends though in
great want, and so those in greater need before those in less, having an
especial respect to those whom God in his providence offers to us, as the
wounded man was to the Samaritan, Luke 10.33.

But what if we be uncertain whether any of these kinds of poor be wicked or
no? Nay what if we know them certainly wicked and vicious? I say if it be
doubtful, let us not be overcurious in searching, if Abraham had done so, he
had missed to entertain Angels says Chrysostom in Romans 12. be not (says
Nazianzen) overcurious to examine, who is worthy, Seeing it is better to give
to the unworthy for love of the worthy, then to hazard it, that the worthy
should be defrauded for a suspicion of unworthiness. Our Savior did without
curiosity kiss Judas that killed him: if he be certainly wicked, we must be
merciful as our heavenly father is merciful, who causes the Sun to shine
on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust,
Matthew. 5.45. They are called alms because we give to unworthy and we give not
to the manners, but to the men, as Laertius reports that Aristotle answered
in such a case, Non moribus damus sed hommi Chrysostom. conc. 2. de lar.
Laertias Lib. 5. cap. 1. I gave it not to the man but to humane condition, I
pitied not the manners but the man, and Hierom says well, Non homini sed
humanae sorti dedi, non more sed hominem commiseratus; Qui indigenti
eleemosynam tribuit nec prodelicto spernit, misericord^ am vere scivit; natura
enim respicienda non person^ Hieron. in Eccl. 12. Duo nominasunt, aliud quod
homo, aliud quod peccator; Quod homo opusest dei, quodpeccator opus est
hominis, da operidei, noli operi hominis.
He that gives an alms to the needy, and despises him not for his default,
shows mercy truly; For the nature is to be respected, not the person. Saint
Austin has a pretty distinction in this kind; There are two names, one that
he is a man, another that be is a sinner, that he is a man is the work of
God, that he is a sinner is the work of man, give to the work of God, give
not to the work of man. And he interprets what it is to give to the work of
man, to a sinner in regard of his sin, to an Hunter, Stage player or Harlot,
in respect of their profession, Aug. in Psalm. 102. But as for those sturdy,
vagrand and lazy droanes who being strong to labor, will eat and not work,
who have taken up Satan's trade to compass the earth, who live without God,
without Magistrate, without Minister, without calling in the world, we must
withdraw our selves from them, if they will not work they must not eat, 2
These. 3.6.10. if their extreme necessity be such that they must have an alms,
yet, their impiety deserves a rod for their backs, and it is the best alms
that can be done to them, to execute the laws made against them, both that
they may be brought into order, and also that the truly poor may receive that
which these drones devour. These are the persons that we must do alms to,
and in such rank and order as I have recited. It is no being merciful or
doing of alms if we feast our rich friends, or neighbors, if we give great
gifts to our betters, or equals, either to curry favor, shun displeasure, or
because we have or would recieve a like or greater benefit; if we keep an
open and dissolute house for drunkards and good fellows, the one may be civil
courtesy, the other uncivil prodigality, Laudent tejelunantium viscera, non
er^ctantium plena convivia, Hieron.
neither Christian charity. Let the bowels of the hungry praise thee, not the
full bankets of the Gorbellies says S. Ierom He that considers the poor and
needy is blessed. The Lord give us understanding as in all things, so in this,
that showing mercy we may find it with the Lord in that day. Now to God the
Father etc.

THE FOVRTH SECTION
Acts 10. verse. 2. A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house,
which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always.


I Come to you now this fourth time with that commendation which the spirit of
truth (whose testimony we know to be true) gives of this religious proselite
Cornelius. Now he was not like the mongrell brood of those Jews, who had
married wives of Ashdod, that spoke half in the language of the Jews, half
in the language of Ashdod, Neh. 13.23.24. He was not religious by halfes, he
served not God in an unrighteous holiness, as many who profess to know God
and to be zealous for him, yet will do no good amongst their people, or in an
unholy righteousness, as they who are ready to do good, and show great
kindness amongst their people with whom they dwell, but care not for the
matters of religion, and Gods service what it become of them, but with the love
of his neighbor whom he had seen he joined the love of God whom he had not
seen, with charity toward men, he practiced petty toward God and prayed God
continually. Wherein all things are 3 things ( as 3 things are all) the action
he prayed, Omnia sunt tria. Tria sunt omnia.
2. the object God, 3. the manner always.

I begin with the action, the original is, (...) which (...) properly a
supplicating and suing for the averting of evil either come or coming upon
him, (...)
for the Apostle in four words seems to make four kinds of prayers, (...)
1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort that supplications, which are deprecations of all evils
either imminent or incident; (...)
petitions for all necessary good things either temporal or spiritual;
intercessions for others, that God would free them from evil* (...)
fill them with good; thankesgivings either for benefits conferred upon, or
evils removed from us or others, (...)
be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority. But here the
special is put for the general, (...) for (...) he supplicated to God, (...)
for h^e invocated and prayed with all prayer and supplication, as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 6 18. Whereof if any amongst us be so ignorant (as I fear too
many amongst u^ are but children in understanding) as to ask me what is this
whereof thou speak: as the Philosophers at Athens did Paul of his doctrine,
Act. 17.19. I say it is a religious service, wherein we ask of God only for
Christ's sake all Spiritual and Temporal gifts, according to his Commandment
and promise, and also give thanks to him for gifts received. Some of the
Schoolmen go too far when they define prayer to be a petition which is
directed to God, Oration est petitio, quae ad deum. dirigitur, vel ad personas,
vel ad personam propter ipsum.
or to some persons or person for him, Biell de canone Missae 61. That so the
Saints may be brought in to have part in our suites, but such honor have none
of the Saints; Oration est mentis devetio, id est coversio in deum per pium and,
hum^lem affectnum. (...).
Saint Augustine speaks the same language of Canaan, Prayer is a devotion of
the mind, that is a turning it to God by a pious and humble affection, and
Damascene, Prayer is an ascending up of the mind to God, and an asking of
covenient things of him.

Now do we look on him and do likewise? Judge. 7.17. be we followers of him,
that good which we see and hear in this good man let us do; as he prayed with
all prayer and supplication so let every one of us that will be of Gods
household power out our souls in prayers unto him; nay what speak I of
following Cornelius only? Let us take for an example of lifting up our hearts
and our heads in prayer, all the Elders and worthies of God that now inherit
the promises, who in their generations called on the name of the Lord, and
sought his face from time to time, according to that Psalm. 22.5. they cried
unto him, and were delivered, they trusted in him, and were not confounded. Yea
the chief shepherd of our souls, who in the days of his flesh offered up
prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. I need not
relate particulars, they are so well known, I cannot insist upon them, they
are so many in number; Never was any of this family that did not ask good
gifts of the father of this household. Non viviturexemplis solum.
But in this point weerely not on examples only, that which we do herein we
may do upon warrant sealed unto us. The King of heavens mandate is gone out to
this purpose. Seek ye my face, Psalm. 27.8. Call upon me, Psalm. 50.15. Seek
the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Isa. 55.6.
Ask, seek, Knock, Matthew. 7.7. Come unto me all that travel and are heavy
laden, Mat. 11.28. Watch and pray, Mark. 13.33. Pray always, Luke 21.36. Pray
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. and 1 Timothy 2.1. So
writes, so charge Paul almost in every Epistle.

And to stir up our pure mind heereunto we have a cloud of motives, I will
single out some of the principal, and those either in respect of our selves or
in respect of God, in respect of our selves, our necessity to pray, for stand
we not still in want of tempor^all or spiritual blessings? in fear of evil
falling upon us, in sorrow through evils already fallen upon us. What have we
before we have received it, all comes from Gods hand. We are that man in
the parable, that having a friend come to him has nothing to set before him,
and must fly to our heavenly father and friend for supply of our wants, Luke
11.5. Oration non est nisi indigentium, Aug. in Psa. 36. Prose ora^enecessitas
cogit Chrysostom in Matt.
Who will not supply us without asking, for to that condition he has tied his
grants, Matthew. 7.7. Ask and ye shall receive etc. prayer cannot proceed but
from men in want says Austin, and very necessity compels every one to pray
for himself, says Chrysostom. Thus as David's necessity made him fly to the
bosom of his heavenly father, Psalm. 18 4.5.6. The sorrows of death compassed
me round about, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid. The sorrows of
hell compassed me, the snares of death prevented, me. In my distress I called
upon the Lord and cried unto my God: so he pleads his misery to move God to
mercy, turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and
afflicted. The trouble, of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my
distresses, (...)
Psalm. 25.16.17. The very heathen Poet could bid us pray, for all men have
need of God.

But if we had nothing but our own need to in courage us, we might have but
cold comfort* For many with Lazarus make show of need enough to the rich
Churles of the world, and cannot speed, many with the diseased man at the
poole of Bethesda lie in distress, and none will put them into the curing
poole, John 5. Therefore as on our side there is need, so on Gods side there is
good speed, that we might have strong consolation. It is not with suitours
that come to him, as Absalom traduced his fathers government, that none was
deputed of the King to hear them a Sam 16. Nor as it was with Baals Priests
which cried from the morning to the evening and had no answer, nor any to
regard them, 1 King. 18 he answers not as Philip of Macedone with an, I am
not at leisure, Non vacat.
but when they cry with their voice unto him he hears out of his holy mount,
Psalm. 3. His ears are open unto their prayers Psalm 34. his proper style is the
God that hears prayer Psalm. 65.3. therefore all flesh shall come unto him.
Nay he is so forward herein that Isa. 65.24. It shall come to pass, that
before they call he will answer and while they are yet spea^ing he will
hear, and his hearing and speeding go together, this is the confidence that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears
us; and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we
have the petitions that we desire of him, 1 Ioh. 5.13.14. Whatsoever we ask
the father in Christ's name he will do it, John. 14 13. The righteous cry and
the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles, Psalm. 34.17
Look at the generation of old, and see, did ever any trust in the Lord, and
was confounded? or did any ab^de in his fear, and was forsaken? or whom d^d
he ever despise, that called upon him? Eccles 2.10. How should this kindle a
zeal of prayer in us? how should it set an edge upon our devotions that ^ay?
upon this that God had forgiven David his sins when he prayed and confessed
them, he infers for this cause shall every one that is godly pray unto the
Lord, in time when he may be found, surely in the floods of great waters, they
shall not come nigh unto him, Psalm. 32.6. the negligence of the asker is
worthily reprehended where there is no doubt of the mercy of the giver says
Chrysostom. Petentis negligentia reprehenditur ubide dantis misericordia non
dubitatur Chrysostom. Nil potentius homine orante. Oration justi est quasi clavis
coeli etc. Aug. ser. 135 detemp. Quando fidelis and humilis and fervens oration
suerit, sine dubio caelum penetrabit, unde certum est quod van 2 redire non
postir Bern. Orario oranti est subsidium, deo sacrificium daemonibus flagellum,
Aug. Oration est animae sanctae praesidium, Angelo bono solatium, diabolo
supplicium, gratum deo obsequium, Aug. Gravis nobis est inimici tentatio, sed
long graviorilli nostra oration. Bern. sermon. de. dedic. Eccl.
As Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so a Christians in prayer and as
Chrysostom says, nothing is more powerful then a man that prays. The
effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails much, Iam. 5. And like
Jacob wrestling in prayer with God (For he wept and made supplication, he had
power over the Angel and prevailed, Hos. 12.3.4.) will not suffer him to
depart without a blessing, Genesis 32. Prayer so prevailed for Sodom that Abraham
ceased praying for it, before the Lord ceased granting, it both opened and shut
the womb, nay it both opened and shut the heaven in Eliahs time: it removed
the Plagues of Egypt, freed the Israelites of the fiery Serpents, healed the
Leprosy of Miriam, vanquished the Amalekites, caused the sun to stand a
whole day I^s. 10. obtained water for, Sampson in his thirst, strength in his
need to be revenged on his enemies, Iud. 16. Brought thunder and lightening
from heaven in Samuels time, fire in Eliahs time, healed the sick, cast out
the Devils, opened the prisones for Gods servants to come forth, raised the
dead, obtained remission of sins, Iam. 5.14.15 and eternal life, Psalm. 21.
So true is it that the Prayer of the righteous is as the key of heaven, prayer
goes up, and mercy comes down, when our prayer shall be faithful and
humble and fervent, (says Bernard) out of doubt it will pierce the heavens
from whence it is certain that it cannot return empty. Hence are those
Elogies of the fathers given to prayer, that it is au aid to him that prays,
a sacrifice to God, a scourge to the devils, and that it is a safeguard to an
holy soul, a comfort to the good Angel, a torment to the Devil, an
acceptable service to God, and Bernard says excellently, that the temptation
of the adversary is grievous to us, but our prayer is far more grievous to
him.

If then we are the Church of God, sanctified in Christ, and called to be
Saints let us call on the name of the Lord (for these go together 1 Cor. 1.2)
and offer up these Sacrifices of the fruits of the lips prayer and praise unto
him, Heb. 13.15. making our requests ( Phil. 4.6.) manifest at his mercy seat.
They are no sons but bastards that ask not good gifts of their heavenly
father. And here I can never sufficiently enough bewail the impiety of a
generation of carnal Christians too general amongst us that call not upon God,
Psalm. 14. that through the pride of their countenance will not seek after God,
Psalm. 10.3. God is not in their thoughts, nor in their mouths at all to bless
his name; but he is too frequently in their mouths to blaspheme his holy and
fearful name, most unholily and with ut fear. It is with them as Gentilletus
in examine Trid. conc. said of the old Monks, that their fasts were very fat,
their prayers very lean. Tantum orant, utiis qui hoc de illis audiunt
incredibile vicea^ur, ita nimis hoc faciunt ut hinc judicenrur inter haeretico^
numer-ndi, Aug. c. 57 de haeres. Maxim si ad praxi^ accederet persuasio
The old Heretics the Euchites prayed so much, that they were reckoned
heretics for it, they pray so much that it may seem incredible to these
which hear this of them, they do it so much, that hereupon they are judged to
be reckoned amongst heretics says Austin.

But the common sort of our Christians are in the other extreme, they do it so
little that they may be accounted heretics, if to their practice their
persuasion should be added, if they should both omit it and believe they sin
not in their omission. For entering into their chamber and praying in private
either alone or with their family, they are like Festus they cannot get
convenient time, like as it was with them in the parable, their buying of
Farms, trying of Oxen manying of Wives, matters of profit or pleasure, rioting
and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, hunting and hawking, dicing and
carding, and a world of vanities, swallow up all their time, leave them none
for prayer. Hours, days, months years ages are consumed either in doing
nothing, or in doing naught or that which is to no purpose, Nihil agendo, male
agendo, aliud agendo. Domine miserere mei Dominus nobiscum
but minutes serve their turn for this purpose, a Lord have mercy on us, or,
the Lord be with us, is enough for a day or a week with them, their short
devotion cares for no longer invocation: Nay, with Gallio, they care for none
of these spiritual matters at all, as Chrysostom said of his Auditorie that
they thought reading of the Scriptures did belong only to the Clergy and
Monks, so these abandon prayer and meditation to Ministers only; let Priests
pray, they must play out their time. Forentring into Gods house they do it
more for fashion then affection, Magis pro more quam amore.
to see, to be seen of men, then to see God in the beauty of holiness. When
they go to the Temple to pray, they do nothing less then pray, yielding their
bodily presence, but scarce a bodily gesture fit for prayer, and suffering
their hearts to run after covetousness, or any other wickedness, Ezekiel. 33.
little considering as Chrysostom speaks, how great felicity is granted them,
Quanta concessi est fae licitas, quanta collata gloria, fabularicum Deo, cum
Christo miscere colloquia, optare quod velis, quod defideras postulare, Chrysostom.
how great glory is bestowed on them, to have conference with Christ, to wish
for what thou willest, to ask for what thou defirest.

Sometimes teeth are set on edge with the sour Grapes of the old Adamites and
Peodicians who as Clemens Alex. stromat. lib. 7. says) held prayet needless
because God knows our wants, is of himself a liberal giver, and has from
the beginning determined what he will give; But we pray not to acquaint God
with our wants which he knows not before, but to obey his Commandment, to
give him the honor due to him in acknowledging him the searcher of our hearts,
to stir up our faith and to seek the blessing which he has determined by
such means as he has appointed according to that Phil. 4.6 In every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto God, and Iam. 4.2. Ye have not because ye ask not, Luke 11.13. Our
heavenly father gives the holy spirit to them of death, and what not? no doubt
by it he would make good the entreating of Christ by Thomas Beckets blood Thou
by the blood of Thomas shed for thee make us a scend whither he is gone up, in
his new learning then though we beg grace and glory, any thing, every thing
of the Saints in direct terms, yet we mean only that they should beg it
at Christ's and Gods hands for us. But what is this to make Christ only a
Mediator between God and the Saints, and the Saints Mediators between him and
us, whereas 1 Timothy 2. There is but one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. Augustine notably overthrows this error, li. 2. c. 8. cont.
Epist. Parmeniani making the Bishop a Mediator between God and the people if
any man say you have me a mediator with the Father, and I make intercession
for your sins, what good and faithful Christian would endure him? who would
not look at him as the Disciple of Antichrist? He is the only and true
Mediator that makes intercession for all and none for him; Paul makes
himself no Media: our between God and the people. For if he were a Mediator
then should all his fellow Apostles too, and so there would be many mediators,
and that point of Paul not stand good, that there is but one Mediator, 1 Timothy
2.5. and Cyrill. tom. in 1 Ioh. li. 11. says upon those words ask in my name,
Ioh. 16. He adds these words to show himself the Mediator, Hae everba addit
ut se mediato^ em ostendat.
and that none comes to the Father but by the Son, by whom we have
entrance through the pirit, and that therefore he calls himself the way the
truth and the life, In quantum filius est un a cum patre nobis largitur bona,
i^ quantum mediator and Ponrifex et paracletus nostras preces ad patrem adducit.
Ioh 14. And for as much as he is the Son, together with the Father he gives
us good things and forasmuch as he is our mediator; high Priest, and
Comforter, he brings our prayers to the Father.

This was the divinity of antiquity, they thought Christ presented and obtained
our suites not the Saints The blessed Saints and holy Angels are not to be
invocated in prayers, for they conceive not our inward thoughts, hear not our
outward words, understand not our state on earth, are not present to them that
call upon them, are not to be believed in, are not Gods, nor Creators, to whom
service must be done, Romans 1. Gal. 4.8 but creatures, but our fellow servants
whom we must not serve 1 Cor. 7.23. Nay who would not have us serve them,
Agnoscant Arriani sanctos non a creato postulare ut aux iliator sit. Orat. 2.
contr. Arrianos Quis oinsanum caput martyrs aliquando adoravit? Hier, cont.
Vigil An eundum mihi fuerit ad Angelos? qua prece? quibussacramentis? mediator
inter deum and hominem oportebat ut haberet aliquid simile deo, aliquid si mile
hominibus, ne in utroque similis hominibus, long esset a deo, aut in utroque
similis deo, long esset ab hominibus, atque etiam mediator non esset. Aug.
conf. li. 10. c. 24.
Reav, 19.22. Athanasius says against the Arrians let the Arrians acknowledge
that the Saints do not beg of a created thing to be their helper, and
Hierome, O foolish man who did ever adore the Martyrs. Austin in his
confessions says, what must I go unto the Angels, but with what prayer? with
what sacrament? It was meet that a Mediator between God and man, should have
something like to God and something like unto men least being like to men in
both, he should be far from God or like to God, in both he should be far from
me, so should not be a Mediator. Olympias wrote to her son A lexander the
great, that if he took upon him to be Jupiters son it would make Juno angry. I
dare say if the Saints could hear such unlawful prayers they would be much
displeased, at the giving of Gods honor to them, and cry out as the Angel,
Rev. 19. See thou do it not, we are thy fellow servants and thy brethren
worship God.

That same renagate turne-coate Spalato, in his recantation written since his
leaving of England says, that whilst he was Deane of Winasore he did with
great joy hear one of his Canons there in a Sermon before his Majesty say,
that he saw no cause why every man might not turn him to his Angel-keeper, and
say O Angell-keeper pray for me. But to omit his lies let it be granted which
yet is doubtful, that every man has at all times a certain Angel to keep
him, yet by what commandment, by what example is he to be called up n^ may we
not here say, who has required this at your hand: Isa. 1. Is not ous an
intruding into those things which a man has not not seen, a being vainly puffed
up by our fleshly mind and understanding, without any teaching of God in his
world? Col. 2.18. Would not such an Angel (if he did visibly appear and
manifest himself to him that he keeps) say with the Angel in the
Revelation, see you do it not?

I have bin long in this point, I shall male amends for it with brevitie in the
next, which is the manner always. (...) Collatis testimonis dem^nst^are (...).
We shall the better understand what is meant here if we do as the Apostle did
in disputing with the Jews Act. 9.22. Show it by comparing of testimonies.
Saint Paul expresses this more plainly, in Ephesians 6.18. when he bids the
Ephesians to pray always with all prayer and supplication, taking all
occasions of prayer watching thereunto with all perseverance and persevering
therein without fainting, and Saint Peter, 1 Ep. 4 7. Saying watch unto prayer,
and the Apostles practice is as it were a gloss upon this, night and day,
praying exceedingly that we might see your face 1 Thessal* 3.10. Without
ceasing I have remembrance, 2 Timothy 1.3. According to that of David evening and
morning and at noone will I pray and cry aloud, Psalm. 55.17. three times a day,
Dani. 6.10. and our Saviors words that we should pray always and not faint,
Luke 18.1.

The Messalian ^^^^etickes grounding upon Luke 18.1. and 1 These. 5.17 Gave
themselves to nothing but prayer, contemning preaching, reading, participating
of the Sacraments neglecting working in their calling and doing good in holy
duties. Men not worthy of confutation, that could not distinguish the things
that differ, but made Gods commandments contrary which are subordinate one to
another. I say in our Saviors words, these things they ought to have done and
not to have left the other undone. Against their error, the precepts of praying
night and day, without ceasing without intermission, without fainting must be
understood either of the affection or of the action; De affectu vel de actu.
for the affection of praying, it must be continual, which if it be, the
prayer is continual. In ipsa fide, spe etcharitate continuato defidetio semper
oramus. Defiderio semper orandum, Aug. 122. ad Probum. Sanistim^egrave; sic
accipitur ut, nulio die intermitrantu^ c^rta. tempora ocand^, Aug. har. 57.
In faith it self ( says Saint Austin) hope and charity, we always pray with
a continued desire, we must always pray in heart and desire, for the Action of
prayer, it is most soundly understood that on no day the certain times of
praying be omitted. We must keep our set times both public and private, and
besides these we must upon every occasion have certain mental or vocal
ejaculations or dartings out of our desires to God according to that of
Augustine Ep. 121. c. 10. the brethren in Egypt are said to have frequent
prayers but those very short and as it were darted out speedily, lest the
fervency lifted up with watchfulness, which is needful for him that prays,
should be dulled and vanish away with long delay, hereby showing that this
fervency as it is not to be dulled if it cannot last, so it is not to be
quickly broken off, if it can last. We see then what it is to pray always, to
have a continued desire of praying, to omit none of our set times either
public or private, to be ready upon every occasion to lift up our mind to
God, and darre out our prayers, and not to faint in all this, Luke 18.1. In a
word to pray always is to pray frequently, without intermission and constantly
without fainting.

We have the Saints our patterns and presidents herein, David's and Daniels
thrice a day, David's seven times a day, and his midnights praising of God. The
Apostles giving themselves to prayer, Act. 6. Paul's praying night and day, his
precepts, pray always, Ep. 6 18. Continue in prayer, watch in the same, Col.
4.2^ Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. Continue instant in prayer, Romans
12.12. Annas serving the Lord with prayer night and day, Luke 2. the Apostles
widow continuing in prayers and supplications night and day, 1 Timothy 5.5. The
parable of the poor widow im^ortuning the unrighteous Judge Luke 18. The woman
of Canaans instance notwithstanding all checks. Matthew. 15. Paul's tripling his
prayers for his deliverance, 2 Cor. 12 Our Saviors going a part to pray,
spending whole nights in prayer, commanding us to watch and pray, always Luke
21.36. are well known unto us, Quod pernoctaverie dominus in orande and quod
prolixius oraverit quid aliud quam nobis praebebatexemplum? in tempore precator
opportunus, ^um patre exauditur aeternus, Aug. ep. 121. Genua in morem cameli
sensum contactus an uerint, assiduitate orandi. Cum vita defunctam
lavarevelient in genibus cubi^sque concrecam callorum duritiem apparvisse.
and should be as well imitated. That our Lord concluded all night in praying,
and that he used prolixity there in what did he else but give an example to us,
being in the time (of his flesh) a seasonable prayer to God, but with his
father an everlasting hearer and granter of our suites, says Augustine.
Eusebius li. 2. c. 23. reports of Iacobus Iustus, the brother of the Lord,
that his knees like a Camel, had lost the sense of touching with assiduity of
praying etc.

Gregory in his Dialogues reports of Trasilla a Virgin his Aunt, that when
they went about to wash her being dead, there appeared a thick hardness in
her knees and elbowes. Gregory Nazianzen in his Epitaph for his sister
Gorgonia says, that she was so given to prayer th^ther ^nees seemed to cleave
and grow to the ground Hierom in the life of Paul the Eremite, Propefinem.
Etiam cadaver mortuum officioso gestu precabatur.
near to the end writes that he was found by S. Anthony dead, kneeling upon
his knees, holding up his hands, listing up his eyes, Even the dead carkeise
prayed with an officious gesture. Theodesius the Emperor being to fight
against the Tyrant Eugenius continued a whole night in prayer, as Theodoret lib
5. ca. 24. and Zozomen page 421 report and as Saint Augustine says of him,
lib. 5. de civit. c 26. he fought more by praying then by striking. Magis
orando quam feriendo pugnantes Sicut nullum est momentum quo homo ^on fruatur
deipietate aut mis^rico; dia, sic nullum debet ^ste momentum, quo eum
praesentem non habeat in memoria Bern. de interiort domo. cap. 48.


Oh then bel^ved let us taking these whothies for our examples always abound
in this work of the Lord praying without ceasing, watching unto prayer being
servent therein, and c^ntinuing in it without fainting. As there is no moment
(says Bernard) wherein man injoyeth not the goodness or mercy of God, so
there ought to be no moment, wherein he should not have him present in his
memory.

There is not a more certain sign of a faithful servant of the Lord, as the
neglect thereof is a plain proof of aprophane chart* Cum videro quempiam
Chryso. li. 2. orand. deum.
When I see a man that cares not for prayer nor fervently and vehemently bent
thereunto, it is evident to me that he has no good disposition in his mind:
Again when I see a man that can never be glutted with serving of God, and
reckoning it his greatest loss, if he pray not continually; I suppose that he
does surely meditate on all good duties, and is a temple of God. For if man's
garment, his gate, his laughter declare what he is, much more is his praying a
sign of all righteousness, virtue and piety. There is no better weapon to
fight against our spiritual adversaries and our inward lusts, Frequens oration
extinguit impugnationem vitiorum Oration continua superat tela diaboli, Bern
ser* 67. de modo been vivendi
frequent prayer (says Bernard) quenches the affaults of vices, continual
prayer overcommeth the weapons of the Devil.

And whatsoever we do whether we eat or drink, let us do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus with prayer and giving of thanks to God and the Father by him,
Col. 3.17. Let us prayto the Lord when we lie down, to lighten our eyes that
we sleep not in darkness, Psalm. 13. When we rise up to send us good speed
this day as Abraham's servant did, Genesis 24. When we go out and in to be with us
in our journey as Jacob did Genesis 28. according to that of Hierome when we go
out of our lodging, let prayer arm us, when we return from the street let
prayer meet us. Egredientes dehospitio armetoratio, regtedientibus de platea
occurrat oration.
When we take in hand any business, to prosper the work of our hands upon us,
Psalm. 90. when we sit down to eat and drink, to bless these creatures unto
us; when we perform any service to him, to accept it at our hands; when we are
partakres of his Table let us pray him to make us worthy receivers to our
salvation, and give thanks to him for that spiritual meat, that he gives us
there to eat, and that spiritual drink that he gives thereto drink, for
hence was the Lords supper called the Eucharist, of the giving of thanks used
in the celebrating of it, and an oblation or sacrifice because as Justin Martyr
said 2 Apolog pro Christianius the Minister sends up praise and glory to the
Father of all. And Gregory says, (...)
that the Apostles used the Lords prayer to the consecration, lib. 7. Epist.
63. Justin Martyr, that the Eucharist was consecrated by prayer. Prece fieri
Eucharistiam, Apol 2. Invocatione summi number inis li. 1. epist. 1. Iren.
grariarum action, li. 4. cap. 57.
Cyprian, by calling upon the high God, and Iraeneus, by giving of thanks, if
we walk according to this rule, peace and mercy shall be upon us from this
time forth and for evermore.

FINIS.

