A declaration of the recantation of John Nichols (for the space almost of two
years the Popes Scholar in the English Seminary or College at Rome) which
desires to be reconciled and received as a member into the true Church of
Christ in England.

1 Esdr. 4.38, 41. Magna est veritas and praualet.

Tertul. de virginibus. Whatsoever sauoreth against the truth, is an heresy,
be it never so ancient a custom.

1. Peter 2.17. Fear God: Honor the King.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Anno 1581. Februarii. 14.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE decorative border incorporating the royal English
blazon or coat of arms

Illustri Equiti, clarissimoque Regiae Maiestatis Londini Castrorum praesidi,
custodique insigni, praestanti, ac nobilitate verae sapientiae, and virtutis
insignibus decorato, Domino Odoeno Hopton, domino suo obseruando, Johannes
Nicholaus gratiam and pacem a Deo patre, and a Domino nostro Jesus Christo.
PATER ille coelestis (vir praestantissime, omni pietatis, atque religionis
genere perpolite and exculte) sic mei pestilentis papistici erroris tabe pene
consumpti, and ab omni fere virtute remoti tandem misertus est, vt ex
densissima mortis caligine, atque profunda ignorantiae abysso, me sibi ingratum
and inobedientem filium eruere dignaretur: atque in suae ecclesiae, Luke 15.20,
21.
nullis idololatriae sordibus maculatae, gremium reuocare non negaret: and
omnimoda bonarum literarum eruditione refertos, satisque sanctitatis notis
cumulatos viros excitaret, qui suo fraterno labor and industria, contenderent
quam maxim possent, in Christi Euangelicae veritatis agnitionem me demum
vendicare: quorum incorruptis, nullis hypocrisews inuolucris, and integumentis,
documentis, praeceptisque inuolutis imbutus ac instructus, quorum (inquam)
consilio fretus, and suffultus, (diuina illa gratia animum meum ad bonitatem
disponente) non ambigo, neque animi pendeo, me posse causam meae religionis
suscipere, tueri ac defendere, in conspectu illorum aduersariorum, quos
aliquandiu diurna co^sortij familiaritas mihi no^ ignotos fecit. Ea sunt Dei
omnipotentis in me collocata beneficia, quae enumerando percensere, and
explicando consequi non est mearum virium. Aliquando fedissimae orationis,
vanitatis and ignorantiae seruituti mancipatus eram: iam vero omnis mendacij
and inscitiae obscuritate nocteque fugata, clarissimum mihi veritatis lumen
affulget: ingenium meum antehac adeo deprauatum, and a verbo Dei alienum erat,
vt maiori delectatione, atque vehementiori desiderio, hominum commentitias
traditiones citius approbarem et amplecterer, quam professionem illam
Catholicam, quam Christi Apostoli tradiderunt, martyrs suo sanguine effuso
confirmauerunt, and fideles hucusque conseruant, amplexibus exciperem, sinuque
fouerem: Nunc vero ingenio meo Spiritus sancti flamme accenso and inflammato
(depulsis mentis erroribus, quibus constrictus and irretitus fueram,) Sathanae
imposturas intelligentia and ratione comprehendo, falsae opinionis tenebras ab
oculis depello, (auxilio diuino mihi suffragante) and salutarem Euangelij
veritatem magno cum amore prosequi incipio. Ante hoc conuersionis meae tempus,
verbo Dei aures erant mihi clausae, vt illud audire abhorrerem, atque
reclamarem, in me caecitas ita dominatum habuit, vt fulgentes Christi Euangelij
radios videre aspernarer. Iam ductore Spiritu sancto, atque atroci conscientiae
vulnere stimulatus, animaduerto Papistarum fabulas prorsus incerto niti
fundamento, illorumque religionem non modo nulla afferre conscientiae multis
delictis obrutae and circuncessae efficacia medicamenta, verum etiam altius
tela infligere, animam, (vitae primam causam) diris infaustisque vinculis atque
compedibus arctare and constringere, and plane aperteque Deo eiusque verbo vim
infer. Turpia illorum idola, crassissimi errores, blasphemiae infinitae,
superstitiones detestabiles, vanissima commenta, ac denique vitae inaudita and
horrenda turpitudo, atque dedecus ob oculos mihi versantur. Meditor itaque
atque cogito quantis quamque varijs astutijs and blandimentis, homines cuncti
doli fraudisque expertes, immunesque, versuti Papistae alliciunt atque
titillant, ad suam pernitiosam doctrinam amplexanda^. Ad hos praefatos homines
deludendos, and in sempiternam fraude^ conijciendos, in angelos se lucis
transferunt, and eam vitae exteriorem pietatem prae se ferunt, qua facilius
incautoru^ hominum mentes circumuenire queant. Sed plus gloria and
praedicatione sua bona opera (si bona dici possint) efferunt, atque extollunt,
quam veritas concedere possit. Non verentur illi (omnibus pudoris velis
reuulsis, cunctoque dei altitonantis timore deposito, omnique charitatisnota
relegata and in exilium pulsa) dicere illos coelitum dignitatem, moribus and
institutis, atque vitae sanctimonia consecutos. O impudentes Papistas, mendacij
sordibus illinitos, and omni animi funestae prauitati succumbentes, atque a
fide Christiana, and charitate fraterna auersos! Quotus enim quisque inter vos
vitam non degit belluinam? Quis Dominum timet? Quis illum diligit? Quis
pietatis ruinas edere formidat? Quis inter vos (vt breui comprehendam) fontem
aquae vitae non deserit, and cisternas sibi fodit maxim dissipatas? Iere. 2.13.
Si quorundam Papistarum vitam, omnium scelerum, libidinumque maculis
notissimam, Latinis verbis explicare conarer, Latinae linguae rudes nihil inde
fructus perciperent, quia quod diceretur, neutiquam intelligeretur. Qua de
causa operaepretium me facturum duxi, si nuda ac impolita (bona tamen cum fide,
animoque syncero) exarata narratione beneuolo Lectori satisfacerem, lingua
nostra Anglicana narrando and exponendo ea, quae vidi atque audiui a viris fide
dignis inter illos gesta. Praeterea nostros sacrificulos Romani Pontificis
(filij perditionis) mandato missos and delegatos in hanc florentissimam Angliae
Insulam ad peruertendos huius terrae accolas, and veritatis splendori
insidiantes, quo studio perpetuo tenebras moliuntur in hoc regnum reducendas,
quas huic solo suo paterno minas comminantur, atque quibus conuitijs optimos
quosque viros insectantur, in hac epistola dedicatoria silentio praeteribo. De
Papistis satis hoc in loco verba fecisse videor, and hinc te (vir clarissime,
religione, iusticia, liberalitate, caeterisque heroicis animi dotibus nobiliter
stipate and vallate) hac oratione crasso filo mihi scripta affari liceat, cui
inter homines mortales plurimum debere, ac cui ob tuam erga me charitatem, ad
extremum vitae anhelitum me obstrictum sentio, deuinctumque fateor. (Blanda
absit verbo vanitas.) Quem laborem pro me, cum verae Ecclesiae septis non
tenebar inclusus suscepisti, omnibus patefacia^, cum fueram carceribus
dete^tus, eo quod in Papistaru^ partem propendebam, (and in Seminario
Anglicano, Romae duos (plus minus) annos sede^ collocassem, quam saepe me ad te
accersi vocarique fecisti, quam mansuete humaniterque mecum semper egisti, quam
salubre mihi co^silium impertitus es, vt Papisticae idololatriae faecem
exuerem! nonne concionatores permultos, non vulgari doctrina praeditos ad me
accedere voluisti? vt si qua possent ratione, me coelesti Euangelij veritati
reconciliarent atque deuincirent. Plerosque mihi insuper libros suppeditasti,
quibus nonnunquam lectis, immenso Dei beneficio, magnam inde vtilitatem
salutiferam mihi (paruo temporis interiecto spatio) comparaui. Habito identidem
sermon cum peritis, atque crebris concionibus auditis, ex indubiae veritatis
inimico (Deo adiuuante) dum in his inclusus corporis compagibus fuero, verum
meipsum praestabo amicum, and ad studia sacrarum literarum animum applicabo,
quarum praesidio, Papistarum frauds detegere, and furta conuincere valeam, and
omnibus (Deo meis conatibus auspicante) demonstrabo, quod sit illis artificium,
quo prius persuadent quam doceant, vbi autem veritas docendo potius suadeat,
quam suadendo doceat. Ambros. in 1. cap. ad Romans
Declarabo cunctis istos se no^ putare reos, qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt
creaturae, and relicto Domino, conseruos adorant, sibique persuasum habent Deum
sine mediatore inexorabilem esse, and prorsus ignorant ad reges per tribunos
and comites eu^dum esse: quia homines vtique sunt reges, and nesciunt quibus
debeant Re^publicam credere. Ad Deum autem, quem nihil latet, omnium rerum
merita nouit, ad promerendum suffragatore non est opus, sed mente deuota.
Vbicunque enim talis loquutus fuerit ei, procul dubio respondebit illi. Sed
aduersarij nostri, etsi videa^t scripturas sacras suae sententiae oppositas,
confiteri tamen nolunt se in tetra erroris caligine versari. Quare haec Sancti
Hilarij verba in illos haud indigne quadrare videntur: Hilarious de Trinitate
li. 6. cap. 84.
Grauis and periculosus est lapsus in multis, etsi enim se intelligant, tamen
pudor exurgendi autoritatem sibi praesumit, vt quod errant, prude^tiam velint
existimari, quod cum multis errant, intelligentiam asserant veritatis. Et vnde
illud quaeso? Ex contemptu certe scripturarum, and ex insolenti superbia qua
inflati sunt. Si circundarent sibi quasi murum firmissimum, scripturaru^
doctrinam, nunquam tam cito ad illoru^ interiora irrumpere posset hostis. Tunc
omnes errores, and idola, and similitudines veritatis comminuerent atque
dispergerent, and adeo iudicarent immunda, vt ea (menstruatae mulieris)
sordidissimo sanguini co^pararent. Si cord non ficto diuinum auxilium
compellarent, sibique nihil inaniter arrogarent, Dominus superne intrans in
corda sua, claro suo lumine mentes illoru^ illustraret, rationi (animae formae)
iubar suum infunderet, detegeret occulta, doctorque fieret eorum quae
ignorarent, tantum si illi ea quae ab illis sunt, auferre vellent. Sed omnia
haec media, quibus possent saluari, tanquam si nulli essent vsui, respuunt
spernuntque, qua de ratione illorum salus valde desperanda est. Concedat Deus
Optimus Maximus vt resipiscant, and veritatem agnosca^t, dum huius lucis vsura,
and hoc vitae curriculo fruuntur, atque omnia figmenta, quae multis simplicibus
aditum ad coelorum regnu^ penitus intercludunt, seponant, atque abijciant, and
Sancti Dauidis verborum recordatione^ obliuio nunqua^ deleat, Psalm. 34.13, 14.
quae in Hebraico textu sic se habe^t. Iamim oheu chaiim hecaphets hais mi tou
liroth vsephatheca, merag, lesconecha Netsor: Mirma Middabber. id est, Quis
ille vir qui vult vitam, diliget dies ad videndum bonum, custodi linguam tuam a
malo, and labia tua a loquendo dolum. Et Beatus Paulus: (...), id est, 1. Cor.
6.20.
1. Pet. 1.19.
Empti estis pretio magno, glorificate igitur Deum in corpore vestro, and in
spiritu vestro, quae sunt Dei. Temere fortassis magis quam prudenter hanc
epistolam, nullis verborum phalaris flosculisue Ciceronianis exaratam, tuae
amplitudini dicare conabar, sed meae temeritati tua ignoscat humanitas, atque
dignetur, vt sub tuo patrocinio and tutela, haec breuis recantationis meae
declaratio in lucem aspectumque omnium intrepide prodeat, and impioru^
maleuolentiam flocci pendat, quibus nocendi voluntas non deest, sed officiendi
potestas abest, and declinata recumbit. Ne epistola haec longior sit quam par
est, diutius tuam amplitudinem detinere nolo, sed vt hoc meae erga te
qualecunque obseruantiae monumentum beneuola manu excipere ne grave tibi ducas,
mirum in modum posco and imploro. Dominus Jesus te tuosque (vir magnifice)
muneribus suis ornet, augeatque, and in multos annos Ecclesiae suae conseruet
and retineat: Serenissimam vero Reginam Elizabetham, (quam exteri plerique
omnibus laudis ornamentis efferunt) protegat, and longaeuam in terra faciat, ad
gloriam Dei propaganda^, and ad comprimendam and confringendam inimicorum
suorum audaciam, denique ad consolationem nostram: Nobilissimos Proceres,
adeoque omnes huius regni potentissimos ordines defendat, and omni
benedictionum genere cumulet, and ad verae pietatis, and regni Christi
propagationem perducat. Amen.

Tuae amplitudini addictissimus and humilimus seruus Ioannes Nicholaus.

The preface to the gentle Reader.
GOD that is my record, and searcher of all men's hearts (good Christian
Reader) knovveth, Ier. 11.20. and 17.10. and 20.12. 1. Chron. 28.9. 1. Sam.
16.7. Psalm. 7.10. Esaias. 29.13.
that with unfeigned heart I greatly wished this declaration of my repentance,
and desire to be received to the true Church, to be imprinted, for two
principal causes: the one, to certify my dear country men of my
reconciliation to the true Church, the other of my disposition to do them good
hereafter, when it shall please God to increase me with greater knowledge, and
to manifest how it has pleased Christ our Savior the head shepherd, Heb.
13.20.
to call me away by his instruments the faithful and godly, from the whore of
Babylon, Apoc. 18.9.
from the schole of error and from the temple of heresy, to the City of
righteousness, the true Church, his undefiled spouse. I doubt not but that the
godly and unfeigned lovers of the glorious and comfortable Gospel of Jesus
Christ will heartily rejoice and give God thanks, that it was his divine
pleasure to bring me a lost sheep into his fold, Mat. 18.12. Luke 15.4.
and to him make their prayers in my behalf, that he of his bountiful mercy
will vouchsafe to grant me continual perseverance therein even unto the end
of my life, that I may never swerve from his heavenly truth unto blindness
and error, Psalm. 125.5.
wherewith once seduced by false prophets, I was holden captive. But now
having the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, the truth of his sacred word, and
perfect love of the faithful on my side, I pass not what wicked Papists
speak or do against me: their immoderate and uncivil bitterness proceeding
from the furious and stormy passions of their poisoned hearts I may well
lament, but restrain I can not: therefore I say, Let the Papists here in
England fret and fume, and say of my name what evil or slander they can
devise, let them write their letters to Rheims in France, and from thence to
Rome with the post, and certify all the English Scholars there, that the
Popes scholar their own companion and fellow student is revolted from
papistrie, has left the Pope in plain field, and quite denied him, protested
against his blasphemies, and renounced the deuilish dregs of all his
Idolatry. So soon as these letters shall come to view, Robert Parsons
sometimes of Bailyol College in Oxford.
they will name one Father Parsons Jesuit a Prophet, or Southsayer, for that
he at Rome in the English Seminary in a certain exhortation made to the
scholars, prophesied that one or other of that company (my self being then
present amongst them) should degenerate from their faith, and be the
overthrow of that college: he confirmed also the proof thereof by example,
beginning with Christ and his Apostles, Mat. 26.16. Luke 22.4. Ioh. 6.71.
and pyking out Judas one of the college of Christ that forsook his master,
and then from the college of the Apostles he named Nicholaus that revolted.
Acts. 6.5. Apoc. 2.6.
Now will their divines declayme in the refectory pulpit of my sudden
sequestration, and estranging from their brotherly society. The trial and
experience of their rash judgment, hatred, and envy, mocking and scoffing,
had and pronounced against others, gives me sufficient notice that I shall
incur their like railing, and misreport. I know that I cannot be void of
their imagined slanders, in judging me to be the first begotten son of the
devil, I cannot escape their sinister exposition of all things to the worst:
wherefore I must arm my self with patience, and seeing through Gods goodness
I am reduced from the miserable captivity of blindness and error, to the
true understanding and knowledge of Gods holy truth, I need take no great
thought for their conceived choler, slanderous speech, and railing words of
Satan's prompting, since they have dealt so maliciously with my betters. And
as for their holy father the Popes curse with book, bell and candell, it shall
not grieve me at all, neither will I take one unquiet nappe for all his banning
and cursing: and seeing I have renounced his Popish church, wherein I neither
heard the word of God syncerely taught, the Sacraments rightly administered,
nor the Name of God duly called upon: Seeing that (I say) I forsook the
idolatrous church of Rome, and have so gone from it, Dan. 6.23. and 3.26.
as Daniel went out of the lions den, and the three children out of the
furnace, and am come to that Church, wherein the most earnest Papists them
selves can not deny (if they will say truly and as they think in their own
conscience) but all things be governed purely and reverently in this true
Church of Christ, I have a desirous mind to profit my loving countrymen,
according to the Talent which God of his bountifulness shall give unto me, in
preaching unto them his holy word, in exhorting them unto watchfulness and
prayer against Romish doctrine, which is builded upon false miracles and
traditions of men, being the fantastical devises of their busy brain for
lucre and ambition sake: finally in warning them unto amendment of life, that
both by their faith and conversation Gods name may be glorified. If thou art a
member of that church the spouse of Christ, whereof he is head, and not
Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome, it needs not then (good christian Reader)
much to entreat thee to take in good part this unlearned declaration of my
reconcilement made as it were ex tempore, my self being in prison and wanting
books, to the great impediment and hinderance of this my discourse. The
benevolence of the Papists I seek not, for if I should, it were but in
vain, I can not obtain it, for that I have with upright conscience made a
true rehearsal of such things as I have seen at Rome, yet not all, nor the
twentyeth part thereof, but here one thing, and there another, and so few
things in all: and this I add in the end, if they can not afforde one good
word by me, yet for good fellowshippe sake let them then say, Requiescat in
pace, but let it be a solemn dirge for Aristotle's soul, who never knew the
true God, but ever lived in gentility and blindness of the truth, that he may
be delivered out of Purgatory where they hold him to be, so that we may have
conference with him, and know of him whether it be substantial and true
divinity such as he taught and set forth in writing, or else whether it be
Plato his divinity, who was an Heathen or Gentile, and which of them is best:
and as for the divinity which Christ preached, and was delivered by the
Apostles, and received of the faithful, they are not acquainted with. God
evermore inflame and direct me with his holy Spirit, that the zeal of his
truth may thoroughly pearce and possess my heart, that I may safely walk in
the ways of righteousness and holiness all the days of my life, and utterly
abandon and detest all hypocrisy, and idolatrous superstition.

I. N.

A declaration of Gods benefits toward me a wretched sinner.
How provident a patron, and bountiful a father the Lord of life has been
unto me his unthankful and rebellious child, his sundry and manifold
benefits do testify, and this my unfeigned reconciliation to the true Church
does verefie the same, yea the continuance of his loving kindness was herein
principally declared: for whereas mine own natural corruption wrought daily in
me the banishment out of his favor, and the danger of reprobation, he
notwithstanding in consideration of my frailty, never withstoode to help me
in all dangers both bodily and ghostly, and to pluck me out of the pit of
perdition, whereinto the haynousnesse of my offenses haled me by violence. Oh
gracious God, how shall I a sinner, conceived in sin, and brought up in
iniquity, worthily advance the excellency of thy love? who shall give me a
heart to conceive this thy kindness? whence shall I have utterance to sound out
thy mercy? Of my self (because I am a vessel of wrath subject to sin,
death, hell and condemnation) I can not conceive so perfect a work: thou
therefore which art the everlasting fountain of all goodness, Ier. 2.13. Iam.
1.17.
give it me, oh give it me, and I shall have it, and in the having of it I
shall magnify thy Name, extol thy power, and marvel at thy mercy. Thou have
had special regard to my frail estate, and safety of my soul. I had once
lost the precious pearl of thy blessed Gospel, Matthew. 13.45, 46.
which is the true jewel of all christian joy, but by thy gracious gift I have
found it again, in consideration whereof, Christian duty binds me to take
the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Psalm. 116.12, 13.
and burn the same upon the altar of an humble heart, that the redolent and
perfumed incense thereof ascending up into heaven, Psalm. 51.17.
may be acceptable to thy divine Majesty, whose special delight is in such a
burnt sacrifice and oblation.

A discovery or laying open of my zeal in Popery, and how I preached before
that Antichrist of Rome, and also of the causes of my most happy conversion to
the truth.
IT is not yet a twelue-moneth past (good Christian audience, and well-beloved
brethren in our savior Christ) since that, before some of you now prisoners,
and the^ my scholefelowes, I preached, as you know, commanded by our
superiors at Rome, in defense of the Romish Religion, which now (God be
thanked therefore) (being reduced by the godly and daily counsel of the right
worshipful Sir Owyn Hopton Knight, Lieutenant of her Highness Tower of
London, the strong and pith thy persuasions of learned Preachers, which through
his means and permission, had access unto me, and the hearing of their
fruiteful sermons, confirmed by the true and lively word of Christ Jesus) I
utterly detest. How earnest I was then in persuading the English Students to
embrace Papistrie, and in exhorting you sometimes my Scholefellowes, (as the
Popes Apostles,) faithfully to do your message, consta^tly to take the cross
of Christ upon you in all troubles and afflictions, and courageously to abide
Martyrdom, I think you have in remembrance. About half a year past, Anno.
1580.
I was also requested by the Prefect or Master of the English Stude^ts, named
father Peter Jesuit, a Spaniarde borne, to make a Sermon in the Latin tongue,
upon the festiual day of Peter ad Vincula, certain English Doctors of the
city, and some of the Popes Chapel, with other strangers being present at
dinner. I preached then contrary to ye true Religion, against faith, the
buckler of our defense, the Tower of refuge, the enemy of desperatio^, the
comfortresse of the afflicted, and the perfect way to salvation. I preached
also repugnantly to maintain popish idolatry, against the heavenly Gospel,
the new Testament, and last will of our Savior Christ. Thus did I wilfully
fight against Gods word, albeit my conscience cried within me day and night,
This is not the right way to get eternal life, thou must worship God, Apoc.
22.9.
and not a stock or stone. Well, it pleased God of his merciful goodness to
visit me with grievous sickness both of body and mind, two days after I
made this Latin Sermon, which was the Wednesday after S. Peter ad Vincula his
day. August. 5.
Truly then lying very sick in my bed, and more like to die, then live,
conscience so pricked and disquieted me, that I feared condemnation: my
conscience always suggesting, and as it were telling me, Papistrie to be an
idolatrous and superstitious religion. Yet for all that, I thought that
religion to have been best, although I disputed often against the same,
insomuch that many of my scholefelowes suspected me to have bin an heretic
(for so term they Protestants. Act. 24.14.
) One of you that was prefecte of our chamber in the English Seminary, may
easily gather that I was no true lover of the Gospel, when as I so sharply
spoke, and preached against the professors thereof. And how unwisely I slept, in
the coldest time of the year the last winter, upon hard boards, forsaking my
bed, 1. Reg. 18.28. Luke 18.12.
how I scourged my self with whipcordes, and how I fasted twice in the week:
you may conjecture by this, that I was a Papist, which would seek so to
shorten mine own life: you know also, how I took thereby a vehement cough
with continual spitting, which since your departure grew to a dangerous
disease, whereof I thank God I am now recovered. My Confessor did advise me to
such and so extreme discipline and correction of my body, as had I still
followed his directions, I had been dead yer now, and put in the grotte, for
graves have they none at Rome, but Vawtes. If this be good or wholesome counsel
for a man so to correct himself, that he shall be the cause of his own
death, judge you. But I left those superstitions, and suffered reason to rule
my will, before it was too late, and having recovered my health, I presented my
self before the Pope, and obtained leave to go to Rheims, for that the air
there was more te^perate. I had before that time made an Oration and a Sermon
in the Latin tongue, presented before the Pope and four Cardinals, and before
all them that were with the Pope in the Consistory. If you my brethren yet
prisoners within the Tower, deny the assertion thereof, yet to your shame, and
my credit, they that shall go to Rome for pleasure sake, may safely go to the
Popes Protonotary, dwelling fast by Saint Peter's church in the inquisitory
palace, or to any of his clerks, and there make inquisition of my name, which
is registered in three great paper volumes, of such as are always present,
writing in chambers, to whom all men without danger may resort: where,
turning to my name, they shall find ye Sermon and Oration containing ten
sheets in Paper, for the which the Pope gave me great thanks, and so did the
Cardinals, with all the rest. Moreover (which I had almost forgotten) being
before the Pope, I had a wallet for four Priests, and a Doctor, and others,
full of Agnus deis, Grana benedicta, Medellas, Crosses, and Beads, with other
trasshes: and forasmuch as I had never before that time seen the Pope blessing
wallets, I did hold ye wallet before him, and would have had him to hold it
upon his lap, and so to have blessed it with his red cappe. Well, I never drew
back my hand from him, until extraordinarily he had blessed it three times,
which before that time as I think, was never seen. So that England is happy,
which has gotten such a wallet, with so many blessings, whereby (perhaps) they
may deliver their Grandsiers apace out of purgatory: it is a strange thing to
see what virtue may be thrust into a wallet. O unwise people that trust to such
trasshes. If I had money plenty, I would get you a thousand blessings, but God
bless us all from such hypocritical benedicities. Well, concerning my
journey, I forsook France, and came not at Rheins: but traueiled through
Germany, and arrived in England, and was within eight days taken prisoner,
and brought to the Tower: and being there kept in prison for Papistry, I
thought it good to consider the estate of my religion, not fearing the death of
the body, Matt. 10 28. Luke 12.5.
so much as the condemnation of my soul, to burn in hell fire for ever, if I
held not true religion, although that others in their books should write me a
holy Martyr. Thus in prison with a sorrowful mind, a careful thought, and a
troublesome conscience, I spent the time, where with sobbing tears and hearty
prayers, I craved of GOD, that he of his merciful goodness, would vouchsafe to
assist me in all troubles and persecution, that valiantly I might be able to
fight under his banner, stoutely to overcome the subtle assaults of the devil,
Mat. 10.38. and 16 24. Acts. 5.41. 1. Pet. 3.14, 15. 2. Tim. 2 11, 12.
prudently to despise the deceitful promises of worldly felicity, manfully to
abandon the frailty of the flesh, and joyfully to take up the cross, and
follow Christ, even to the death, the death of martyrdom. It pleased God,
hearing this my foolish petition, and knowing me to be seduced by false
prophets, (I say not, ne dare say, such as you my brethren are,) for that I
hope you have determined to recant your wicked religion: but I do, and may
boldly say, such as you were before your apprehension, and imprysonment here in
the Tower. Well, I say, it pleased God of his goodness, knowing me to be in
error, to lighten mine eyes, that I might clearly see the abominable
Idolatry, the pernicious superstition and vain ceremonies, which are used and
practiced in all Countries, where Antichrist reigns, who is an enemy of God, a
robber of his honor, a false seducer of ye people, a disturber of commonweals, a corrupter of Gods holy word, a Coziner of princes, a setter down of
new laws and strange commandments, otherwise then our master Christ in his
blessed word does allow: and briefly, a great stumbling block of offense to
infinite thousands of the true lovers of the Gospel, an open persecutour, and
a bloody butcher. When my heart was prepared to perceive the fickle fundation
of this vnsauored religion, I recanted from the bottom of my heart, and
bewailed that ever I was a Papist: but afterward somewhat comforting my self,
I craved, and do crave, and shall with Gods help ask mercy and forgiveness,
for all my idolatrous crimes and faults committed against his divine majesty.
I shall become of a Rebel a true subject, of an enemy of the truth, an
embracer thereof. I will study and endeavor by God his grace during my life,
that his wrath and indignation worthily deserved, may be pacified, and that I
may be found acceptable in his sight at ye dreadful day of judgment, Romans
2.16. Apo. 20.12.
when every man shall give an account of his Stewardship. I will moreover do
what I can to reform the judgment and conscience of our Adversaries, and to
bring the enemies of the Gospel to the love thereof. Romans 6.16, 18.
But it is not in him that wills, neither in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy. There shall want no diligence in me by gods help, in this
my first sermon after my recantation, to have you my brethren brought into the
way of salvation, who yet hitherto (as it seems) either ignorantly or
wilfully wa^der from the same. I have chosen a Theme fit for my purpose to
discover the errors and vanities of your religion. But before I enterprise to
discourse o^ my text, I think it most needeful to make my prayer to God, that
I the preacher may with a pure mind, fervent zeal, wholesome doctrine and
bold utterance, instruct you that be here present, and that you the hearers
may diligently mark, and obediently follow yt which is taught, yt you may
hear Gods word with reverence, and practice the same in your life and
conversation, that I may preach to the honor of God, to ye extolling of his
benefits toward us miserable wretches, to the edifying of his church, to the
enlargement of his holy kingdom, to ye advancement of the truth of his sacred
Gospel, to the extirpatio^ of sin, to the abolishing of Papistry, to ye
reformation of you yt be infected therewith, to the plucking down of Babylon,
and finally to ye building up of the walls of Jerusalem. In which prayer I
commend to your good devotion the whole estate of Christ his church milita^t
here on earth, etc.

The recantation of John Nichols a Seminary man, and lately the Popes Scholar,
made in the Tower of London, the fifth day of February, 1581. and the 23. year
of her Majesty's most blessed reign, before Sir Owyn Hopton, Knight, with
diverse other Gentlemen Citizens of London, and many others. Where also were
present certain of the same sect, and lately his fellows and companions.
Matthew. 7.15. Cauete a falsis prophetis, qui veniunt ad vos induti vestibus
ouium, sed intus lupi sunt rapaces.

Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves.


IN this parcel of scripture, good Christian audience, and well-beloved
brethren, we have three things worthy to be noted. The first is a caveat,
warning, or watch word given by our Master Christ, when he says, Cauete a
falsis prophetis? Beware of false prophets. False teachers of men's traditions,
Romish Priests, crafty seducers, he bids us take heed of such deceitful
Iuglers. In the second point or co^ma, he tells us their outward habit, by
the which we may distinguish and know them from true Prophets, when as he
says, Qui veniunt ad vos induti vestibus ouium: Which come to you in sheep
clothing. In the third point, which is the shutting up of the sentence, he
shows us their inward habit, Sed intrinsecus sunt Lupi rapaces: But inwardly
they are ravening wolves, deuourers of the flock. These three points or
divisions will I handle, God willing, in order, as the text gives me occasion.
Our ancient adversary the serpent (derely beloved in our savior Christ) was
never more busy to seek the destruction both of body and soul, the time
never more dangerous to fall, the people never so leude and prone to sin and
idolatry, the Papists never so vigilant to deceive their own countrymen, as
in these our latter days, whereof Christ prophesied: neither seek they only
to spoil them of their goods, but also to pluck them from the truth and
ready way to salvation, unto wicked error and idolatrous superstition, and
from the perfect path that leads to life everlasting, unto the lamentable way
of endelesse torment and utter destruction. Wherefore my brethren, if you have
the fear of God before your eyes, if you have the love of truth dwelling in
you, if you have an especial care to save your souls, yield not to the
serpents persuasion, take heed of false prophets, consent not to the doctrine
of Romish priests, the Popes Apostles: For says one, Dum Romani sacerdotes
qua^ maxim possunt, enituntur multa praedicare, quae saluti animarum co^uenire
videantur, non pauca praedicant, quae ad perennem animarum perniciem ducu^t:
Whiles that the Romish priests endeavor as much as they may, to preach many
things, which seem to agree to the salvation of souls, then teach they not
few things which tend to the perpetual destruction thereof. The first point of
their deuilish doctrine, in seducing the blind and ignorant people, is this,
To tell us, that we leave this article of our Creed vnbeleeued, Credo sanctam
Catholicam Ecclesiam, I believe in the holy Catholic Church, if we acknowledge
not the Roman church to be the holy catholic Church. As though that were
true. In the judgment of all the learned and godly, the Catholic Church is
dispersed over the face of the earth, not tied or united to any proper place as
Rome, or person as the Pope. The Council of Nice, in time past committed the
charge of the Catholic Church, to three principal Patriarchs, Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch, which afterward came to Constantinople. Nilius in his
book de primatu Romani Pontificis, of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
says, Quandoquidem quaeda^ prouinciae spectant ad ecclesiam Romanam, aliquae
ad Episcopum Alexandriae, and aliquae ad Episcopum Constantinapolaeos, iam non
magis subditae sunt Romano Episcopo, quam Romanus Episcopus subditus sit illis:
Primacie by lymitatio^.
Forasmuch as certain countries are limited to ye church of Rome, certain to
the Bishop of Alexandria, and certain to the Bishop of Constantinople, they
are now no more under him, then he under them. I gather by this Council of
Nice, which all Papists of Rome do allow, that the Church of Rome was not
only accounted Catholic, but also the Church of Alexandria was taken to be
Catholic, and in like manner the Church of Antioch. I am certain you will not
deny the Bishop of Rome ever heretofore to have been, and as yet to be Pope,
therefore I infer the Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishop of Antioch to be
Popes, and Christ's Vicars, and so consequently to be three Popes, and three
Christ's Vicars. Have you taught our English men so, yt there be three Popes,
and three Catholic churches, and are you put in prison therefore? No, no, I
know it is otherwise. I take you to be hirelings. Pope Gregory the xiii. Greg.
13.
of that name, or rather by his right name, Hugo Bon compaignion, Hugh
goodfellowe, has brybed you with his money, that you should preach him to be
Pope alone, and none other. Is this pretty stuff, vt amor nummi esset casus
multorum, that the love of money should be the fall of many? I will speak a
little more touching your Catholic church. Athanasius says, Roma est
metropolis Romanae ditio nis, Rome is the mother church (not of the whole
world) but of the province of Rome. I will not speak of England, Ireland,
Scotland, France, De^marke, Polonia, Suetia, Bohoemia, of Germany, Heluetia,
Prussia, Russia, Lituania, Pomerania, Austria, Rhetia, Vallis, Tellina, etc.
where the Gospel florisheth. But is your church ye mother church? and has your
Pope government and jurisdiction over the churches in Asia and Affricke? It is
well known that there is Christianity in Asia, Affricke, Armenia, Aethiopia,
Cyprus, Constantinople and other places, where the Pope dares not once peep,
for all his pontificalitie at Rome. And in respect of all Christian assemblies
and faithful members, wheresoever the church is called Catholic, that is
meant universal. So that your church and all churches are to be tried and
known not by your erring councils, canons, constitutions, decrees and glosses,
but by ye word of God, which is the touchstone of truth. Ireneus says, Lib.
3. cap. 11.
Columna and firmamentum ecclesiae est Euangelium and spiritus vitae. The
pillar and buttresse of the church is the Gospel and spirit of life. August.
de vnitate Eccle. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Augustine unto ye Donatistes says, Sunt certe libri dominici quorum
authoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus: ibi
quaeramus ecclesia^, ibi discutiamus causam nostram: There are verily books of
our Lord, unto the authority whereof each part agrees, each part believes,
and each part regards, Church to be sought in the scripture.
there let us seek for the church, and thereby let us examine and try our
matters. This I thought good to note here, least that any of this faithful
congregation should at any time be carried away with ye bare name of your
catholic church. Now moreover you seek to prove your church by antiquity,
multitude, succession of person or place, none otherwise then false coyners,
who will not have their money known by the finenesse of gold, or by the
touchstone, but by the weight, by the sound, by the coin, and by the color
which they may easily counterfeite. Therefore they allege antiquity unto us,
following that which was spoken unto Job by one of his friends, Job. cap. 8.8.
Consule quaeso priscam aetatem, et compara te ad peruestigationem maiorum
illorum: Ask for the ancient generation, and prepare thy self to seek for
the fathers. Job. 32.7
Prouecti aetate loquentur, et annosi notam facient sapientiam: Days shall
speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom. To whom I could
answer by Job himself, eue^ in ye verse next following, 9. verse.
Magistri semper sapientes non sunt, neque senes omni tempore intelligunt
Iudicium. The masters are not always wise, neither do ye old men always
understand Judgment. Profecto spiritus ille in mortali, 8. verse.
et afflatus omni potentis efficit eos intelligentes: It is ye spirit of God,
and not years, that ought to speak in man. August. ad Pet. Diac. cap. 34.
If antiquity should prevail, why then (I pray you) is the Church compared to
a little Bark or Ship, which the more she is upon the sea, the more she
leaketh: unto a house, which with age decays and falls to ruin: to a City
and the policy of it, which is corrupted from time to time, if it be not
brought back to the first institution: and to a man's body, whereunto years do
bring all kinds of evil: to be short, age is even as sickness it self to
the most healthful and temperate body in the world. I say the^ that antiquity
alone ought to make us think, yt in the Church there is a great sickness, and
much filthynes, and that even for this cause alone, without any longer
confutation, it is requisite to bring a broom to purge it, and to call for a
Physician. So far is it off, that for these things a man should mainteyne
your Church to be pure and holy, as you do. Furthermore I demand, how you will
answer unto Saint Augustine, entreating upon the threescore and fourth Psalm,
who says, That Jerusalem began by Abel, and Babylon by Cain. The promise was
made by Isaac, and the bastardise by Ismael. Who were the elders? If antiquity
were a mark of the truth, how would you have answered unto ye Jews, who
told Christ that they were the children of Abraham, John 8.33.
who was the first father of the believers? They had their Genealogy from the
creation of the first man, they did allege the covenants that were made
between God and them. Notwithstanding, Christ being sent unto them according
to these promises, under the shadow of this antiquity, they maliciously
called him the carpenters son, a Samaritane, Matthew. 13.55. John 8.48. Mark
1.27.
one that had the devil, and a preacher of Novelty. And there is great
likelihood, yt if some of you Papists had been the^ there, seeing at that time
they used ye self same arguments, you would have helped to have crucified him.
Furthermore, what will you answer unto the Greek Churches, the Armenians,
Ethiopia^s, etc. founded by the Apostles, and as old as the church of Rome,
yea and elder too, seeing that the Church of Christ, as we know, took her
beginning from the East to the West? If antiquity be a mark of holiness and
purity, they are holy and pure: and if they be holy and pure, then the latin
Church in comparison of them, is most unholy and impure. If they be
Heretics and impure, then it follows that antiquity is not a mark to
prove the holiness or verity of the Church. How then? shall we reject
antiquity? nay rather, we embrace it with all our hearts, so that it be
agreeable to Gods word. Tertullian de Virginibus velandis, says, Consuetudo
initium ab aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsum per successionem
corroboratur, and ita aduersus veritatem vendicatur. Sed Dominus noster
Christus veritate^ se, non consuetudinem cognominauit. Viderint ergo, quibus
nouum est, quod sibi vetus est. Haereses non tam nouitas, quam veritas
reuincit. Quodcu^que aduersus veritatem sapit, hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus
co^suetudo: Custom either of simplicity, or of ignorance, getting once an
entry, is inured and strengthened by succession, and then is defended against
the truth. But Christ our Lord calls himself truth, and not custom. Ioh.
14.6.
Let them take heed therefore, unto whom the thing seems new, that in it
self is old. It is not so much the novelty of the matter, as the truth that
reproves an heresy. Whatsoever sauoreth against the truth, is an heresy, be
the custom thereof never so old. Victi ratione opponunt consuetudinem, quasi
consuetudo sit mayor veritate. Being overcome with reason, they defend
themselves with custom, as though custom were better the^ the truth. We may
not prescribe of custom, but we must overcome with reason. Custom without
truth is the mother of error. Istud non est curandum quod aliquis ante nostru^
tempus fecit, sed id precipue nobis curae debet esse, quod a Christo factum
est. Non est imitanda nobis hominum consuetudo, sed dei veritas expectanda:
That is, We must not regard yt which any other has done before us, but we must
regard that which Christ has done, which is before all. For we must not
follow the custom of men, but the truth of God. Again he says, De seipso
ad Pompeian. epist. 9.
Mos sine veritate, est vetustas erroris. Et dixit dominus, Ego sum veritas:
and no^ loquutus est Dominus, Ego sum consuetudo: Custom without truth is an
old error. And ye Lord has said, I am the truth, and not, I am custom.
Ignatius says, Ignatius ad Philadelph. Canon. consuetud. did. 11.
Quem non audire est manifesta perditio: Whom not to hear is manifest
perdition. See then how the most ancient send us always to learn the
truth of him, which is most ancient of all. Thus much briefly touching
antiquity or custom. Now let us come to multitude. It is said expressly,
Exodus 23.2,
Exodus. 23. Ne insistito vestigiis potentiorum ad mala: Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil. Also, Mat. 7. Lata est porta, and spatiosa via quae
ducit in exitium, multique sunt qui ambula^t per medium eius. Wide is ye gate,
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat. Contrariwise, Luke. 12. Ne time, o parue grex, nam visum est patri
meo dare vobis regnum: Fear not, my little flock, for it is my fathers will to
give you a kingdom. Moreover, we see how that all the world was brought to
one Noah, and afterward came to Abraham, then God chose one people of Israel,
the least (as it is said) of all peoples, and finally of all peoples the least
part, that is to wit, Christendom: which for this cause he calls a little
flock, so far forth, that S. Augustine says, That ye Church was sometime in
one Abel, and in one Enoch. August. super Psalm. 128. Wherefore multitude ought
rather to be presumption, then a mark of the true Church. Forasmuch also as
man by nature is always more prone to evil, then to any goodness, if multitude
should take place, then Paynims should be happier then we be, for yt they
surpass in number. For whereas there is one that believes in Christ our
Savior, you have a thousand that believe him not. What a multitude is there
of Turks, of Jews, and other infidels? Also in Noah his time, what a
multitude there was yt would not acknowledge God, nor follow his commandments,
nor give credit to Noah his preaching, but with one consent conspired against
him, mocked him, and his religion, Genesis chap. 6. The Samaritanes were more in
number, then they of the tribe of Judah. And in Judah and Israel, the multitude
of the idolaters was the greater. For the Prophet Elias made his complaint,
that he was left alone, and that all the rest had forsaken their living Lord,
and given them selves to idolatry: and as you may read in Jeremy 4. 1. King.
22.6, 13, 24.
There arose up 400. false Prophets, who swarued from Gods law, and followed
their own imaginations, against one good Prophet Micheas. And the Prophets
cry, Ierem. 18.18
Omnem populum seductum fuisse, a regibus vsque ad Sacerdotes and Prophetas:
That all the people were deceived, even from the Kings, to the Priests and
Prophets. In the Church of Christ also, number and multitude shall have as
small room: for even at the beginning thereof, Esa. 53.1. Ioh. 12.38. Romans
10.16.
it was said, Who has believed our word? and to whom has the Arm of the
Lord been reueiled? Anon after the death of our Savior, the Scholemen hold,
yt for one instant, the church stood in the Virgin Mary alone. In the time of
Arrius, almost the world throughout, was of ye Arrian heresy, and few besides
Athanasius, with five of his company, professed the true faith. Theod. lib. 2.
cap. 16.
Wherefore the Emperor of the Arrians said, That four or five persons with
their Athanasius, would trouble the peace of the world. To whom Liberius the
Bishop of Rome answered, That his solitude or fewness did not any whit
diminish the word of faith. As for the declining estate of the Church, we are
given to wit, That when ye son of man shall come, before whose coming
Antichrist shall seduce the world, Neque fides, Matt. 24.12, 37.
neque charitas inuenta erit in terra, and isti dies erunt tanqua^ dies Noah
and Lot: There shall neither faith nor charity be found on the earth, and those
days shall be as the days of Noah and Lot, etc. The Eclipse then of this Moon
shall be as it were universal, all the whole earth being put between ye Church
and the sun. And therefore if we shall find no other direction in such
darkness, then the multitude, we shall have no part with that little number. So
much for multitude, whereof the Papists make great account. Now will I speak
a little of Succession, which you, my brethren, take to be a very substantial
argument of the truth. But Christ says in the 23. of Matthewe, In cathedra
Mosis sedent Scribae and Pharisaei: By order of Succession, the Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses chair. Annas and Caiphas touching Succession, were as well
Bishops as Aaron and Eleazar. Of Succession S. Paul says to the faithful at
Ephesus, Scio quod post discessum meum intrabunt lupi rapaces, ex vobis ipsis
exurgent viri peruersa loquentes: I know that after my departure hence,
ravening wolves shall enter and succeed me, and out of yourselues there shall
(by Succession) spring up men speaking peruersly. Therefore S. Hierome says,
Non sanctorum filii sunt, qui tenent loca sanctorum: They be not always the
children of holy men, that (by succession) have the places of holy men.
Notwithstanding the Pope himself will say, as it is before alleged, In Papasi
desint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficient quae a loci praedecessore
praestantur: If the Pope want good things by his own merits, the good things
which he has (by Succession) of Peter his predecessor, are sufficient. And
the gloss upon Petrus fecit Papas haeredes bonitatis suae: Peter made ye Popes,
heirs of his goodness by Succession. And again, Papa recipit a cathedra
sanctitate^. The Pope receives his holiness by succession of his chair. Such
affiance sometime had ye Scribes and Pharisees in their succession: therefore
they said, Ioh. 8.33, 53.
We are the children of Abraham. Unto us has God made his promises: art thou
greater then our father Abraham? John 9.29.
As for Christ, we know not from whence he came, or what can he show for his
succession? And when our Savior went about to reform the abuses and errors,
they said unto him, Matt. 21.23. John 2.18.
By what power do thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?
where is thy succession? Upon which words Beda says, Beda in Matthew. 21.
Intelligi volunt diaboli esse quod fecit: They would have the people
understand (for that he had no solemn succession) that all that he did was of
the devil. Cyrillus Carena in Luc. 39.
And Cyrillus frames their words in this sort, Tu ortus ex Judah, commissos
nobis fasces vsurpas: Thou being of the tribe of Judah, (and therefore having
no right unto the priesthood) take upon thee the office that is committed
unto us. Likewise Chrysostom imagines ye Pharisees thus to say, Chrysostom. in
Mat. Hom. 39.
Tu de sacerdotali familia natus non es, Senatus tibi hoc non concessit, Caesar
non donauit: Thou art not of ye house of priests, the Council has not
granted it thee, the Emperor has not given it thee. Thus to maintain
themselves in credit, (for that they had succession, and continuance from
Aaron, and sat in Moses chair) they kept Christ quite out of possession,
Matt. 23.2.
and said unto him then, even as you my brethren say now unto us, Who ever
taught us this pernicious doctrine before? what ordinary succession of persons,
and vocation have we? what Bishop admitted us? who confirmed us? who allowed
us? Therefore (good christian hearers) let not these the Papists great words
much abash us. The Scribes and Pharisees in the like cases used the like
language long ago. But let me ask you a question. How can you show any
demonstration or probability, that the succession of your church is lawful?
If there were any church that could allege succession of persons, it were the
church of the Jews, for they were of the house of Aaron, from the father to
the son, and besides them none might sacrifice. Moreover to them it was
promised, that they should continue so for ever. And in deed, when the Prophets
exhorted them to reformation, they had no other thing in their mouth, but this,
Lex a Sacerdote non peribit, neque consilium a sapiente, neque verbum a
propheta: The law shall not perish from the priest; nor the counsel from the
wise, nor the word from the Prophet. But the spirit of ye Lord answered them,
Quomodo dicitis, Sapie^tes sumus, Iere. 8.8.
and lex Iehouae penes nos est? vtique ecce ad falsitate^ operatur stylus, ad
falsitatem operantur legis periti: feceruntne sapientes vt erubescerent?
consternatine sunt and capti? ecce verbum Iehouae spernunt, eccuius rei
sapientia inesset eis? How say ye, We are wise, and the law of the Lord is
with us? For it is in vain, that the pen is made, and that there is a scribe:
wise men are confounded, and seeing that they have rejected the word of the
Lord, what shall be their wisdom any more? In like manner when the Jews boasted
to Jesus Christ, that they were of the seed of Abraham, John 8.44.
I know it well (says he) but the devil is your father. And in very deed this
successiue and hereditarie wisdom crucified Christ, and rejected salvation
offered unto them, as also this self same succession (although it be only
pretended) worshippeth Antichrist, and interteyneth her own perdition.
Moreover I demand what these alledgers of succession would have answered to
the Arrians, Samosetans, Nestorians, etc. who had their beginning continued
from the first Bishops even to themselves, and namely to Nestorius and
Samosetanus, both which were lawfully called to ye patriarchal churches, the
one to Constantinople, and the other to Antioch? Also, what will you answer to
the succession alleged by all the Greek and east churches? To be short, to the
reformed churches of England, De^mark, Swethe^, a great part of Almaigne,
through all which there is at this day this succession from Bishop to bishop,
from Pastor to Pastor? If you will allege the Popes succession, we deny it
you, and it is another question. If simply succession, you have lost your
cause. If your doctrine, then we gain this point, yt the simple succession of
persons without ye succession of doctrine, is nothing worth. With this sentence
of Pope Adrian the fourth, I end to discourse any further of antiquity of
persons, Succedimus, non Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in parricidio: We
succeed, not Peter in feeding, but Romulus in killing. And so is it truly:
for you shall have no Pope, that teaches the people how to live in the true
fear and love of God, but such an one as persecuteth and kills the
Christians, that cherefully embrace, and comfortably receive the glad tydinges
of the Gospel. Thus being commanded to instruct the ignorant, and to feed
them with the heavenly word of God, he practices tyranny against them.
Wherefore this is an evident sign (that if we should seem to grant, (which in
no case is to be granted) the succession of Peter unto your Bishop of Rome)
that he does far degenerate from the diligence of Saint Peter, who had more
care to save souls, then to become rich and famous in the face of the earth:
yea, to have all men subject unto him, even Emperors and kings to kiss his
foot. Your Pope does alter from the doings of S. Peter, for Saint Peter never
warranted to any man the possession of heaven for moneys sake: but your Pope,
like a good peddler, sets all things to sale, and he that brings most, shall
in heaven bear the greatest swaye. Wherefore these words of Baptista
Mantuanus are true, speaking of the unhappy state of Rome: -- venalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, Sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelu^ est venale, Deusque:
Amongst us in Rome, churches, priests, altars, masses, crowns, fire,
incense, prayer, and heaven are set to sale, yea God himself amongst us may be
had for money. Budaeus says, Sanctiones Po^tificiae no^ moribus regendis vsui
sunt, sed, (propemodum dixerim) argentariae faciendae autoritatem videntur
accommodare: The Popes canons serve not now to guide men's lives, but, (if I
may so say) they serve rather to make a bank, and to get money. Bernard of
Clunice says thus, Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus. Omnia Romae cum pretio:
Rome gives all things to them that give all things. All things at Rome will
pass for money. Yea even in the Popes own Decretals, you shall find it noted
thus, in sexto de elect. and electi potestat. fundame^ta in margin, Roma est
caput auaritiae, ideo omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the head of al covetousness,
and therefore al things there are set to sale. Yea Thomas Becket himself (whom
you call a saint, (and whose festiual day about Christmas time you keep with
great solemnity, Gul. Neub. lib. 2. cap. 15 and 25.
and a few of his bones you keep in such reverence, yt God himself is not
honored so much) when for his wilful disobedience, and treason committed
against his prince, he had fled for aid and succor to Rome, and saw that
nothing would be wrought there without money) wrote thus thereof to the Bishop
of Menze, Matter Roma facta est meretrix, and prostituta est pro mercede: Rome
our mother is become an harlot, and for money and meede lays her self to
sale. To be short, you know that our fathers long since were wont to say,
Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana: The court of Rome will not take the
sheep without the fliece. John 2. Matthew. 21.
Christ sometime thrust such buyers, sellers, brokers and coarsers out of the
Temple: but contrariwise, you have received in buyers and sellers, and thrust
out Christ, and so have turned the house of God into a den of thieves. Saint
Paul says thus unto the people of Ephesus, Argentum and aurum nullius
concupiui: I have desired no man's gold or silver. Upon which words, in the
gloss it is noted thus, Per hoc lupi cognoscuntur, qui talia concupiscunt:
Hereby they yt desire such things, are known for wolves. Saint Hierome says,
Hierom. 1. quaest. 1. lib. Nunquam diuinatio.
Quia Prophetae pecuniam accipiebant, prophetia eorum facta est diuinatio: For
that the Prophets fell to taking of money, therefore their prophecy was become a
soothsaying, that is to say, it was of the Devil, and not of God. This I say,
that according to your dealing, he that is poor, is not like to go to heaven,
but ye rich is sure to be saved. Now you allege succession of places, not
far unlike to the Jews, who will enclose orbem in vrbe, the whole world in
one city: but we see that God has chosen many out of Jerusalem, and the
Church is not tied thereunto, and God has suffered by his righteous will, many
Christian churches to be turned into the temples of the Turks, as that of
Ephesus, founded by S. Paul, and S. John, and that of Bonne in Barbary, where
Saint Austin preached, etc. And further it is said there expressly, Glossa
communis in eum versiculum, Apocal. 12.8. etc. that ye Church of God for a long
time, by reason of the persecution of Antichrist, shall retire herself into the
wilderness, as the common gloss it self does expound. If ever there were
church that might allege succession of place, it was Jerusalem, for of it was
said, Deuteronomy. 12.11. 2. Sam. 7.10. 1. King. 8.29
Dominus in hoc Templo in aeternum habitabit: The Lord will evermore dwell in
this house. Also, ^. King. 21.7. Psalm, 132.14.
Elegi (...) hanc domum, vt nomen meum (...) in perpetuum maneat: I have chosen
this house, to the end that my name may dwell there for ever. And therefore the
Priests had no other answer to all the Prophets that reproved them, but this,
Templum Domini, Iere. 7.4.
Templum Domini: The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. But see what
the Lord himself answers unto them, Ite (says he) ad locum meum in Shiloh,
vbi habitauit nomen meum a principio, etc. Go, and see Shiloh, I have chosen it
from the beginning for my house: now see what I have done unto it for the
wickedness of my people, I will do even so to the place, which I have given unto
you, and to your fathers. But if you will that I dwell there, amend your ways,
and turn from your evil deeds. Now therefore I say, if God has forsaken his
own Temple, for the iniquity of the Priests, even then, when he had none
besides erected in the whole world, must we tie our selves to the church of
Rome, or to any other place, where all the clymates of the world are equally
his temple? I can not but marvel, why any of our country men should take
the church of Rome, to be the mother church of all churches, and the same to be
an article of our faith. We are not expressly commanded by the word of God, to
acknowledge ye church of Rome, Caput mundi, the head of the world: neither is
it expressed in holy scripture, that we are condemned, if we believe not at all
the traditions of men: but the Scripture manifestly does Esaias 29.13. Matthew.
15.3. Colos. 2.8.
forbid us to believe them. If you can find one only text of the scripture, that
wills and commands us to believe in the Roman church, as having
prerogative over all churches the world throughout, I will be on your side to
ye death. But no such place, I am certain, you can show in the whole Bible,
that the Roman church is ye holy Catholic Church, which all men (of what
country soever they be) must acknowledge to be chiefest. It is not sufficient
to claim succession of place, it behooves us rather to have regard to the
succession of doctrine. Bernard. in Council. Rem
Bernard says, Quid prodest, si canonice eligantur, and non canonice viuant?
What avails it, if they be chose^ in order, and live out of order? So says
Saint Augustine contra Donatistas, August. lib. 6. 1. q. 3. Vocatur canes.
Ipsum characterem multi lupi and lupis imprimunt: The outward mark, or right
of a Bishop many give to wolves, and be wolves them selves. Therefore the
ancient father Ireneus gives us this good counsel, Eis qui sunt in ecclesia
praesbyteris, obedire oportet, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis: qui cum
episcopatus successione charisma veritatis certum, secundum beneplacitum patris
acceperunt: It becomes us to obey those Priests in the church, which have
their succession from the Apostles, and together with the succession of the
Byshoprickes, according to the good will of God the Father, have received the
undoubted gift of the truth. Saint Cyprian being likewise charged for
dissenting from his predecessors, answers thus, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Si quis de antecessoribus meis non hoc obseruauit and tenuit, quod nos dominus
exemplo and magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati eius venia concedi:
nobis vero ignosci non potest, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus:
If any of my predecessors have not observed and kept the same that our Lord
has taught us both by his example and commandment, his simplicity may be
pardoned: but we (if we do the like) can hope for no pardon, being now
admonished and instructed of our Lord. Compare ye use and order of our
churches (my brethren) with ye Primitive church of God, and you shall easily
see the right of our succession. S. Cyprian says, (ad Pompeium contra
Epistolam Stephani) Si canalis aquae quae copiose prius and largiter
profluebat, subito deficiat, nonne ad fontem pergitur? etc. Hoc and nunc facere
oportet Dei sacerdotes praecepta diuina servants, vt in aliquo si mutauerit
and vacillauerit veritas, ad originem Dominicam and Euangelicam, atque
Apostolicam traditionem reuertamur: and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde
and ordo and origo surrexit: If the pipes of the conduyte, which before ran
with abundance, happen to fail, do we not use to search to the head? etc.
The Priests of God keeping Gods commandments, must do the same: that if the
truth have faynted or failed in any point, we return to the very original
of our Lord, and to the tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, that
from thence we may take the discretion of our doings, from whence the order
it self and original first began. Thus much touching succession of place. Now
I exhort you brotherly to be reconciled to the true church of God, I mean the
Church of England, wherein you find not so many idolaters, Necromancers,
heretics, adulterers, Sodomites, churchrobbers, perjured persons, mankillers,
Runnagates, mo^sters, Sicophants, Clawbacks, slaundering tongues, scribes and
pharisees, as you may easily find in the church of Rome. Boast not of the
succession of your Pope. S. Paul says, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes (not by succession, but) by hearing, and, hearing comes (not
of legacy or inheritance from Bishop to Bishop, but) of the word of God. They
are not always godly, that succeed the godly. Manasses succeeded Ezechias,
and Jeroboam succeeded David the Prophet. By succession, ye Turk this day
possesses and holds the four great patriarchal Sees of the church,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. Dan. 9.25. Matt. 24.15.
Mar. 13.14. Luke 21.20.
By succession, Desolation shall sit in the holy place, and Antichrist shall
preasse into ye room of Christ. Thus much (well-beloved brethren) touching
succession of place. Now I will speak a little in confutation of your forged
miracles, wherewith you seek to oppugn the true church of Christ, and defend
your wicked church of Antichrist, polluted with all manner of detestable
idolatry and cursed superstition. There are two manner of miracles, Miracles.
the one true, the other false. Miracles are counted false, when either they be
not that which they seem to be, or if they be, they are not supernatural, but
are done by virtue of nature, and that, the Angels either good or bad, three
manner of ways may bring to pass. For sometime the force of nature which they
best know, they accommodate to the matter, of which conjunction with efficient
causes follow the effects, and that suddenly, which effects are of the
beholders, thought to be miracles. The devils know, that frogs, worms, or
serpents be engendered of putrefacted and rotten things, so that there be put
heat in certain degrees, in consideration whereof, (seeing that it is not a
hard thing for them to do these things which by nature may be wrought) it is
ye easier to deceive the weak of belief. And by this means S. August. de
Trin. lib. 3.
Augustine thought (as he writes in his third book of Trinity) Pharaos
Magicians sometime to have done the same. Moreover the conjunctions of the
spirits, of blood and of humors, do much disquiet men's bodies, from whence
proceed the sights or visio^s of things, which are in those things conserved
in ye same motion, before they come into the fantasy or imagination: and by
the same reason and order wherewith the spirit is troubled, it joins them
together, which thing appears in such as be Phrentique. We are not bound of
necessity to believe all such miracles whatsoever, without exception.
Alexander of Hales says, Par. 4. quaest. 53. Mem. 4. ar. 3. solut. 2. In
sacramento apparet caro, interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione
diabolica: In the Sacrament it self there appears flesh, sometime by the
conueyance of men, sometime by the woorking of the devil. Likewise says
Nicholaus Lyra, Lyr. in 14. Dan.
Aliquando in ecclesia fit maxima deceptio populi in miraculis factis a
Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus propter lucrum: Sometime even in the church
the people are shamefully deceived with feigned miracles, wrought either by the
Priests, or else by their companions for lucres sake. Miracles be not evermore
undoubted proofs of true doctrine: therefore Saint Augustine says unto the
Manichees, Miracula non facitis, Aug. lib. 13.
quae si faceretis, tamen ipsa in vobis caueremus: You work no miracles, and
yet if you wrought any, at your hands we would take heed of them. Iere. 23.
The Prophet Jeremy says, Seduxerunt populum meum in mendaciis suis, and in
miraculis suis: They have deceived my people by their lies, and by their
miracles. Aug. in Joan. tract. 23.13. says, Contra istos (vt sic loquar)
mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus meus, dicens, In nouissimis temporibus
exurgent pseudoprophetae, facientes signa and portenta, vt in errorem inducant
(si fieri potest) etiam electos: praedixi vobis. Ergo cautos nos fecit sponsus,
quia and miraculis decipi non debemus: My God has warned me to beware of these
miracle mongers, saying, In the last days shall rise up false prophets, working
signs and wonders, to ye end (if it be possible) to bring the elect into
error: behold, I have forewarned you. Therefore ye bridegroom has willed us to
beware, for we may not be deceived, no not by miracles. S. Chrysostom. In Matthew.
Hom. 49.
says, In fine te^poris co^cede^da est potestas diabolo vt faciat signa
vtilia, vt iam ministros Christi non per hoc cognoscamus, quia vtilia faciu^t
signa, sed quia omnino haec signa non faciu^t: In ye end of time power must be
granted to ye devil to work profitable miracles, yt then we cannot know ye
ministers of Christ, by yt they work profitable miracles, but by yt they work
no miracles at all. S. August. says, Non dicat, Ideo verum est, quia illa vel
illa mirabilia fecit, vel iste vel ille, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum
nostrorum orant, and exaudiuntur: aut quia illa vel illa ibi contingunt, etc.
Remoueantur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium
spirituum: Let no man say, Therefore it is true, for that this man or that man
wrought this or that miracle, or for that men make their prayers at the tombs
of our dead, and obtain their desires, or for that these miracles be wrought
there, etc. Away with these things, they may be either the iuglings and
mockeries of deceitful men, or else illusions of lying spirits. Again saint
Chrysostom says, In Matthew. Hom. 49.
Per signa cognoscebatur qui essent very Christiani, qui falsi: Nunc autem
signorum operatio omnino leuata est, magis autem inueniuntur apud eos qui falsi
sunt Christiani: In old time it was known by miracles, who were the true
Christians, and who the false: but now the working of miracles is taken quite
away, and is rather found among them that be false christians. Neither is the
Gospel of Christ preached this day utterly without miracles. The blind see,
the dombe speak. Your idols are fallen. Your great Babylon is come to ground.
These things my brethren, (if you have eyes to see) are no small miracles.
Saint Chrysostom. says, Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. hom 8.
The conversion of the world is a miracle. Saint Aug. De verbo Domini secund.
Matthew. Sermon. 18. says, Modo caro caeca non aperit oculos miraculo Domini, and
cor caecum aperit oculos sermon Domini: Now a days the blind flesh opens
not her eyes by the miracle of our Lord, but the blind heart opens his eyes
at the word of our Lord. And again, Ibid.
Modo aures corporis surdae non aperiuntur: sed quam multi habent clausas aures
cordis, quae tamen (verbo Dei penetrante) patescant. Now a days the deaf
ears of the body be not opened: yet many they are, that have the ears of
their heart shut up: which ears notwithstanding are opened by entering of the
word of God. Therefore I may rightly say to you with other words of Saint
Augustine de ciuitate Dei, Lib. 22. ca. 8.
Quisquis adhuc prodigia vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui
mundo credente non credit: Whosoever yet requires miracles to bring him to the
faith, is himself a great miracle, who seeing that the world believes,
remains still in unbelief. Matt. 27.4^.
Whereas the Pharisees said of Christ, Let him now come down from the cross,
and we will believe him. Saint Hierome in Matthew. 27. says unto them, Etiamsi
de cruce descenderet, similiter non crederetis: Yea, although he should come
down from the cross, yet would you not believe him. But it were a world to
behold the glorious countenance of your miracles, your crosses can speak,
Popish miracles.
your idols can go, your images can light their own la^pes, your holy water
is able to calm the sea, to chase away myce, and to make barren women to
conceive. If you doubt hereof, co^ferre with Master Cope, Dial. 1. Page 18.
whom (as I think) you knew alive, and were present at his burial at Rome in
ye English Church: you knew him a Canon of S. Peter's church at Rome, and one
whom Cardinal Hosius greatly esteemed. But now both Hosius and Cope are dead.
Confer also with that worthy Prelate the Bishop of Verona, your holy father
Lypomanus. I am sorry, well-beloved, that you are so ready to approve your
miracles with false reasons, and unstable grounds: howbeit such religion, such
miracles. Saint Hierom says, Ad Algasiam.
Mendacium Antichristi Christi veritas deuorabit: The truth of Christ shall
devour and consume the falsehood of Antichrist. The heathen had their deuilish
miracles in the temple of their false gods, and in effect true, as may appear
by all their histories. Read Titus Liuius in many places. Et M. Cic. 1.
Diuinat.
Simon Magus, who would be acknowledged as Christ, wrought miracles. So much
touching your miracles. Touching revelations and visions, which are a kind of
miracles, we have the plain text which decideth this matter: Cum surgens in
medio tui Propheta, somnians somnium, ediderit tibi signum aut prodigium,
(quamuis eueniat signum illud aut prodigiu^, quod praedixerat tibi) dicendo,
Sequamur deos alienos, quos non noueras, and colamus eos, etc. If there shall
arise (says the Lord in Deuteronomy. 13.) amiddest thee a Prophet or a dreamer of
dreams, and that the sign or miracle which he has told thee come to pass,
and thereupon would turn thee away to strange gods, etc. thou shall not hear
him, etc. There are then both Prophets and visions true in effect, and yet
false in their end, and the trial of them (as we may see by this text) is
the doctrine. Likewise when Saint John (to the end to keep us from false
prophets) exhorts us to prove the spirits, 1. John 4.
and by and by he adds, Hereby shall you know the spirit of God, Every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in ye flesh, is of God, etc.
that is to say, Prove the spirits by the doctrine which they preach. Therefore
Saul and Caiaphas have prophesied, but (as Saint Augustine says) as Balaams
ass once spoke, August. lib. 2 ad simpli. quaest. 1.
and yet for all that, they might have once spoken the truth: for the devil
himself (to color his lying) sometimes speaks the truth. How weak (my
brethren) your revelations be, and how small credit ought to be given
thereunto, there is no man but should know. At Rome you have them that receive
revelations daily, as for example: A poor man there is in the city of Rome
(of whom I doubt not but you have heard) who makes men believe, that our
blessed Lady, with her guard of heavenly mayds, saluteth him, and has
conference with him daily. This man is no otherwise then a Saint counted among
the Jesuits. The Pope has him to pray for him, the people regard him as a holy
holy man. This man helps the citizens, to bring the wood from Tyber side to
their houses: of his gain he reserueth nothing else, but yt which is
sufficient for meat, drink and cloth: ye rest he gives to ye poor. Father
Hieronimus Jesuit, repetitour of the Logicia^s in the English Seminary at
Rome, reported that there was there dwelling, an old woman (I will not otherwise
call her, for I deal gently and mildely with you) which would (as he said) tell
him every thing that he had done in his life time, and when he came to her
house at any time, she would tell one of her maids (not having seen him) that
there was such a fellow coming unto her house. She also foretold him, yt he
should become a Jesuit. He reported in like wise, how ye Pope in diverse
matters co^sulted with her. He praised this woman out of measure, and said how
she was greatly in favor with God, who revealed such hidden and secret
mysteries unto her. He commended thereby the happy state of Rome, that there
should be such in yt city, as were worthy to receive these reuelatio^s and
visions: he counted her a Saint. No dout, if one yt I knew at Cowbridge in
Wales, in the Town where I was borne, had been there, they would have taken
him as a Saint, and familiar fellow with Christ. For, (when he was alive, as he
wandered the country) he made men believe, yt he would tell them their
fortune, what things had before chanced in their time, and things that
should happen afterward even unto their dying day. But this man (as he was
wont to say) took his revelations from the Pharies: But the Romanists
affirm, that their revelations come from God, or from some Angel or Saint of
heaven, where as in very deed, if a man had the straight examination of them,
I am persuaded they would confess, that they have their revelations from the
Phairies, or from the devil, as the other had, whereof mention is made.
Moreover, there was a rich man in Lombardy, that had ye like revelations, but
far more excellent then the other: upon consideration whereof he sold all
that he had, and gave it to the poor frankly. For it was revealed unto him in
a vision by Christ and his Apostles, and the same also confirmed with the
bodyly presence of our blessed Lady, that he should be Pope of Rome, and should
translate the Sea of Rome into the city of Jerusalem. This man, not able to
read, presumed to preach, and gathered unto him twelve Apostles, who (at his
commandment) preached in likewise. They had many folowers, and such as
believed him, so much the sooner, for that he told them, that he had received
a revelation. He was presented before Cardinal Bromeo Cardinal of Milaine, who
examined him: and when he had told this vision, he was dismissed, and set at
liberty. They counted not this man an heretic, for crediting such false
revelations, making himself Christ, and choosing to him self twelve Apostles.
Oh my brethren, deceive not your selves, and seek not to deceive others that
mean you no hurt. It is but in vain to swim against ye stream. It is not
wisdom to mainteyne an error known. I am sure your consciences are burnt with
hoate yrons, speaking and maynteyning lies in hypocrisy. Oh give not your
selves over into reprobate and wilful minds, despise not the wisdom of God
within your selves. Seek not to be offensive and grievous to any which be of
the Church of Christ. Do what you can, Gods truth is mighty, and shall
prevail. Dagon shall fall down headlo^g before the Arc, the darkness shall flee
before the light, and the more fiercely ma^s wisdom shall withstand, the
more glorious shall God be in his victory: the more you do falsely slander
the faithful and true meaning ministers of God, the greater shall their reward
be in the heavenly kingdom of Christ. If you take my conversion to the true
church, to be outwardly and not inwardly, and the same to be spotted with
hypocrisy, I may be sorye, not for my self, (as though I were such a one as
you take me to be, for GOD knows it is nothing so, his name be praised
therefore:) but for your rashness in judging that which you know not. It is
God that is the searcher of men's hearts, and none other. If I recanted, either
for fear of punishment, or for prefermentes sake, you might count me then (if
it were so, as it is not) to be far worse then a Turk or Pagan, who never
received the truth. How can I be a Protestant outwardly, and a Papist in
heart, with a mind to be saved? You know, that according to your own
papisticall laws, no man dare in common assembly deny the Popes authority,
and afterward to name himself the member of that church of Rome. I am sure
that no man is a true christian, which with his lips does profess Christ,
and with his heart does flatly deny him. As I do acknowledge that there is a
God, a Trinity in unity to be woorshipped, who has most gloriously
beautified the heavens, most plentifully enriched the earth, most Angelically
created man, who has ordained the heaven to mayntaine life and light, the
earth to succor and sustain nature, all creatures living in land and water,
to supply his wants, nothing to be reckened and named, which he has not most
liberally given unto man, as appointing him lord and sovereign, but them his
vessels and servants. Against hunger, (lest we should famish) he has provided
nourishment, against thirst, (lest we should perish) he has ordained sauoury
liquors. Against cold, (lest we should die in our nakedness) he has given us
clothing. As I acknowledge the omnipotency of God, and confess the
unmeasurable greatness of his goodness and love toward man: so do I verily,
from the very bottom of my heart, detest your Popish religion, and embrace the
undefiled truth of Christ's Gospel. I call God to witness, that what I have
already spoken with my lips, that do I establish in my mind. I beseech you
all, (such as have forsaken the Pope) sometimes to pray for me, that it would
please God to make me a profitable member of his church, and steadfast in the
faith of Jesus Christ, even unto ye end of my life. So much for Antiquity,
Multitude, succession of persons or place, miracles and revelations. God of his
mercy grant you, my brethren, true repentance. Now good Christian audience,
and well-beloved brethren, I will speak a word or two touching the images,
which Papists allow, and have in their churches. The scriptures in sundry
places plainly forbid any image to be made. The Lord warned the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
that they should remember that they saw no image in the day that ye Lord
spoke unto them in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire. Isa. 40.18.
And in Isaiah, Cui assimilabitis Deum, aut qua similitudine illum exprimetis?
To whom then will you liken God, or what similitude will you set up unto him?
And again, the Lord confirms the same, Isa. 44.9. to the 19.
saying, Quis audebit effingere Deum, aut fusile aut sculptile facile, quod
nihil prodest? Who has made a god, or molten an image, that is profitable for
nothing? Behold, all they that are of the fellowship thereof, shall be
confounded, for the workmen themselves are men: let them all be gathered
together, and stand up, yet they shall fear, and be confounded together. I can
not a little maruayle, that among you, my brethren, (I mean the Papists) that
Dominicke Asotus, writing upon the Epistle to the Romans, the first chapter,
Romans 2.21.
durst so boldly affirm, that in the same commandment of God, the Christians
were not forbidden to make images, representing the form of man: for (said
he) the law there only makes mention of birds, of fourefooted beasts, and
of creeping worms, whereas in very deed they are strayghtly charged not to
make the images of male or female. Moreover it is expressed in the Psalm,
Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, etc.
Os habent, and non loquuntur, pedes habent, and non ambulant, aures habe^t,
and non audiunt, nares, and non odorantur: They have a mouth, and speak not,
they have feet, and walk not, they have ears, and hear not, they have
noses, and smell not. The Carpenter is blamed in Isaiah, Isaiah 44.13, 14.
which of one part of the hewn tree, makes an image, of the other part he
makes fire, and upon the same he baketh bread, he carueth and labors much,
that he may express the similitude of a man. By all these places it does
manifestly appear, that the images of men are utterly forbidden, which are
instituted to a religious end: And yet you (though you know that all manner
worshipping of images is forbidden by express testimonies of the holy
scripture) must have them forsooth, (as you say) for books unto such as can
not read. What think you in making the image of God the father, and God the
holy Ghost? You know God is a Spirit: John 4.24.
whereof it follows, that you can not express his form, with lineaments,
with paintings and colors. It is written, John 1.18. 1. Tim. 2.16. 1. Ioh.
4.12.
that no man has ever seen God. Why then, if he can not be seen, or if he
possess inaccessible light, how can he be pictured? or how should a picture
make him to be seen? Moreover, God is unmeasurable and infinite, but the
things which are painted, graven, or molten, are measurable and finite.
Likewise, Images are made of men, that the absent, after a manner may be thought
present: but God is every where, neither is he absent from any thing. It is
written in the Psalm, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9.
Si ascendero in coelum, tu illic es. Therefore it behooves us, not to make
God present, with images, seeing he is always present, and to al men. The
image should with apt similitude express yt which is to be represented. How
does the image of God the father rightly and truly represent him, whereas he
has no beginning? The images are made by man, and have a beginning. Who can
set forth the quantity of God and his wonderful works, how he is never
idle, but evermore doing that which tends to the salvation of man?
Contrariwise, images sleep, and do nothing at all. Moreover God is altogether
wisdom and knowledge: whereas your images feel nothing, and understand as
much. Saint Paul says, Acts 17.29.
that we must not think the Godhead to be like gold or silver, or stone
graven by art. God that made the world and all things therein, Acts 7.48.
seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with
hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all life and breath, and all things. Fortunate do I think
those stones to be, whereof images are made, and put upon your popish altars,
because they are had in such reverence and honor amongst you, whereas other
stones not unlike unto the^, lie in ye streets, are trodden with feet, and
spet upon. Papists objection.
You object unto us the authority of the Scriptures, and say, It is lawful to
paint God in the form of man: which you seek to prove by the vii. of Daniel,
Dan. 7.13, 22.
I beheld (says the Prophet) till the thrones were set upon, and the ancient
of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hears of his
head like ye pure wool, his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels
as burning fire. In Ezechiel, speaking of God, Ezech. 1.5.
is expressed the figure of man. Isaiah says, Esaias 6.1.
that he saw God sitting upon a Throne. Moses also with the Seniours saw God,
when he sat in his Throne or tribunal seat. Exodus 33.20, 23.
And in the mount he saw God in the form of man departing. Seeing these
things now uttered were seen of the Prophets, why then is it unlawful for us
to paint God with colors and karuing? been man himself. By his eyes he
described providence, by his arms, strength, by his hands, workemanshippe, by
his nostrelles, wrath, and many things of like sort. And whereas you say that
it is lawful for us (for the expressing of God) to use the like lineaments,
colors, and caruings, it follows not. To GOD there is no law given which
he ought to observe, neither are all things lawful to men, which he justly
and rightly has done. Exodus 7.5.
God reuengeth him on his enemies, Genesis 22.2, 10
he gives commandment to the father to kill his son, Exodus 11.2.
and he wills the Hebrews to take with the^ the goods of the Egyptians: which
things if men should do or command, they could not clear themselves of a
great offense, committed against God. The Lord has delivered a law to men,
and to himself has he given no law: for seeing that he is the Author of
the law, he may thereof except what he list. Wherefore it is to be granted,
that he has done nothing without consideration and infinite judgment. I
would gladly be brief: therefore I refer you to the chapters which speak
against Images. Read Exodus 20.4. Leui. 9.4. Number. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 4.15. Psalm.
115.4. Psalm. 135. Esa. 40.18. Ierem. 10.5. Ezech. 6.6. Heb. 2.18. Wis. 13.10.
Baruc. 6. Act. 17.42. Romans 14.3. 1. Cor. 5.11. 1. Cor. 6.6. Gal. 5.19. John
4.5, 21. You see, my brethren, in how many places the scripture does forbid
us to have images, yet you will have them, though God say nay, if your holy
father the Pope does allow them. Let us see now what the ancient Doctors and
grave fathers have said by your images. Tertul. in lib. de Idololatria.
Tertullia^ in his book of Idolatry, says, God has forbidden an image as
well to be made, as to be worshipped. As far as making goes before
worshipping, so far is it before that the thing be not made, that may not be
worshipped. Some man will say, I make it, but I worship it not, as though he
durst not worship it for any other cause, but only for that same cause, for
which he ought not to make it: I mean, both ways procure Gods displeasure.
Nay rather thou worshippest ye image, thou give the cause to other to
worship it. Some one or other that maintain idolatry, will say, And why then
did Moses make the image of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness? Number. 21.8.
The old idolaters found out and used the same, above fourteen hundredth
years ago. One and the same God, has by his general Law both forbidden any
image to be made, and also by his extraordinary and special commandment he
has bidden an image of the serpent to be made. If thou be obedient to the same
God, thou have his Law, Make you no image: but if thou have a regard to the
image of the Serpent that was made afterward by Moses, then do thou as Moses
did, Make not any image against the law, unless God command thee, as he did
Moses. Origin. libr. 7. contra Celsum.
Origin says, We make no image of God, as knowing him to be invisible, and
without body. Again he says, Ibid. lib. 4. contra Celsum.
The mind of the Law was this, that they should in all things so behave
themselves, as the truth required, and that they should beside the truth,
counterfeite nothing, representing the shape of a man or woman. Cyprian in lib.
de Idolorum vanitate.
Cyprian says, Images were first drawn, thereby to keep the countenance of
the dead in remembrance, upon occasion whereof, things grew at length unto
holiness, that at the first were taken only for solace. Again, Ibid. tract.
1. in Demetrian.
what do thou bow thy captive body before foolish images, and earthly
counterfaites? God has made thee upright: and whereas all the beasts of the
earth are depressed in shape, bending down to the groundward, thou have a
lofty state toward heaven, and to God thy countenance is erected. Then look
up thither, thither cast up thine eyes, seek God above, that thou may want
hell below: lift up thy doubtful heart to high and heavenly things. What
do thou throw thy self with the devil, whom thou seruest, into the pit
of death? Clement says, Clement to James the supposed brother of our Lord.
The devil by the mouth of other, is wo^t to bring forth such words, We to the
worship of the invisible God, worship the visible images. And this is most
certainly false. For if you will truly worship Gods Image, you should (by
being beneficial unto man) worship the true image of God in him. What honor of
God is this, to run about the counterfeites of timber and of stone? and to
worship the shapes that are without soul, and despise man, in whom is the true
shape of God? Arnobius in his eight books against ye Gentiles: We neither
worship, nor wish for crosses: you that consecrate wodden gods, peradventure
worship your wodden crosses, as parts of your gods. If you had not this image,
should Christ be ignorant that he were served of you? Will you think that
there is no honor done him? Then does he receive your seruings and
worshippines by certain traynes, by other put in trust, and before he, to
whom the worship is due, have any feeling of the matter, you do your
sacrifice unto the image, and send him but the scrappes from another man's
boorde. And what can be devised more injurious, slanderous, and discourteous,
then to acknowledge one God, and make thy suit to any other thing? to hope for
help of God, and power out thy prayers to a senseless image? Is not this (as
the Proverb says) to have a quarrel to Alfonsus, and fight with Ferdinando?
and where thou seek for advise of men, to ask the sentence first of
porkelings, and of asses? Is not this an error? Is it not properly a madness,
in trembling wise to make thy humble suit to a thing that thou made thy self?
And whereas thou do know, and art assured, that it is thine own
workmanship, the fruits of thine own fingers, to fall groueling upon thy
face before it? Very children know, that your images have eyes, and see not,
mouths and speak not. Wherefore then does the holy Ghost so often teach us,
and admonish us the same thing in the Scriptures, as if we knew it not? For
that the very shape and proportion of a man set aloft, after it once begins
to be adored and honored of the multitude, it breeds in every man that most
vile affection of error, that although he find there no natural moving or
token of life, yet he thinks some god or godly thing is within it, and so
being deceived, partly by the form that he sees, and partly by the way of
authority and credit of the authors and makers of it, whom they take to be
wise, and partly also by the example and devotion of the people, whom they see
obedient to the same, he thinks that the image being so like a living body,
ca^ not be without some living thing underneath it. Lact. says in plain
words, Non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachru^ est: Out
of all doubt, there is no religion, wheresoever there is an Image. S. Aug.
speaking of the image of God the Father, says thus, Tale simulachrum Deo
fingere, nefarium est: To devise such an Image of God, it is abominable.
Theodorus the Bishop of Ancyra says, Sanctorum imagines and species ex
materialibus coloribus formari minime decoru^ putamus: manifestum enim est,
quod vana sit huiusmodi cogitatio, and diabolicae deceptionis inuentum: We
think it not convenient, to paynt the images of saints with material or
earthly colors: for it is evident, yt it is a vain imagination, and the
procurement of ye deceytfulnes of the devil. To like purpose writes
Epiphanius, Estote memores dilecti filii, nec in ecclesias imagines inferatis,
neque in Sanctoru^ coemiteriis eas statuatis, sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in
cordibus vestris. Quin etiam neque in domo communi tolerentur. Non enim fas est
Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis: My dear
children, be ye mindful, that you bring no images into the churches, and that
you erect up none at the burials of the Saints, but evermore carry God in your
hearts, nay, suffer no images to be, Mark well
no not in your private houses. For it is not lawful to lead a Christian man
by his eyes, but rather by ye study or exercise of his mind. For this cause
Epiphanius says, The superstition of images is unfit for ye church of Christ.
It is a world to see, how welfauouredly, and how towardly touching religion,
these men agree with the fathers, of whom they use to vaunt. They be your own
good, and yet you see, how they speak against your images. If time should
permit, I were able to recite many such places out of the fathers, in
confutation of your worshipping such vain images. You do not only allow
images to be had in churches, but also you cause them to be devoutly and
reverently honored, and that with the same honor that is due to God himself.
One of the Bishops of the council of Nice says, Venerandas imagines recipio
and adoro, and id perpetuo docebo: I receive and worship ye reverent images,
and this will I teach. Another says, Sacras imagines perfect adoro. Qui vero
secus confite^tur, eos anathematizo. I do perfectly adore the holy images, and
I accurse all them that hold the contrary. Another says, Non sunt duae
adorationes, sed vna, ipsius imaginis, and primi exemplaris, cuius est imago:
There be not two kynds of adoration, but one, which is as well due to the
image, as to the pattern of the image. Saint Augustine says, Sic omnino errare
meruerunt, August. de consensu Euangel. lib. 2. cap. 20.
qui Christum and Apostolos eius non in sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis
parietibus quaesierunt, nec mirum, si a pingentibus fingentes decepti sunt: So
were they worthy to be deceived, that sought Christ and his Apostles, not in
the books of holy Scripture, but in painted walls. Neither may one marvel,
if the feyners by Paynters were deceived. In Epist. Joan. Episcop. Hier.
The old father Epiphanius says, It is a horrible wickedness, and a sin not
to be suffered, for any man to set up any picture in the church of the
christians, yea though it were the picture of Christ himself: yet you store
all your Temples, and each corner of them with painted and carved images, as
though without them religion were nothing worth. Thus (good brethren) you see
both scriptures and fathers against you. Forsake then your worshipping of
images. Now will I speak a little, after what manner they worship images at
Rome. I have seen, and so have you, that on every altar in Rome, there are set
up either Idols or images. In S. Peter's church, they have the image of S. Peter
in brass, holding out his finger to bless them as they pass by: before the
which image the people fall down, and make their prayers unto it, kiss his
foot, and touch it with their Beads. I would ask you once again, why they
paynt God the Father, and God ye holy Ghost. Even because lay men (when they
see God to have a body) should think God the father, and God the holy Ghost
to be men, as we be. Their priests in Italy for the most part are altogether
unlearned. I demanded of some of these Italian priests in the Italian tongue,
whether God the father and God the holy Ghost had bodies. They answered, Yea.
Well then, seeing their priests are ignorant in these things, you may persuade
your selves that the simple countrymen are likewise ignorant. Father Pais
reader of scholasticall divinity at Rome, in the Roman college (being
demanded of Doctor Allen) whether it was as lawful to worship the thing that
represented, as well as the thing that was represented by the Image: This grave
and learned Father answered, it was lawful to worship the timber, whereof the
Image was made. If this be not idolatry, that a man should worship that thing
which is more fit for the fire or for some other purpose, then to be
worshipped, the^ there is no idolatry worthy to be named at al. Thus much
briefly touching images. God give you a heart to conceive the truth. You
worship ye pillar upon the which the cock crew, when Peter denied his master
Christ. Why do you thus? What, do you make the cock a saint? The Romans
have made them a cratch or manger, representing the ox and the ass, and also
the birth of Christ, to the which workmanshippe of man, they fall down and
worship. Can you show me a reason, why you should kneel before these stones,
or why you should kiss them, and touch them with your beads? What, have you
canonized the ox and the ass Saints, and do you say in your Letanies,
Sancte bos, and Sancte Asine orate pro nobis: Saint ox and Saint Ass, pray
for us? Why do ye worship the thirty pence, which Judas took to betray his
master Christ? What, do you count the thirty pence holy Relics, for yt Judas
had them, or for that they came from ye chief priests? What, do you make Judas
the traitor a Saint, or ye chief priests of the Scribes and Pharisees holy
me^? The relics of Saints are worshipped, as bones etc. they fall down
likewise on their knees before them, they cry unto them, they touch the box
with their beads, they see not the bones being wrapped in silk, and put in a
box, or in the altar, in boards, or in Crystal. The beads touch not the
bones, but the outward box. The priest may beguyle the people, putting in the
box the bones of a dead horse, or the head of a fox, in stead of ye Saints
bones: for the people sees not what is in the box, or wrapped in silks. Why
do the poor men for their asses bring offerings to stations, as candels,
torches, and such like? And why do the poor Romans bring their asses to
Churches, and cause the priests to say a few prayers over them, and sprinkle
holy water upon the^? Belike, they think to get a room or place in heaven for
them, and s to ride upon Asses in heaven, or else to get indulgences of the
Pope for their asses. In deed they are (as the Prophet David says) sicut
equus and mula quibus non est intellectus: Psalm. 32.9.
They are like horse and mule, who have no understanding. If I should recite
all those Idolatrous practices, which I have seen at Rome, a whole day were
not sufficient to tell them: but by these few things laid down, you may gather
the rest to be as bad, or rather worse. Now I will speak a little of the
wickedness of Rome, which you count holiness, and make our Englishmen that
were never there, believe so. First I will begin with your Cardinals, the
pillars of your Church. Have they not beautiful boys, with whom they commit
the sin of Sodom, Genesis 19.5.
as I have heard by the Romans, and by a Gentleman who served to Cardinal
Sforsie, who trauayled by land with me, from the city Ancona to Venice? Have
not these young Cardinals pretty wenches in their palaces, whom in the day
time they call either their sisters or cousins, and in ye night time make them
either their bedfelowes or co^cubines? And do you not know, how that there
was a young Cardinal a Prince, burnt at Rome not long since, by a common queen
of the stews, and took from her the french disease, wherewith he dyed
miserably? Do not your priests at Rome, without shame and punishment, openly in
the sight of all men go to the stews? I have seen them with mine eyes, (as I
walked ye streets) embracing the Queanes. O if a minister here in England
should commit such abomination, and escape unpunished, how would you cry out
against him and against the Magistrates! Yet to see your own priests so to
do, and your Magistrates to suffer it, you hold your peace, you seem to
allow it. What shall I speak of your Monks? Was there not at Rome a whole
monastery of such as bear a silver cross in their hands, and are apparelled
in blewe, full of women, that went in habit of those monks, and were they not
spied at the last, and escaped unpunished? Be these the holy me^ that have
renounced the world, and have vowed chastity? Now of the lay men, because I
will not stand to discourse upon every thing that I recite. How do the
citizens live? Was there not lately a great rich citizen, that had a place to
the which resorted many young Roman Gentlemen, who committed the sin of Sodom
one with another, and were they not spyed out at the last, and did not they all
escape punishment, except one poor man which dyed for all? And did not the
Romans say, that he dyed wrongfully, for that the sin of Sodom was but a
trick of youth? Count you me that a light offense, Genesis 18.20. and 19.13.
that cries up to heaven to God for vengeance? Moreover, have not ye Romans
six streets full of Curtizants, and harlots, who pay a yearly tribute to the
Pope? And be there not throughout al Rome Queanes, who lay out of their
windows carpets, and their gowns, which is a sign to them that pass by,
that there they may have a woman for money? At Shrouetide, what horrible abuses
are there practiced at Rome without punishment! Do not men go in women's
apparel, and women in men's apparel? The Gentlewomen out of their windows
throw rosewater, which is a token to them that pass by, that there they may
defile their bodies one with another. What murder is there, insomuch, that no
man can sit in his wagon without danger of his life? These words of Petrus
Bembus are true, Roma est sentina pessimorum hominum: Rome is the sink of
pestilent varlets. I would not for a great deal of money, but that I had seen
Rome: otherwise I should have stood in doubt, lest I had misreported ought of
them, but what I saw, yt speak I, and testify, and cry with Mantuan, Viuere
qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum:
Ye yt desire to live godly, depart from Rome: for when al things are lawful
there, it is not lawful to be honest. Peradventure now, you will say yt the
Pope is a holy man. Although I am indebted unto him 50. or 60. li. in money,
yet will I not, neither can I but speak the truth of him, unless I should
sin, (which God forbid.) Has not this Pope, at his haven city Ancona,
prised and taken away the merchandise of the Turks merchants, for that one of
the Turks had offended one of his servants? The Pope perceiving the merchandise
to be of great valewe, took an occasion thereby to deprive ye merchants of
their merchandise. The emperor of the Turks wrote a letter to ye Pope,
desiring him to restore the goods again to his merchants: ye Pope refused so
to do. Wherefore the Christian merchants were in like sort dealt withal at
Constantinople. At Macerata, the Pope put a County out of his possession, and
gave it to his own son James, whom (of a beggar) he has made a Marquis, able
to spend by the year, thirty thousand crowns, and is richly married to a
Dukes daughter: He gave the county for his possession, not half so much as it
was worth. There was also a monk, who came from the Indians, who at Venice
refused a hundred thousand crowns, for two precious stones which he brought
with him, who thinking to please this Pope now living, and to get a greater
reward, presented the precious stones before this Pope Gregory, who taking
the gemmes or precious stones, in stead of reward, committed the Monk to
prison, alleging nothing against him but this, that he forsook his cloister,
or monastery. Master Alet (whom you know) has reported this to be true: for
he knew this said Monk, as he reported to two Gentlemen of ye North that had
been at Jerusalem, and to me, and to three other scholars. Thus much touching
his iniquity. Now I will not speak of the Popes pontificalitie, how he is
carried on men's shoulders, how the people kneel before him, how the trumpets
sound, how ye ordinance or double canons are discharged, and how the people
cry out, Viuat papa Gregorius: (Let our dissembling Antichrist) Let Pope
Gregory live and reign over us. You feign (my brethren) yt there is a purging
place for the souls after this life, wherein they abide and suffer the self
same punishment which is in hell, and are in no better case (to speak of the
torments) then they of hell. But herein they are far happier then the damned,
for that they of purgatory are sure to be saved, and they of hell, are sure
never to find end of their miserable condition. You say, that such as be in
purgatory, may be released, and delivered to heaven, by the prayers and dirges
of such as be on earth. That there is such a place named as Purgatory, you
seek to prove by the Scriptures. First out of ye book of ye Maccabees, where
it is read, that good and profitable it was to pray for the dead. From hence
you go to Zachary the Prophet, where it is said in the ninth chapter, Eduxisti
vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non erat aqua: Thou have delivered thy prisoners
out of the dungeon wherein there was no water. Also in Ecclesiastes the 4. De
carcere atque catenis interdum quis progreditur ad regnum? Who at any time
comes from prison, and from fetters unto the Crown? You allege the Psalm,
Transiuimus per ignem and aquam, nosque in refrigerium eduxisti: We have passed
both fire and water, and thou have brought us to a refreshing place. Out of the
new Testament you bring this place, where it is said, that the sin of the
holy Ghost is not forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the world to
come. Ergo (say you) in this life sins are forgiven, and also in the life to
come. And out of Saint Matthewe you object, Take him, and bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into utter darkness, and there let him stay until he has
paid the uttermost penny. Ergo (say you) he means Purgatory. Also you object
the history of Lazarus and the rich glutton. You allege moreover this place
of the Apocalypse, where it is said, that nothing impure and defiled with
sin, shall be admitted to that holy city of the Lord. And you think that
these words of S. Paul do serve to your purpose, that al knees must bow to
God, that be in heaven, in earth, and under the earth. Finally, you bring
forth this place of the Apocalypse, that every creature in heaven, in earth,
and under the earth gives praises unto the Lord. You think that these, and
such like places of Scripture do make greatly for your purpose. But it is
known, that amongst you Papists there be diverse opinions touching purgatory.
Some say that it is a true opinion, and an article of our faith, to teach, and
believe, that there is a purgatory: Others there be, who not so firmly and
constantly affirm the same, but they either suspect, or think yt there is
such a place. First, I will show, that Purgatory belongs not to any article
of our faith, neither is it a necessary thing to be credited. Secondly, I
will declare, whether the suspicion and opinion of purgatory stands with
reason, and is just. I answer unto them, which say it is a necessary opinion,
and an article of our faith, to acknowledge that there is a purgatory: If it
were a certain and firm article of our faith, it should then most evidently
so appear out of the testimonies of the scriptures. For we do not descend into
their sentence, which be fathers, or will make men the authors of the matters
of religion. It should be a reproach unto the holy Ghost, if we should persuade
our selves, that whatsoever they write, does tend to our salvation, and that
the salvation of our souls does stand upon their words. What thing soever
apperteyneth to our salvation, the same by the virtue of the holy Ghost is
expressed in the Scriptures. Saint Paul to Timothy says, 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
that the whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to convince, to correct and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. If you do
contend to set forth any good work, or any thing necessary to be credited,
which may not be confirmed by the scriptures, I would take that to be neither
good, nor profitable, if the Scriptures do not plainly allow the same. We must
not believe your words to be true, whereas you say, The Apostles have not
taught all things, which touch the salvation of man. This will I grant in
political, but not in spiritual matters, that it should be true, which you
say, that all things are not contained in Scriptures, which belong to the
government of a common weal. But to prove that ye scriptures wrote
sufficiently touching our souls health, Tertul. de praescrip.
Tertullian in libro de praescript. says, Foelix ecclesia cui totam doctrinam
Apostoli cum sanguine profuderunt: Happy is that church which has received the
whole doctrine confirmed with the blood of the Apostles. Our savior Christ
says, Quae audiui a patre meo, omnia feci nota vobis: Those things which I
have heard of my father, I have revealed unto you. Moreover, that I may return
to my matter, often it is doubted of Purgatory. The Greek church in the
council of Florentine long stood in doubt. And the common places of the
scripture, which are brought forth, to prove this opinion, let them expound
them no otherwise then the proper and lawful interpretation does require, and
there shall then be left no place to prove Purgatory. Saint Cyprian in his
first treatise against Demetrian says thus, After we be once departed out of
this life, there is no more place of repentance, there is no more effect or
working of satisfaction, life is here either lost or won. Everlasting
salvation is here provided for, by ye due worshipping of God and the fruits of
faith. Saint Augustine says, de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 13. Quidam nullas
poenas nisi purgatorias volunt esse post mortem: Some men will have no
punishment to be after death, but only the pains of Purgatory. Even in Paul's
time there were some, 1. Cor. 15.29
that being alive, were baptized for the dead. And by the Council of Carthage.
3. canon 6. it appears, there were some yt used to thrust the sacrament into
the mouth of the dead body, meaning thereby (as it may be thought) to procure
some relief of the soul: The words be these, Placuit vt corporibus
defunctorum Eucharistia non detur. Council. 3. Can. 6.
Dictum est enim a domino, Accipite, and edite: Cadauera autem nec accipere
possunt nec edere: We think it good, that the Sacrament be not given to the
bodies of ye dead. For our Lord says, Take and eat: but dead bodies can
neither take, nor eat. These were ancient errors in old time, as it is
easy to be seen. As for the fantasy of purgatory, it sprang first from the
heathen, and was received amongst them in that time of darkness, long before
the coming of Christ, as it may plainly appear by Plato and Virgil. Plato in
Timaeo. Virgil. Aeneid. 6. in whom you shall find described at large, the whole
common weal, and all the orders and degrees of Purgatory. Saint Augustine de
ciuitate Dei, lib. 7. cap. 7. says, The old heathen Romans had a sacrifice,
which they called, Sacrum purgatorum: A purgatory Sacrifice. You will say, The
Apostles of Christ have taught us purgatory, (not by any word that ever they
wrote, but) by tradition. This is as true, as that S. Peter said Mass in Rome
with a golden Cope, and a triple crown, unless perhaps some man will think,
whereas S. Paul says, Homines priuati veritate, existima^tes quaestum esse
pietatem: They be men void of truth, thinking that their gain is godliness:
or whereas Saint Peter says, 2. Pet. 2.3.
Per auaritiam fictis sermonibus negociantur de vobis: Through covetousness,
by feyned talk, they make sale of you: that by these words, they gave us
warning of the very form and doctrine of your purgatory: for better
authorities then these be yt I reckon, you can lightly find none. And whereas
you tell us out of some heathenish fantasy, that sins can not be washed
away, but by long space of time, and pain in purgatory, Saint Cyprian says,
In eodem articulo temporis, cum iam anima festinet ad exitum, and egrediens ad
labia expirantis emerserit, poenitentia^ clementissimi Dei benignitas non
aspernatur, nec seru^ est, quod verum est: In that very moment of time, even
when the soul is ready to pass, and is even at the lips of the party ready
to yield up the spirit, the goodness of our most merciful God refuses not
repentance, and whatsoever is truly done, is never too late. Saint Chrysostom
says, Latro in cruce, neque vno die opus habebat. and quid dico vno die?
Neque breui hora: tanta est Dei erga nos misericordia: The thief on the cross
needed not so much as one day to repent himself. What speak I of one day?
No, he needed not one hour: so great is the mercy of God toward us. Saint
August. Epist. 80. says, If any man depart hence without repentance,
Imparatum inueniet illum dies Domini, quem imparatum inuenerit suae vitae huius
vltimus dies: Him shall the day of the Lord find unprovided, whom the last
day of this life finds unprovided. Saint Ambrose says in his book de bono
mortis, Qui hic non accipit remissionem peccatorum, ibi non erit: He that here
in this life receives not remission of his sins, shall not be there. And S.
Hierome in Lamentationes Ierem. lib. 1. cap. 1. Thou shall not go forth
thence, until thou have paid ye last farthing, says thus, Significat semper
non exituru^ esse, quia semper soluat nouissimum quadrantem, dum sempiternas
poenas terrenorum peccatorum luit: Christ's meaning is, yt he shall never come
out, for that he must evermore pay the last farthing, whiles he suffers
everlasting punishment for his sins committed in this world. So says Saint
August. de sermon Domini in monte, lib. 1. Donec soluas nouissimum quadrantem,
miror, si non eam significat poenam quae vocatur aeterna: Until thou pay the
last farthing, I marvel, but it means that pain, which is called
everlasting. Hereby, my brethren, I think it may partly appear, that you
maintain your painted fire and paper walls, with painted authorities and
paper reasons. Verily the Christian people of the East church of God, which
sometime was as great and as famous as the Church of the West, notwithstanding
they believed in God, and his Christ, and knew there was both hell and heaven:
yet in your Purgatory they had no skill. One of your Doctors says, Alphonsus de
haeresibus lib. 8. de indulgentiis. Vsque in hodiernu^ diem Purgatorium non est
a Graecis creditu^: Until this day, of the Grecians, or of the East church,
Purgatory was never believed. Therefore you can not justly say, yt your fantasy
herein was evermore accounted universal, or catholic. Augustine in Psalm. 85.
in deed sometime says, There is such a certain place, sometime he denies
not but there may be such a one, sometime he doubts: sometime again he
utterly denies there is any at all, and thinks that men are therein
deceived, by a certain natural good will they bear their friends departed.
But yet of this one error has there grown up such a harvest of those
massemongers, that the masses being sold abroad commonly in every corner, the
Temples of God became shoppes to get money, and silly souls were borne in
hand, that nothing was more necessary to be bought. In deed there was nothing
more gainefull for these men, then to sell masses for the dead. Your own
Roffensis says, Nemo nunc dubitat Orthodous, an purgatorium sit, de quo tamen
apud priscos, vel nulla, vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio: sed and Graecis ad
hunc vsque diem non est creditum, quamdiu enim nulla esset cura de purgatorio,
nemo quaesiuit indulgentias: No Catholic man now doubts of Purgatory,
whereof notwithstanding among the ancient Fathers, there is either no mention
at all, Mark well.
or very seldom, yea even until this day the Grecians believe it not, for so
long as there was no care of purgatory, no man sought after pardons. So much
for Purgatory. Now I think it not amiss (my brethren) somewhat to speak
against your praying for the dead. First I will disprove your praying for the
dead by scriptures. Then after, I will confute the same by the authority of
the Doctors. To begin with Scriptures, I cite the 2. of Samuel 12.22. While
the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, who can tell, whether
God will have mercy on me, that the child may live? But now being dead,
wherefore should I now fast? Can I bring him again any more? I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me. Psalm 49.7. A man can by no means
redeem his brother, he cannot give his ransom to God, so precious is the
redemption of their souls, and the continuance for ever. Ecclesiastes 9.5. The
dead know nothing at all, neither have they any more reward, for their
remembrance is forgotten, and they have no more portion for ever, in all that
is done under the Sun. All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with
all thy power: For there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither thou go. Also 1. Thessalon. 4. I would not
have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you
sorrow not even as others which have no hope: 1. These. 4.13.
for if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen, even so them which sleep
in Jesus, will God bring with him. Wherefore comfort your selves one another
with these words. Thus much for scripture. Now will I allege the ancient
testimonies of the Fathers. Cypr. sermon. de mort.
Cyprian in his sermon of mortality says thus, Seeing that we know, that our
brethren, which be delivered out of this world, by the hand and calling of
the Lord, are not lost, but sent before: we must not here take on us black
gowns, sith that they have already there put on white garments: we must not
give occasion unto the Paynims, that they may deseruingly, and by good right
blame us, or lay to our charge, that we do lament, and bewail them, as
perished and lost, whom we do affirm to live with God, and so to prove with
the testymonies of our hearts, and break the same faith that we do profess
and set forth by our communication and talk. Again he in his first treatise
against Demetrian, When we be once departed out of this life, there is no more
place of repentance, there is no more effect or working of satisfaction, life
is here either lost or won, everlasting salvation is here provided for by the
due worshipping of God, and the fruits of faith: then we shall be without the
fruit of repentance, and grief of pain. In vain shall weeping be, and
prayer shall be of no force or effect. Augustine in his first book and 12.
chapter of the time: August. De temp.
Therefore all these things, that is to wit, the looking unto the corpse, or
caring for it, the condition of the burying, and the pomp of the funerals, are
rather for the comfort of the living, then for the aid and help of the dead.
If costly and precious burying do profit the ungodly, vile burying, and none
at all shall hurt and hinder the godly. The multitude of servants did in the
sight of men make excellent and glorious funerals unto that rich man that was
all clothed in purple: but the ministry of Angels made much more excellent and
noble funeral in the sight of God, unto the poor silly creature that was full
of skabbes, blaynes and sores: for they did not lay him in a tomb of marble,
but did carry him into the bosom of Abraham. Likewise in his first treatise
upon the Epistle of John, Whereof do Schisms come? Hereof they come, when men
say, We are righteous, we do pray, we do obtain. Hierom in his 13. quest.
and 2. chap. We know that in this world we can be helped one of another,
either with prayers, or with counsel: but after we be once before the
judgment seat of Christ, neither Job, Daniel, nor Noah be able to pray for
any body, but every man shall bear his own burden. The council of Toledo.
3. cap. 22.23. qu. 2. cap. qui diui. We do bid and command, that they
which depart out of this life by the divine calling of the Lord, be carried
forth to their graves, only with Psalms: for we do altogether forbid ye
same prayer of funerals, that they be wont to sing commonly for the dead. Item
senten. 4. distinct. 45. Neque. He that prays for a Martyr, does wrong unto
the Martyr. Against praying for the dead, I thought it sufficient to speak
thus much. Now I will speak a word or two of praying to Saints. First the
Scripture forbids it: for it is written, Psalm 80.11. Give us help against
trouble, O Lord, for vain is the help of man. Psalm 115.17. The dead praise
not the Lord, neither they that go down into the place of silence. Esaias
63.16. Doutlesse thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel knew us not, yet thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer. Saints
have preeminence above the rest? No, no, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. Iere. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine
affection could not be toward this people. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be
the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his
heart from the Lord. Ezechiel 14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and
Job were among them, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness, (says the Lord) yet I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but me, for there is no
Savior besides me. Esther 14.3. O my Lord, (thou only art our King) help me
desolate woman, which have no help but thee. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. John 14.6. Jesus said, I am
the way, and the truth. No man comes unto the Father, but by me. To the
first. If Gods Ergo this curse touches you. These holy men, Noah, Daniel, and
Job can do no more but save their own souls, they can not with their prayers
procure the salvation of other men's souls. These three were Saints, and in
favor with God, as others be, they had the view of the glorious majesty of
God as others have: Ergo I infer, If there could no help be found in them,
then you may be assured, no help is to be found in others. To the to crave
help at his hands, but unto God himself, who was most ready to grant her
requests. Therefore you are much to be blamed, that you will not follow the
allowable examples of others. To the fifth. Christ bids us, Ergo in vain do
you then make your prayers unto Saints. Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation
in any other: for among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby
we must be saved. Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? James 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which
gives to al men liberally. Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights. You see in these places of
scripture God tells us plainly, we cannot be saved (by any other, neither by
this Saint nor that Saint) save only by Jesus Christ. Thus much out of the
scriptures. Now let us see what the Doctors speak against your praying unto
Saints. First I will begin with Augustine in his second book and 8. chap.
against the Epist. of Parmenian. Saint Paul makes not himself a mediator
between God and the people, but requires that they pray all one for another,
being all the members of Christ. If Saint John would say, This have I written
unto you, that you sin not, and if you sin, you have me your mediator
before God, and I will entreat for your sins, as Parmenian (the heretic)
in a certain place, made the Bishop a mediator between God and the people:
what good and faithful christian man could abide him? Who would look upon
him, as the Apostle of Christ? or rather who would not think him to be
Antichrist? Also upon the 108. Psalm. All prayer, yt is not made unto god by
Christ, not only does not put away sin, but also is turned into sin. Item in
his 3. book of freewil. We are not commanded to go to any creature yt we may
be made blessed, but to the creator and maker of al things, of whom (if we be
persuaded otherwise then ye truth is) we are deceived with a damnable error.
Ite^ in his book of ye spirit and the soul, 29. cha. The souls of the^ that
are dead, are there where they do not see, neither hear what things are done,
or chance in this life: Such is their care for the living, that they know not
what we do, even as our care is for the dead, that we know not what they do.
Item, in his tenth treatise upon John. My mother whom you have called blessed,
therefore is blessed, because she has kept the word of GOD, and not because
in her the word was made flesh. Item, in his book of the remission of sins,
the 14. chap. The Apostle said truly, Be you folowers of me, as I am of
Christ He never durst say, Be you justified of me, as I am justified of
Christ. None is just, but Christ justifying. Therefore he said, He that
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Who is so bold therefore to say, I justify thee, which may not
be said of the Saints, but of the holy of holiest, yt said, Believe in God,
Ioh. 14.7.
believe also in me? Again in his first treatise upon the Epistle of John:
From hence comes schisms, when men say, We are righteous, we make holy the
unholy, we do justify the wicked, we do pray, we do obtain. Item in 84.
treatise upon John. Though we dye brethren for brethren, yet the blood of no
Martyrs is shed for the forgiveness of sins, which thing Christ has done
for us. Ambrose upon the 1. chapter of the Romans: But we obtain Gods favor,
from whom nothing is secret, as knowing what every man is meet to have, we
need no spokesman, but a devout mind, for whatsoever such a one speaks unto
God, God will answer him. Chrysostom. in his 2. hom. of the woman of Canaan: Tell
me woman, since thou art a wicked and sinful woman, how durst thou go unto
him? I know (says she) what I do. Behold the wisdom of the woman, she
prays not unto James, she entreats not John, she goes not unto Peter: she
did not get her self to the company of the Apostles, she sought for no
mediator: but for all these things, she took repentance for her companion,
which did fulfill the room and place of an advocate: and so she did go to
the high fountain. Item in his sermon of going forward of the Gospel: There is
no need of a Porter, of a Mediator or minister, no need of Advocates with
God, nor of any running, and gadding about for to speak fair unto other: for
although thou be alone, and without an advocate, and pray unto God by thy
self, thou shall obtain thy petitions. Cyrill in his book of right faith: He
was taken up into heaven: but as God he is showed to grant the petitions of
them that worship him, if they make their prayers in his name. For why is it
more meet to give Saints their asking, and to grant them their petitions,
then for him, which is only by his own nature, and truly God? Leo Bishop of
Rome, in his 81. Epistle: Although the death of many Saints has been precious
in the sight of the Lord, yet the killing of no Innocent, has been the
propitiation for the world. The righteous received, but gave no crowns, and
out of the valiantnes of the faithful are graven examples of patience, not
gifts of righteousness. For their deaths were every one singular to
himself, and none of them did by his end pay the debt of another, forasmuch
as there is our Lord Christ, in whom all are crucified, all dead and buried,
and raised up again. Erasmus in his book called the Preacher: If any man
lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, and not of the Saints. So much against
praying unto Saints. Here in the first part of my declaration, I have (as you
know) declared a true report of the wickedness of Rome: I began with the
Cardinals lives, proceeded to the Priests, Monks, and citizens, and ended
with the Pope. Seeing you know these reports to be true, for your own
salvation return to the truth. Be not obstinate and froward in your false
opinion. You are courteously and gently entreated, yet are you never the
better, but rather the worse, like Frogs that keep a great crooking and stir
against the light of the Sun: so do you against the glorious and comfortable
beams of Christ his Gospel. Be satisfied with truth, and abuse not the
merciful lenity of our gracious Sovereign, lest that the Lords discipline
be restored, which shall restrain your spreading poison, and avoid the hazard
which otherwise should happen, not only to the church of God among us, (which
might not thrive amidst such pestilent and co^bersome weeds) but even to the
enda^gering (which the Lord of glory turn from us) of this flourishing common
weal, and her Majesty's most royal person, crown and dignity. Your malicious
and cursed practices, as cocatrices, have brought forth and hatched great
dangers to ye common weal already. If you should be set at liberty, without
recantatio^ escape unpunished, winked at, favored and spared: greater
mischief shall ensue your treasonable practices, to ye ruin and desolation of
this blessed land, which God of his mercy turn away from us. What
pestiferous books have our English fugitives thrust forth unto us, defacing
Gods holy truth, the Queen her royal Majesty, many of her honorable
counsel, and sundry of her loving and faithful Subjects? Have they not also
procured Antichrist, Pope Pius Quintus, to excommunicate our Redoubted
Sovereign, and al the^ that content themselves, christianly and quietly to
live under her government? But an vnderserued curse hurts not. About
Midso^mer last was twelue-month, they renewed these bulls of excommunication,
granted by this Pope Gregory, under the color and name of Pius Quintus
published. There were five hundredth copies printed at Rome, as two of you (my
brethren) can verify the same, and how they were published, as I heard at
Rome, in the English Seminary at Rheames, and were put fast to pillars in the
city. These Bulls of excommunication were scattered throughout all Italy,
Spain, and part of Germany. In these bulls of exco^municatio^, (forsooth)
they have discharged (if their discharge should be credited) her highness
Subjects from their loyalty and obedience to her Majesty, their natural
Prince. Have not their Bulls pronounced her Majesty to be no lawful Queen,
whom God has placed over us? Have not their attemptes been the seed of
rebellion? and have they not caused, and do cause to this day, many to
practice secretly her graces destruction? The loyalty of Papists.
One of your Readers in Divinity positive, I am certain, before two hundredth
scholars, and not so few, as one of you may testify the same, most impudently
and deuilishly spoke, that it was lawful for any man of worship in England,
to give authority to the vilest wretch that is, to seek the death of our
sovereign Queen. But God who has defended her, still preserve her: And then
let K. P. who threatens, and Antichrist, Pope Gregory an Italian borne in the
city of Bolonia, who provoke, join their powers together: yet she shall
prevail, to their shame, and to her honor. Father Pais a Spaniard borne,
reader in scholastical divinity in ye Roman college at Rome, said in ye
presence of three hundredth scholars at least, these were his words, Bona
Papae voluntas trita and manifesta est, and eius crumena parata, sed R. P. aut
metus subtrahit, aut potestatis defectus vetat, vt suu^ in Angliam exercitum
ducere non audeat. That is, the Popes good will is tried and known, and his
purse ready, but K. P. either fear withdraws, or power forbids him that
he dare not venture, to bring his Army of Soldiers into England. But least
that I be too tedious to my hearers, of this first part I will make an end,
beseeching you my brethren to become loyal and faithful to your natural
Prince, forsaking your superstitious Idolatry and cursed religion, your
pompous glory, and proud hierarchy, and thus much for the first part.

The second part.
Qui veniunt ad vos vestitu ouium, etc.
Which come unto you in sheep clothing, etc.
In this place (being the second part of my division) when the holy Ghost
bids us: Beware of false prophets, he adds also a note or mark, to know
them by, in these words: Which come unto you in sheep clothing. In the first
words, which come unto you, there is also given us one mark of a false prophet,
yt is, to go before he be sent, in ye last words, In sheep clothing, is
showed, that when false prophets come, it is but with flattery and
dissimulation. For to come in sheep clothing: is nothing else, but to feine
himself a sheep, that is, to make thy self holy, whereas thou art nothing
less, to name thy self a follower of Christ's holy word, whereas thou art
obedient to the traditions of me^, to name thy self a Prophet, whereas you art
not, to name thy self a teacher of the truth, whereas thou art a maintainer of
lies: to resemble a sheep in outward show, but in wardly to be a Fox. What a
false prophet is, you may know if ye read these places of scripture that
follow, to wit, Esa. 56. Ierem. 6.23. Ezech. 22.34. Philip. 3.4. and the 2.
to Timoth. 3. Titus 1.2. Pet. 2. Luke 16. Romans 16. For whiles they give
themselves unto covetousness, (and that under a color of godliness,) what
can otherwise fall out, then that which S. Peter says, With fained words they
should make merchandise of Gods people. 2. Pet. 2.3.
So did the false Prophets amongst the Jews: so did their sacrificers, Matt.
15.5. with them, as our massemo^gers have done with us. What manner worshipping
of God have they feyned? what snares have they laid? namely Indulgences,
purgatory, watchings, masses for the dead, works of supererogation, and in
fine to that pass they brought it, that obscured ye grace of our redemption,
wherewith al such as believe, by Jesus Christ are freely redeemed, and get
eternal life. No man thinks amongst the Papists, but they either deserve
eternal life (by reason of their own works:) or else if their outward works
fail, to be damned for ever. This is yt same diabolical perdition, with the
sway whereof, a great part of Christendom is carried headlo^g. And the cause
hereof is, that men have ytching ears, and therefore procure unto themselves
heaps of teachers, 2. Tim. 4.5.
to feed their fond humors, men are highminded, self willed, lovers of
themselves, being wedded to their own ways, and married unto their own
devices, they leave the law of God, and follow after the traditions of men.
What (I pray you) is the cause, that there be so many papists in England? is
it not, because the true preachers are not believed? The truth offends them,
the Scriptures mislike them, they are delighted with falsehoode, and content to
stay themselves upon men's inventions. Precepts are given, and yet the
precepts of God are not regarded, ensamples abound, and yet the ensamples of
the constant and faithful martyrs of God are derided and scoffed at, the
wholesome counsels of the godly either are lightly contemned, or else heard with
so small profit, that they enter in at the one ear, and go out at the other.
Is it then to be maruayled, if Christ suffer these pretensed prophets, (the
Papists I mean) to seduce them from his truth? read 1. of the kings 22.22.
In Achab the like has been done before, and in Ezech. 13.10. and 22.28. we
read of them that builded with untempered mortar. Seeing then that they will
not give credit unto Gods word, and therewith be contented, God is not to be
blamed, if (that these false prophets deceyuing them with an outward show of
holiness) he give them up to strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11
that they fall from the truth to error, from light unto darkness, from heaven
to hell. Such as teach them the truth, are despised, and others that instruct
them in the dregs of idolatry, are esteemed and had in great reputation.
These false prophets, that they may bring these carnal men unto perfection:
they tell them how their forefathers lived, when they embraced papistrie, how
that in coming to Churches, they were very diligent, in worshipping of images
they were devout, how paynefull in visiting holy places, how liberal unto
the poor, how merciful to the afflicted, and lastly, how careful they were
to keep Gods commandments. Where be all these good works (say they) what is
become of them? Now one man seeks to beguile another, one man speaks evil
of an other, their devotion to the church is waxen cold, charity toward the
poor is more then frozen. etc. And whereof (say they) proceeds this heap of
all mischief, the ripenes of this impiety what root has it, springs it
not from the corrupt doctrine of the new fangled Preachers? Unto all these
supposed cauilles, and most manifest slanders (for other are they not, but
slanders and those mere supposed) I answer, whereas they speak of the godly
lives of their forefathers (if their lives had been holy) these their good
works, whereof they boast, were not undoubted marks of true religion. For
read the hystoryes of the Gentiles, let the lives of the old Philosophers
both Greeks and Latins be perused: and it shall not be able to be
gaynesayed, that for the civil state of their life, and the moral virtues,
they lived as uprightly as ever your forefathers did: yea, and that in such
excellency, that some of them were even beautified by the names of the virtues
themselves: as Socrates the Constant, Plato ye religious, Regulus the promise
keeper, Cato the sober, and such like: yet neither did their lives prove their
religion to be true, neither was heaven able to be scaled by so short and weak
a ladder. As for that they blame the lives of them that profess the Gospel,
and thereupon infer that they have no true religion, they speak more (by
their leaves) then truth will warrant. For the imperfections of Gods children,
and the sins of particular men, are not available to disherite them of true
religion: Genesis 9.2. and 19.33. 2. king. 11. and 12. Matthew 26.72.74.
as the drunkenness of Noah, the incest of Lot, ye adultery and murder of
David, ye backsliding of S. Peter, etc do declare, of who^ to say they sinned,
and therefore they were not in the right way, were to conclude very
impertinently, and without all rule of reason. Now whereas upon this weak
supposall grounded upon an untruth, ye misreport of ye preachers of England,
saying, that they allow all licentiousness of life, it is clean contrary, for
they diligently exhort the people to amendment of life: they condemn not good
works, no, they commend them highly. herein truly you and they do differ:
they make works to follow faith as the fruits, according to that S. August.
August. de fide and operibus. cap. 14 and epist. 106.
says, Opera sequu^tur iustificatum non praecedunt iustificandum: You make
works the ground and faith the roof, putting the cart before the horse, and
heat before the fire. The Queen goes before, and her handmaydes follow, not
that she is not able to go without them, but that as necessarily to the
Majesty and Royal port of a prince such attendance is necessary: so is it in
faith, and works. You my brethren say that good works are necessary, thereby
to merit heaven and deserve salvation. But as the scriptures are flat against
you, even so are the doctors also, none of the^ do bear with you, they all
bear against you. We teach the people truth, you fables. We preach faith,
and yet exhort unto good works, you seek more for the husk then for the
kernel. We are not such as Cardinal Hosius misdeemeth us to be (...),
naughty and evil preachers, neither preach we any thing that Gods word
allows not. How your Elders and our forefathers lived, it stands you in
hand to consider of: they put their sons into monasteries, and their
daughters unto Nunneries, what they did they have answered, if they did well,
they are pardoned by mercy in the promise made unto Abraham: if evil, no man
shall have a crown but he that fights lawfully. yet herein ye offer them a
great deal of wrong, yt as blind guides leading them into bypathes, robbing
the^ of their inheritance, spoiling the^ of the truth of Gods word, ye put
the sheep to answer for ye blindness of the shepherd. That they lived in
ignorance it can not be denied, it was not of faith, Romans 10.14.
for it was not grounded upon the written word of God: They did as they were
taught, if they had been taught better, better would they have done, yet is it
not fit yt we should condemn any man's servant whether he stand or fall.
Neither is their early rising to Mattens, to their Complyn at midnight, their
going barelegged and barefoote, their fasting and wilful poverty, their hard
lying, their whippings their going in sackecloth, their long praying in the
streets, nor all other ye like practices able to draw us from the truth. nay
what will ye answer when God shall ask you, Esa. 10.12. Mat. 15.9.
Why did ye worship me with men's traditions? who has required this at your
hands? Read the book entitled, Hierosolomitanus peregrinus, you shall find,
that the Turks live more austerely in their Monasteries and abroad, then ever
any of you did. It were too long to rehearse their outward godliness, they
fast and pray as you do, they build Temples, they maintain hospitals, they
visit the sick, they pray in the night time more then you do, and the day
time they spend either in prayer, or in some good work. They clothe the
naked, feed the hungry, harbor the harborlesse, they follow you in all points
of good woorks, yea, and they far surpass you. For proof hereof, I refer
you to the reading of their Histories. yet will ye not say (I think) that the
Turks for all their good works are like to be saved. If this were a good
argument, yt by good works men are saved: then could I reason thus: The Turks
do good works, But they which do good works shall be saved: Ergo the Turks
shall be saved. And whereas you say, yt they did well which make their daughters
Nonnes. For (say you) they serve God and our Lady: if their service be good
and commendable, seeing that they attribute and apply that unto our Lady, which
(in David's Psalms) is spoken of God the father and the son, judge you. For
when they pray, they pray after this manner, In te domina speraui, miserere mei
domina, dixit dominus dominae meae, sede matter mea a dextris meis, etc. In thee
O Lady have I trusted, O Lady have mercy upon me, the Lord said unto my
Lady, sit my mother at my right hand, etc. In such sort, that these
blasphemies, which they call our Ladies hours, were the chief devotion of
those that were most devout. Now seeing the blessed virgin was put in Christ's
place: I ask what remains for him? and if, because she bred him and bare
him, and brought him forth, she accomplished ye salvation of those that call
upon her, what then was there, that he should deliver himself to death for us?
But let me (I pray you) speak a word or two, concerning the doctrine of
these false prophets, which teaches a man to be justified by his good works.
If I should justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me (says Job:
Job. 20.
) for if I would be perfect, mine own mouth shall condemn me, we have been
all as an unclean thing (says Esaias) and all our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes. Esa. 64.6.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded: (says our Savior)
say the^, We are unprofitable servants, we have done but yt which was our
duty to do. And there is none righteous, Romans 3.10.
no not one: by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his
sight, and all these words come from ye mouth of God. But seeing ye will hardly
admit the testimony of Gods word, without the witness of men: go to, let us
see what say the fathers in this behalf? I do scarcely (says Origin) believe
that there can be any work, Origin. lib. 44. cap. 4.
that may of duty require a reward. Basil. In Psalm. 32.
Basil says that he trusts not in his own good deeds, nor hops to be
justified by his works, he has the only hope of his salvation in the mercies
of GOD. And Saint Hierome, Hierom, in Esai. cap. 64.
If we behold our own merits, we must be driven to desperation. The time will
not serve to handle this matter at large, therefore I end this part,
beseeching al those that love the Gospel unfeignedly, to take diligent heed to
such false Prophets, as come unto them in sheep clothing, faining them
selves holy, and by their holiness think them selves justified.

The third part.
Sed intrinsecus sunt lupi rapaces.
But inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Although our English popish Priests, (that come from Rome, or else from
Rheimes in France, to this our native soil) tell us that they have taken great
labor, passed many dangers, yea and hazarded their own lives to save our
souls from eternal damnation, and endless misery, they are not to be believed
for all these their brags. They are ravening wolves, they seek ye everlasting
confusion both of our bodies and souls. What do they teach, but false
doctrine? do they not seek to persuade us to worship stocks and stones, yea
(which is worst) to worship that idol in the Sacrament? They teach more, then
they are well able to perform. How can they prove, yt Christ is really and
transsubstantially in the sacrament of the altar? This is the effect and force
of all their arguments: Christ spoke it, when he said, Hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body. They will have no Tropicall figure herein to be expressed, for
that Christ said and promised, that he would speak no more in parables. This
argument is naught, if you say, that Hoc est corpus meum, be a parable. If you
say, that Christ promised to use no more figurative speeches, you are far
deceived. For he used a (...) in this phrase, Hic est calix noui Testame^ti,
quem si biberit quispiam, etc. This is the cup of the new Testament, which
whosoever shall drink, etc. You know no man can drink the cup: wherefore
here is Continens pro contento, the thing containing, for ye thing contained.
If Christ used a figure in this phrase, Hic est calix, etc. Why should he not
in like wise use a (...) in this phrase, Hoc est corpus meum?

Fe The death of Christ is not really present in the Sacrament. ri But the
blood of Christ is present in the Sacrament, as his death is present.

Amb. de sac. 4. cap. 4.
o Therefore the precious blood of Christ is not really present in the
Sacrament.

The Minor proposition is proved out of Ambrose, in his fourth book of the
Sacraments, and fourth chapter, Vt recepisti suae mortis similitudinem, sic
bibis similitudinem sui preciosi sanguinis: As thou have received the
similitude of his death, so do thou drink the similitude of his blood.

Dis The true natural body of Christ is placed in heaven.

am But the true natural body of man, can be but in one place.

is Therefore the true natural body of Christ can be but in one place, and at
one time in heaven.

Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9.
The Mayor is proved thus, Jesus receptus est in coelos, and sedet ad dexteram
Dei, etc. Jesus was received up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
GOD the Father. Matt. 26.11.
Pauperes semper habetis vobiscum, me vero non semper habebitis: The poor have
you always with you, but me shall ye not have always. Ioh. 12. Desero
mundum, and eo ad patrem: I forsake the world, and go to my Father. Multi
dicent in eo die, Ecce, Matt. 24.23. Mar. 13.21.
hic est Christus, and ecce, ibi: Many will say in that day, Lo, here is Christ,
and lo, there he is. Whatsoever is in many and diverse places at once, is God.
The body of Christ is not God, but a certain creature. Therefore the body of
Christ can not be in many places at once.

Da Every quantity (that is) every body that has length, breadth, and
thicknes, is contained in one peculiar place.

ri Christ's body has length, breadth and thicknes, and is a quantity.

o Therefore Christ's body is contained in one peculiar place.

The Mayor is proved out of Cyrill in his third book of the Trinity, page
245. Quic quid intelligitur habere corpus, hoc indubie est in loco, and in
magnitudine and in quantitate. Et si sit in quantitate, euitare non potest
circumscriptionem, hoc est habere suum locum: What thing soever is understood
to have a body, that without doubt is in a place, in magnitude and in
quantity. And if it be in quantity, then it must needs be in some peculiar
place.

Fe No natural body can at one and the same time have contrary and diverse
qualities.

ri But to be in one place local, in another not local, in one place with
quantity, in another without quantity, in one place finite, in another
infinite, is to admit contrary qualities to a natural body o Therefore the body
of Christ can not be in one place local, in another place not local, in one
place with quatitie, in another place without quantity.

We must so defend the humanity of Christ, that we destroy not his divinity.
If we assign to Christ's body plurality of places, we destroy his divinity:
wherefore we must not assign to Christ's body plurality of places. The
mystical signification that you have imagined of your shows and accidents,
that the forms of bread and wine outwardly represent the spiritual
nourishing of the soul, is vain and fantastical, without the witness of any
ancient Doctor, or father, and is confirmed only by the authority of ye Pope
himself. For what manner of feeding is there in these accidents and holy
forms, or how can that thing that feeds not the body, represent unto us ye
spiritual feeding of ye soul? The matter is plain enough of it self, and
needs no cavil. The signification and substance of the Sacrament is to show
us, how we are fed with the body of Christ, that is, that like as material
bread feeds our body, so the body of Christ nailed on the cross, embraced
and eaten by faith, feeds the soul. The like representatio^ is also made in
the Sacrament of Baptism: that as our body is washed clean with water, so our
soul is washed clean with Christ's blood. Therefore S. Aug. says, Nisi
Sacrame^ta similitudinem quandam earum rerum, quarum Sacrame^ta sunt, haberent,
omnino Sacramenta non essent: If Sacraments had not a certain likeness and
representation of the things whereof they be sacraments, then in deed they
were no Sacraments. This representation Rabanus Maurus lib. 1.23. expounds
thus, Quia panis corpora confirmat, ideo ille congruenter corpus Christi
nuncupatur, and quia vinum sanguinem operatur in carne, ideo refertur ad
sanguinem: Because (not the accidents or forms of bread) but bread it self
confirms the body, therefore it is conveniently called the body of Christ.
And because wine works blood in the flesh, therefore it has relation unto ye
blood. so likewise says Druthmarus in Matthew. cap. 28. Vinum laetificat and
sanguinem auget, and ideo non inconuenienter sanguis Christi per hoc
significatur. This I speak briefly of the sacrament of your Mass. Read the
old and new Testament, and mark if you find any one word directly, or
indirectly, secretly, or plainly, which speaks nigh or far, of the
sacrifice of your Mass, which is in controversy between us. Contrariwise,
see if you do not find therein from line to line, that Christ is the only
sacrifice once offered up for all: that there is one only washing in ye blood
of Christ, yt there is one only God, to be called upon in the only name of
Jesus Christ. If you find there the doctrines which we condemn, then in heart
and voice condemn us, and cry faggot and fire against us. If not, recant then,
and be sorry for your errors, cry God and the Queen mercy. Be sorrowful that you
have miscalled our sovereign Lady, and that you have said you would burn her
bones, and burn all them of her most honorable counsel, that favored not your
cursed attempts, either alive or dead: Many of whose names I could rehearse,
but for certain causes I will put the first letter of their names. let L. serve
the room of a Lord, and S. of a Knight. B. for a Bishop. etc. L.K. who is
dead, L. T. who is alive, E. L. alive, E. B. alive, E. W. alive, E. H. S. F. K.
S. F. W. S. H. S. M. R. of L. Ar. B. of C. M. D. of C. and all such as have
punished (or favored not) their idolatrous religion. B. of L. M. D. of P. L.
D. of Yor. L. B. of Win. who is dead, B. of Salisb. D. of Salisb. M. I. F.
preacher at London. D. H. at Oxenforde. D. F. preacher at Cambridge, with
diverse others, upon whom you said, you would show no mercy. A man had need to
take heed of such, as yet you are, who make men believe (for all this their
spite and malice toward their own native soil, which they greatly wish to be
destroyed with fire, sword, and famine: this am I able to verifye by such as are
already converted to the truth of Christ his Gospel, and yet I have omitted
many things of their hatred and practices against this Realm of England) yt
they hazard their lives to save our souls from hell, whereas in very deed,
they have wrought (as much as lies in them) our eternal damnation, and so
inwardly are ravening woolues. what do they teach our Englishmen, but yt the
Pope is supreme head, and that, if they will be saved, they must acknowledge ye
Pope to be sovereign Lord? This they teach without proof of scripture. Saint
Cyprian says, Cyprian de simplic. praelat. and in senten. Episc. and in lib.
1. Epist. 5.
Vnum esse Episcopatum, cuius quilibet Episcopus tenet suam partem integra^
sine diuisione. Praeterea nullum sui te^poris vocasse aut fecisse seipsum
Episcopu^ Episcoporum, aut tyrannide suos sibi subiecisse socios. That is, yt
there is but one Bishopric, of which every Bishop holds his part wholly
without any division. Also, that none of his time either called or made
himself Bishop of Bishops, either made through tyranny his companions subject
to his obedience. Also he complaining that profane men, and Schismatiques
withdrew themselves to the Bishop of Rome, says that there were none yt did
so, but certain desperate and wicked fellows, persuading themselves that the
Bishops of Affricke have less power then the Bishop of Rome. Saint Chrysostom.
says in homil. 83. in Matt. cap. 23. Quicunque Episcoporum primatum in terra
desiderabit, confusionem in coelis reperiet, et qui caput omniu^ esse
contendet, non co^putabitur in numero seruorum Christi: Whosoever (says he)
of the Bishops shall desire supremacy in earth, he shall find confusion in
heaven, and he that shall desire to be the chief, he shall not be reputed in
the number of the servants of Christ. Lo here, the fathers of your own Church
say, that the Pope is not supreme head. As for scriptures, read them
thoroughly, and you shall not find one only text to ground your supremacy
upon. Wherefore (good brethren) seeing that your own Doctors speak against
you, be reconciled with me that am converted by Gods grace, and the industry
of his instruments, the right worshipful sir Owyn Hopton knight, the Queens
Majesty's Lieutenant of this tower of London, and diverse godly preachers. Be
with me reconciled, I say, and let us with one accord embrace ye truth, and
become loyal and obedient subjects to our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth,
who so graciously and favorably deals with us, that, whereas (forsaking our
country, and submitting our selves to the government, or rather tyranny of an
Italian priest) we have deserved the heavy wrath of our loving Queen to be
punished with death, by our recantation our trespass may be forgotten, life
granted, and we brought into favor again. Wherefore, my loving brethren,
(considering the promise of the bountiful clemency of our gracious Queen,
ready at al times to pardon our rebellious and traitorous offenses committed
against her Majesty, and the daily labor that this right worshipful knight
sir Owyn Hopton by name takes, to convert us to the truth of the Gospel)
recant, recant, cast not away wilfully your bodies and souls to endless
pain: shorten not your days, which God has lent you here upon earth to do
good, and make not an end of the^ in a bad cause. Allow not the Popes
supremacy, canons of council, decrees of fathers, constitutions of men, rites
and ceremonies, pardons and indulgences, invocation of saints, merits by
works, pilgrimage, masses, diriges, trentalles, images, pictures, relics,
altars, shrines, lives of feigned saints, false miracles, visions, dreams,
fantasies and such other trashes without warrant of Gods word, as it appears
to ye world in your sermons and Romish postils. And in fine, be not Pharisees,
set not light by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, forsake not ye law of God, to
follow after the traditions of men. In vanum mihi seruiunt (says our savior
Christ in the Gospel of saint Matthew 15.) cum nihil, aliud docent quam
traditiones hominu^: In vain do they serve me, while they teach such doctrines
as are nothing but the commandments of men. Say not, that there be seven
sacraments, seeing the Church of God receives but two, numero paucissima,
August. de doct. Christi. lib. 3. cap. 9. and ad Ianuar. Epi. 118.
of the smallest number, (as Augustine writes) which are Baptismus trinitatis
nomine co^secratus, and co^municatio corporis and sanguinis ipsius: Baptism
hallowed in the name of the trinity, and the communicating of his blessed body
and blood, figured in the old Testament by the circumcision and the paschall
lamb. Repent (my brethren) repent, and cry to God for grace and mercy. Let it
never grieve you to return from these princes of darkness, the devil and the
Pope. And in deed what have you seen in the court of Rome? Christ in exile,
and Antichrist reign in his stead, Beelzebub the judge, wolves let loose, and
the lambs in ye stocks. Ah good God, who shall deliver the world from this
oppression? who shall gather together the sheep? who shall reprove and
convince the wicked pastors? Shall there never be a limitation and end of this
intolerable mischief? How long shall the Pope and his shauelings, who have
neither faith, godliness nor truth, deceive thy poor sheep? How long shall
the son of perdition reign over thy flock? who being but a man, lifts up
him self above Kings, yea above Angels, and above the heaven of heavens, and
has caused men to dispute that he is not Pope Innocentius. De transl. C.
quanto. Prohoem. Clement. Glossa: Papa stupor mundi. The Pope is the wonder of
ye world.
simply a man, but a partaker of the divine nature with Christ, and that he
has the fountain and root of ye spirit of Christ in him. To be short,
whereas thou, O Christ, have submitted thy self under heaven, earth and hell,
he will command kings, angels, Gloss. extrau. de sede ad Apostolatus. Distinct.
40. C. si Papa.
devils and all, under color of the key of the word, which thou have delivered
to thy ministers. I ask, (thou being God, and made man for the salvation of
the world) how it can be that this man, which makes himself God, should be
any other, then that son of perdition, come for the perdition of the world.
Thou that have been wounded for our transgressions, and smitten for our
iniquities, and with whose stripes we are healed, govern, help, and succor
thy flock: let Antichrist perish, and be discomfited by the breath of thy holy
mouth, and abolished by the brightness of thy blessed and wished coming. Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, for thy names sake. Let all the people say, Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
Jmprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Anno 1581.


