THREE GODLY AND FRVITFVLL SERMONS, DECLARING, FIRST HOW WE MAY BE SAVED in the
day of judgment, and so come to life everlasting: secondly, how we ought to
live according to Gods will during our life: which are the two things that
every one ought to he most careful of as long as they live. *

Preached and written by the reverend and godly learned M. JOHN MORE, late
Preacher in the City of Norwitch.

And now first published by M. NICHOLAS BOVVNDE whereunto he has adjoined of
his own, A Sermon of comfort for the afflicted: and, A short treatise of a
contented mind.

1. Thessal. 5. 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good. Seen and
allowed.

Printed by John Legatt, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1594.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in London.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND SVCH AS FEAR GOD, THE Knights, and Esquires,
Justices for the preservation of her Majesty's peace in the County of
Norffolke, and to every one of them, Grace, mercy, and peace from God the
Father, and from Jesus Christ our Lord.
WHereas among the many hundred Sermons, or rather certain thousands preached
by this grave and learned father, by the space of more then twenty years, in
which he was licensed thereunto by the University of Cambridge; he left no
such notes at large whereby the principal heads or chief matter of any of
them almost might be well collected for the better understanding of others,
saving only of these, which he wrote out word for word as you have them: It
seemed unto me, that his meaning and purpose was, thereby to commend the most
necessary doctrine in them contained, to as many as he might, and that it
should not be proper to them only, to whom it was first uttered, but stretch
out it self further: neither that the fruit of it should perish with the sound
thereof, but remain afterward, yea live when himself should be dead. Which
moved me thus to publish them, that so they might more speedily be carried far
and nere, and more easily be in the hands and eyes of all them, to whom they
were meant. And as they entreat of that matter principally, which was most
common in all his preachings, as being most necessary, (namely how we may be
saved in death, and how we ought to lead our life) which can never be too much
preached of, or too often heard of any; and therefore if he had still lived, he
would still have preached of this; so now because he is fallen asleep in the
Lord, and can speak no more unto us, and these points are but shortly set
down of him in the beginning of his Catechism, (which yet with great fruit
these many years has been often printed) this larger discourse of his might
be in stead of a continual preaching unto all those that are desirous still
to be confirmed in them: In which besides the matter whole and entire without
any alteration, you have his own very words also as they were penned by
himself, that so by the grave simplicity, or simple gravity appearing in
them, all that were acquainted with his preaching, might thereby as it were by
the color and lineaments of it, easily discern that it is altogether his own
doing in deed: especially so many as then heard him, might thereby as it were
by his footing, trase out the author himself. Seeing then, upon this occasion
these sermons come abroad, I thought it expedient, or rather necessary to
commend them to your Worships godly consideration and Christian protection;
because that being first preached in a Right worshipful assembly and meeting
of yours held at Ocle for the quarter Sessions then; and afterward (the Lord
so effectually blessing him, and moving some of you with his holy spirit)
being written at the earnest request (as it seems) of your Worships, him
self in his life time dedicated them after a sort unto you: so that I could
not now after his death, have alienated them from you: unless I would of
purpose have violated the will, and made frustrate the good intent of the
dead: which yet if I had inconsiderately done, your Worships might have
challenged them, and recovered them into your hands. Hoping therefore that your
Worships will favorably interpret my boldness, who being unknown even in the
face unto the greatest part, yea almost all of you, have presumed thus far:
seeing that therein I have not so much disorderly intruded any thing upon you
against your wills, as dutifully te^dered and delivered up unto you your own:
(as herafter you may for my credit herein, hear in this treatise the author
him self speaking unto you by name) I humbly beseech you to receive it as your
own: I count it altogether needless to write in the commendations of it,
(neither are my praises any thing, if they were needful) the name of the
preacher and writer of them commends them sufficiently, especially unto so many
of you, as knew his great learning, both in all the liberal arts, and almost
all languages, and also in other studies meet for so great a Divine: with his
great godliness and continual grave carriage of himself in the whole course of
his life, which worthily did purchase him great reverence amongst all: besides
his fervent zeal for the house of God, which at the last did eat him up: and
his endless pains in preaching the Gospel in season and out of season:
sometimes almost every day in the week, for the space of certain years, and
every Lords day three or four times: and when he did least, so often as
ordinarily the strength of man will permit, as many of your Worships are
credible and eiewitnesses of it, besides many hundreds more: By all which it
may seem he untimely shortened his days, yet seeing the end of our life is to
do good, and he by making have, did in so short a time, as much good, as if by
sparing him self he had drawn out the same in length, if he could possibly so
have lived an hundred or two hundred years: what cause had he in his death
thereof to repent, or we now in that behalf to be sorry for him? But I will
keep your Worships no longer from him; you shall hear him self speaking unto
you, or rather the Lord by him: unto whose gracious blessing, for the fruit of
this, and all other his good ordinances toward us, for our direction in this
life, and salvation in the life to come, Phil. 4. 8. 9.
commending all your Worships, I humbly take my leave, praying you to think on
these things, which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in
him: those things do, and the God of peace shall be with you Norton in Suffolk.
26 August. 1594.

Your Worships in all Christian duties for the Lords sake, Nicholas Bownde.

THE FIRST Sermon.
2. Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil.
WE have heard (good Brethren) heretofore, how to behave our selves one with
another touching strifes and contentions; that we must not be moved to
reuengement upon every light occasion, but put up injuries and harms, and pray
for our enemies, following the example of our Lord Jesus our chief peacemaker
with God: that we every one in like manner should be studious of peace in our
selves, and help others to be at one among themselves, that the prince of
peace may rest among us: all this we have heard at large declared unto us: it
remains only that we be diligent followers of it, for thereunto tends all
teaching and preaching, to beat into our heads knowledge of our duty
toward God and our neighbor, that we should not only be knowers of his will
with the wicked servant, but practisers of the same with the godly child. And
because in this point we be very dull, and content our selves often with the
bare knowledge of our duty, thinking it sufficient, that we can make jolly
discourses of matters, whereof we be nothing at all touched in our heart: I
have therefore chosen out this portion of Scripture, to this end, that it might
partly awake us out of such a sound sleep of security, to the more deep and
effectual consideration of our duty.

These words as I have read them unto you be uttered by the Apostle to this
end, that he might stir himself up more fervently and earnestly to the
doing of his duty not only before men in show, but also syncerely from the
bottom of his heart before God the searcher of the heart. For so it does
appear by the verse going before: howsoever it be, says he, whether it be
that we be at home in this body, 2. Cor. 5. 9.
or remoouing from home out of this body, we do always endeavor that our
actions and deeds may please our God. For we must all once appear before the
judgment seat of God, as though he should say, How men judge and esteem of
me, I make not so great account, so that my doings may be allowed of my God,
for there is no remedy they must once come to be skanned before God, where all
the allowing or disalowing of man can take no place. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
And herin also he secretly represseth and beats back the vain ostentation
of the false teachers, 1. Cor. 4. 2.
that had nothing before their eyes, but only to have the applause and the
liking of men. I dare not so do my duty, says he, as some teachers among
you, who frame them selves to please men, but my chief and whole purpose is to
please God in my calling; for when men shall have given upon my doings their
verdict and judgments, either in liking or disliking of me, I know that when
men shall have don with me, with their judgments and censures, that I must
after all that come before God, and he must take the view of me and my life,
not according as it has appeared outwardly to the show of men, but as it has
been indeed before God, and therefore I dare not frame my self to the only
liking of man, but especially to the pleasing of my God, before whose judgment
seat I must once stand, and that is it, that makes me so careful (as he
adds in the verse following) not only to do my duty before men so truly as
they can not justly blame me, 2. Cor. 5. 11.
but especially to examine my heart before God, that it be upright before him,
as my outward doings are before me^: because I set before mine eyes this
terrible judgment of the Lord, who is a sore reue^ger of all dissimulatio^.
Thus ye hear then for what purpose the Apostle brings in this sentence of
our appearing before the judgment seat of God, that is, to stir himself up
to walk more sincerely before God, and not to be contented with the applause
or liking of men. It remains now that we gather our profit by it, and apply
it to our use, that it may serve us in as good stead, as it did the Apostle:
for I need not stand long to prove the truth of the sentence, seeing it is
so evident through the whole body of the Scriptures, and so apparent as ca^
be, that Christ shall come to judgment: it is a thing evident enough of it
self, and denied of none, the simplest of all do acknowledge it, every one
knows that doomes day will come, it is an article of our Creed, that Christ
shall come to judge us, so that I need not busy my self to set out that
matter in large proof, which is of all so generally confessed: but this
especially we have to note out of it, that we learn to make our profit and
benefit by it unto our souls health, as the Apostle does unto his soul, and
apply it unto our souls, as he does unto himself. For he brings this
sentence, not to do us to understand, that he knows only and acknowledges
a judgment to come (for the very devils do in like manner so much, and yet
cease not continually to rage against God) but that by the acknowledging of
that judgment, 2. Cor. 5. 11.
he is inwardly touched with a reverent fear, and an earnest desire to do his
duty and walk uprightly both outwardly before man, and inwardly before God.
This profit does he gather to him self then, by thinking upon the judgment to
come, and setting it before his eyes, that thereby he is stirred up to walk
this life warily and sincerely both before God and men: and by this example we
are admonished (good brethren) to do the like, that is, to set the remembrance
of the judgment seat of God before our eyes, that thereby we may be raised
from our security: but alas, we are very far from it; every one of us, I
grant, can confess, (and I think we do believe it too) that Christ shall
come to judgment, we can so say, but alas we go no further, we gather not
hereupon with the Apostle, a lesson to our selves to walk therefore uprightly
and without guile before God, knowing that all our doings must once come to the
skanning before his judgment: this we leave out, and content our selves only
with a vain repetition of bare words in our Creed: and think that we are
notable Christians when we have rolled up the words in our Creed, that
Christ shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, and in the mean time
never apply it to our life, to take admonition thereby to walk in the fear of
our God, this I say, men little think upon: but we see how the Apostle teaches
us another lesson by his example, to apply the consideration of the coming of
Christ unto our souls with fear and trembling, to walk in simplicity before
God, because we cannot escape his judgment. And it stands us in hand to
learn it well, and put it in practice, for we see the untowardness of the
world, and our own blindness, how we do not only suffer our selves to be
blinded by others, but willingly cast before our eyes a thousand clouds and
mysts of hypocrisy and security to blind our selves with all, that we should
never see our own peril and danger, and utterly to bury in us altogether the
remembrance of the last judgment, that we might more safely sleep in our
deadly security and sinful behavior, to our utter destruction both of our
soul and body: therefore it is notable here that the Apostle calls us to
the judgment seat of God, for such kind of doctrine has great force to waken
us more lively out of such peril and danger, when we commonly use to tumble
and wallow without feeling: for as long as we think we have to deal but only
with man, we take upon us to rage like cruel beasts, without al reason and
conscience in oppressing one an other and in deceiving one an other, we commit
all abominable wickedness in corners, and in the dark night, and think we be
in excellent good safety, because our naughtines cannot be espied, nor tried
out by men: but alas the Apostle says we must all appear before the judgment
seat of God; when all the men in the earth have done with us, and can find
out none of our naughtines, then must the Lord begin to try out our
wickedness: and shall he in like manner (think you) be constrained to give us
over as one not able to bewray our lewdness! 1. King. 8. 39
No, no, all the secret thoughts of our hearts are open unto him: all our
subtle practices which we contriue never so closely are every one of them
apparent to his eyes, and he will sit in judgment upon them, and even condemn
us for them to everlasting torment, if we do not now repent while he gives
time. Ye see then it stands us in hand to put this lesson well in practice,
to avoid the danger now in this time of mercy, which otherwise will fall upon
us. And away with all vain gloses, and visours of hypocrisy, whereby we use
both to deceive our selves and others, and let us learn now at last to walk
in simplicity before our God, and in plain dealing with men. For otherwise,
there is no remedy, when we have wrangled out the matter never so stoutly
before men, it must be brought notwithstanding in hearing before our God, whom
we can not with all the fetches of our subtle heads, neither deceive nor
abuse. And yet it is a wonder to see how boldly men dare deal with God, and
how impudently they dare behave themselves in his presence, what wickedness we
dare commit even before his eyes, without all fear of his judgment seat, as
though he had neither eye to see out our lewdness, nor sword to punish, nor
yet judgment seat to condemn. We dare boldly in the open presence of our
God commit filthy adultery, fornication, and all uncleanness, which we durst
not for our lives be so bold as do in the presence of a child of xiii. years
old for fear of his presence, that could bring us to a little shame here in
the world, and yet stick nothing at all like brute beasts, to commit all such
villainy in the presence of our God, who has his judgment seat to condemn us
eternally. Does not this sufficiently bewray our blockishnes, that there is no
fear of God in us at al, when we dare so proudly check against his majesty,
and do utterly se^^ to bury up all the remembrance of his judgment, that we
might like filthy swine wallow and tumble our selves in all wickedness and
abominations without controlment! But like miserable caitiffes, which dare be
so bold with our God, to make no account of his majesty, and do so lightly
esteem of his judgment continually in our sins without repentance, we
shall be haled before his judgment seat in spite of our teeth, when we would
be glad to have the hills and mountains to fall upon us, Luc. 23. 30.
to hide us from his presence: Revel. 6. 17. and 9. 6.
but all shall not prevail. This sentence must stand more firm and sure then
heaven and earth, that all of us must appear before the judgment seat of
God; wherefore good brethren, let us not abuse this time of mercy, but now
repent, while God gives us time, for afterward is a time of judgment without
mercy to all those that dare so horribly abuse Gods majesty, and do not study
to repent while they have time: let us now, while we live upon this earth set
daily before our eyes the continual remembrance of Christ's coming to
judgment, that we flatter not our selves in our sins: and the more
carefully must we look unto it, because we see what blockish heathenishnes the
world is grown unto for lack of practicing this lesson: for what is the
cause of all the disorders grown amongst men, and all outrageous dealing, but
that men forget themselves, and think nothing of their appearance before the
heavenly judge? What is the cause of such flattery and craft among us, such
fetches, shifts, and devices to deceive one another, such swearing and
forswearing? what is the cause, I say, of all this, but only that men do not
effectually consider with themselves of the day of judgment, when all
matters shall be righted, all secrets revealed, and crafty iuggling with God
and man disclosed? me^, I say, do not think upon this, and therefore do harden
themselves in their sin. And especially here in Norffolke it is a marvelous
thing to see how we have so shaken off all fear of God, and utterly buried
the remembrance of his judgment: if we can once devise shifts and subtilties
to delude Justices, Judges, and Gods magistrates, that the law of man can not
take hold of us, we think our selves as sure and ^^^e as can be: if we can
find out any color or fetch that can not be espied by man in the judgment
seat, we on as slily with the matter as can be, and think all cock sure.
And though the matter be never so well known unto our consciences, when we do
injuries unto others, yet if there be no vvitnesses of the matter, or evident
proof by law to convince us, we think we be as safe as can be: and if we
be dealt vvithall by good men to deal uprightly with men and according unto
conscience, oh we be straightvvaies upon them; what sirrah? what know ye
by me? what can ye charge me vvithall? what witness have ye against me? if
ye have any thing to charge me vvithall I will answer it: and thus we play
the jolly fellows in advancing of our selves, and setting up our crest, if
nothing can be prooved against us by man. And what if no man living can charge
thee with any thing, thou miserable caitiffe, and that things can not be laid
out plainly by vvitnesses, and evidences before men? do thou think therefore
to escape scotfree at Gods hand, and so to escape his judgment? what if there
be no man that can charge thee? have not thou within thine own breast a
guest at home, even thine own conscience that charge thee of a thousand
matters more strongly, and more fiersly pursuing the matter then a thousand
vvitnesses? So could that cruel beast Cain, that bathed in the blood of his
brother, vvrangle with God after that manner: Genesis 4. 8, 9.
What do thou mean to ask me of my brother? says he, what have I to do
with him? am I my brothers keeper? is he not old enough to keep himself? He
thought forsooth, he had made sure work on all hands when he had gotten his
brother into the broad fields far from the presence of men that none could
epsy him to bear witness of the fact; Genesis 4. 8.
but the Lord finds out this cruel tiger, and subtle fox, and brings in
vvitnesses enough to condemn him, that were present, even at the deed doing.
Genesis 4. 10.
Thy brothers blood, says God, cries aloud for vengeance in mine ears: do
thou think to escape scotfree in my judgment, because no mortal man can
testify of it? the blood which I put into thy brothers body, and thou cruelly
did let out the same, that same blood has a lovvd voice before my judgment
seat, Genes. 4. 11.
to bear witness against thee, and to call for justice at mine hand to
revengement: the very earth which opened her mouth to receive the blood is
another loud witness before me to condemn thee, what say thou to the
matter? what have thou to say for thy self? Alack poor soul, he stands as
dumb as a block before his judge, and has not a word to answer in his
defense against these vvitnesses but like an obstinate rebel against Gods
majesty, does murmr against God, that he is hardly dealt withal, and that
his punishment is greater then he is able to endure, Genesis 4. 13.
that he is oppressed and thrown down with the fierce wrath of God. Let us
see then what we can prevail with all our shifts and subtilties here, where
we think no man can charge us, no witness against us: the Lord needs no such
witness in his judgment seat, he can call all his creatures to witness
against us: the very house wherein we commit wickedness, our conscience in our
breast witnessing thereunto, the dark night, the ground we tread upon, the
bed we lie upon, all the creatures of God about us, when we are committing
wickedness, shall be sufficient testimonies against us. The matter that we so
subtly contriue in our brains, for to wind in our neighbors and deceive
them, even the very matters them selves shall be sufficient before our God to
stand against us to condem nation. The pen, ynke, paper, parchment, scribe,
subtle pety-fogger, and whatsoever have been instruments with us in our
crafty devises, whatsoever of Gods creatures we have used or rather abused
thereunto, shall testify their humble obedience to their creator to our
condemnation: yea, even our own hands that wrote, our tongue that spoke, our
feet that went, our heart that devised, our body that executed, must needs
stand in judgment as an army of witnesses, to condemn us. What did it avail
that miserable caytiffe, that he could use his legs and feet to meet his
Master, and his arms to embrace him, and his tongue falsely to speak words of
pretensed friendship, Matt. 26. 48.
Hail master, and his mouth like a trusty friend to kiss him: what could all
these prevail, I say, when God pursued him more narrowly, and haled him more
nearly unto his judgment seat? what did they prevail? Alas poor damned
creature, his conscience was made his hangman. The Lord needed no other
witness to bewray the false meaning of his fained friendly heart, then his
own conscience within his breast, that spoke so loud against him to his
condemnation, that he could not abide, but cruelly caused his own self same
legs and feet to carry him to his own death, and the self same hands to
hang up his body to dispatch his life: and then, which is most lamentable, when
he thought to be rid from his Judge, then alas did he but begin his torments,
which never can be ended. Heb. 10. 31
So horrible a thing it is to fall into the hands of so mighty a Judge. O good
breethren, let us lay up these examples deep in our hearts, to bring in
continual remembrance before our eyes the judgment seat of God, that we may
learn to fear his majesty, and stand in awe of his dreadful judgment
seat, that we be not so bold with our God, to dally with him, and as it were,
play with his nose as they say; thinking our selves sure enough when we can
make fair weather with men, and with our smooth looks, sugared words, and
fair countenances subtly intrappe our brethren. Alas good brethren this
geere will not be good stuff with our God, when he calls us to answer the
matter in his highest court of parliament, it vanishes away as smoke. Those
same Judas kisses be to common against us, and which worse is, it is holden
almost no sin: nay, I am afraid, it is accounted of most of us a notable point
of policy, as without which we could not be able to live amongst men, to
flatter, speak fair, and as it were, to creep into men's bosoms, whereas
within there is nothing but falsehood and a double heart: and yet we are grown
to this brutishness, as though God had no judgment seat, that we think we
could not otherwise live amongst men, unless we play on both hands with God
and the world: and we have made it, as it were, an infallible rule, and brought
it to a common proverb, Nescit regnare, qui nescit dissimulare, He knows not
how to keep his own, that knows not how to dissemble and feign: flattery
and fair speech is called holy water of the court, and I can not tell what. I
know not what is in the court, for I am no courtier, but I am sure that we have
too much of such holy water amongst us here in Norffolke: fair words and false
hearts, sugared talk and subtle meaning; it is too too common the Lord be
merciful unto us, as though God did not see us, view us, mark us, and even
register us up unto his judgment seat: Psalm. 10. 11.
well good brethren, let us not deceive ourselves, all this our fair subtlety
is no more but Judas kisses, and undoubtedly, unless we in time repent, we
shall with Judas at the hand of Almighty God taste of the like vengeances for
God will not be mocked: Psalm. 6. 7.
and although during our life we come not to the gallows, or to fordoe our
selves as he did, yet our God has his judgment after this life, and will hang
us up in hell with Judas everlastingly: all of us, if we do not repent, yea
although we do wear velvet coats on our backs, all shall not save us: there
is no remedy, we must all appear before the judgment seat of God: and
therefore let us now think upon it whiles we have time, that we may be in a
readiness when it comes: for therefore we are summoned, and in that court we
must appear. Away then with all these counterfaited devises, which be so
common amongst us, and fall at length to plain dealing: let us examine all our
doings even now presently, as they must be examined before the judgment seat
of God, Dan. 5. 27.
and farse in no bumbasies of our own gloses, for that will be found too light
in the balance: let every one of us now present, examine our selves, and apply
this sentence unto our selves, and make our profit by it, to the direction of
our life according to the will of our God, and not only to please man. What
naughtines soever we go about, let us always enter into our selves and say,
what am I doing now? does not God see me? yes: does he not abhor this my doing?
yes: has he not summoned me to answer this my doing before his judgment seat?
yes: O what a miserable wretch am I then, Psalm. 50, 21.
that dare so boldly commit open sin before my God, as though he were fellow
with me in my sins! should I cast mine own soul away! O good Lord forgive
me, I will never do the like again, grant me thy strength to beat back all the
false allurements of Satan, that goes about to destroy my soul, be merciful
unto me, and set always before mine eyes a reverent fear of thy judgment
seat, that I never ^^ep in my sin, but thereby may be awaked to walk simply
and plainly before my God without hypocrisy dissimulation, or subtilty during
the whole course of my life. Lo then how we must apply this doctrine unto our
selves, that it may be profitable unto us, and stand us in stead against the
subtle practices of our adversary Satan.

But here is yet a further thing in this matter needful to be considered,
namely that whereas the holy ghost here calls into our remembrance the
coming of Christ to judgment, he leaves out the time when he will come, and
makes no mention of it at all. We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, but when the time shall be, whether to morrow, this night, or the
next year, or ten, twenty years, he tells us not: no he speaks not one word
of that, he leaves it out clean: the holy ghost through the whole Scriptures
has left that time uncerten unto man, Mat. 24. 36.
yea the very angels in heaven are ignorant of that, they know not when the Son
of man shall come, no creature in heaven, earth, or hell knows that; the Lord
has hid it from his creatures, and only reserved it to him self: wherefore?
that we knowing certainly that he will come, and not knowing when, Mat. 24. 41.
might always be in a readiness, when he comes, lest he takes us unawares:
Mat. 13. 35.
for so does our Lord Jesus Christ admonish us, Mat. 24. 44.
therefore be ready, says he, for ye know not when the Son of man shall come:
and to waken us up more sharply, he tells us, that his coming will be
sudden, says he, at an hour when ye least think, even as a thief in the
night. And upon the contemners of God says Paul, which lie and wallow
themselves in their sin, 1. These. 5. 2, 3
the day of the Lord shall come upon them suddenly to their destruction: yea
when they shall think themselves most sure, and safe, and make no more but a
tush at the matter, and say in themselves, Verse. 34.
tush all is well, all is quiet, even then suddenly shall destruction come upon
them, as sorrow upon a woman with child. God then has left the certain time of
his coming uncertain unto man, that we might always be ready and deferr not
the time of our repentance till to morrow, because we know not whether the Lord
will call us before to morrow: and this point is most specially to be noted,
for else all that ever has bin taught hitherto concerning the appeara^ce
before Gods judgment seat will be altogether unprofitable unto us: we vvil
acknowledge that we must appear before the judgment seat of God, but we
think it will not be so soon, but that we may have a little space to continue
in our sin: and you shall see that this is the chiefest thing that Satan
uses to bring into the heart of man, to make him believe that the day vvil not
be so soon, but that he may have time enough before that day come, and
therefore that he may yet a long time take his pleasure in his sin and repent
before that day come. And I waraant you he has been busy even with some of
you since that time that I have been entreating of this matter, to blow this
blast in your ear, that that day is not yet so near, but that you may
continue a while in your sin and amend afterward. The carnal ear of him
that is soked in the sweetness of his sin, has heard me all this while
entreating of the judgment of God to come, and very pleasantly laugheth in his
sleeue: oh, says he, here is a fellow indeed, he is afraid of his own shadow,
belike he thinks we be babes, and would afray us with bugs: he has bin
telling a long tale of Gods judgment seat, as though there were any that
denied it, and as though we did not know it as well as he: but what for that?
should we forgo the pleasures of our youth, the commodity of our crafty
subtilties, and the hope of our gain thereby for fear of this judgment? as
though forsooth we could not amend all this geere before that day come: nay,
nay, let him speak what he will, we will take the pleasure and gain of our
sin, and afterward we will amend, and we trust all in time enough too. O
subtle devil that can so be witch the soul of man to utter destruction! but
harken thou carnal beast to the voice of the Son of God, Mat. 24. 41, 44.
he tells thee that this day is not known to any of Gods creatures, and
dare thou appoint with thy self a certenty of it, as though it were not so
soon? thy God says, it shall come suddenly, and dare thou set him to
school, to be wiser the^ he? and say tush in thine heart, it will be long
first? no but he tells thee, if thou be secure, it will take thee unawares,
in a moment, 1. Cor. 15. 52.
in the tvvinkling of an eye, before thou be vvare, and where is thy amendment
then? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
therefore he charge thee to amend now, and defer not the time, least thou
be taken vnavvares, and so carried to eternal destruction, and what shall then
all thy vain hoping for a longer day profit, when thou art taken suddenly,
as the bird in the net? But thou say, it will not come so soon, but Christ
says, it will come at an hour, when thou least think: Luc. 21. 55.
and tells thee flatly, that if thou shall play the wicked servant, and
think thy master will tarry long, and be many years and days before he come,
Mat. 24. 48, 50, 51.
and thereupon fallest to beat thy fellow-seruants, and deal subtily with
the^, without regard of the coming of thy master, Jesus Christ flatly tells
thee, that he will come in an hour, when thou least think, and give thee
thy portion with hypocrites in eternal burning fire: then what have thou
gained by such presuming upon Gods mercy, and hardening of thy self in thy
sin against God, when thy pleasure is turned into pain, and thy security
and ease into continual torment? Alas, good brethren, that we should be so
blinded with the subtilties of Satan, for the gain of a small earthly trifle
to cast away soul and body eternally. Mat. 16. 26.
What can it profit us to win the whole world, and loose our own soul? and
this we do so long as giving care to the vain allurement of Satan, we
continue in our sin, deferring the time of our repentance till afterward,
thinking that the Lord will not come so soon: you see then the lack of
practicing this doctrine, that is here taught unto us, is the cause that at
this day men are so hardened in their sin, and boldly go on forward to
eternal destruction. Men do imagine with them selves, that although they must
one day appear before the throne of God, yet it will not be so soon, and
thereupon they never think of that matter, but devise all wickedness in their
brains to fill their purses, feed the paunches, deceive their neighbors, and
generally all other spite and villainy against God and man: and all because
they think themselves in sure case, that the day of repentance is not so
near, but that they may amend all this gear in time: but it is not so, they
are deceived. The Scripture tells us it will come sooner then we think, and
therefore amend betimes, least we perish all. And it is a marvelous matter to
see how wonderfully the adversary has prevailed in this: for whereas God
would have us always in readiness, because the time (...) uncertain, the
clean contrary is settled in our hearts, namely to take our liberty in
sinning, because the time is a far off, as we dream: and this persuasion is
so deeply settled in our breast, that if men be admonished to take heed of
their dealings: for a day will come when all things shall be righted, then they
think straightway they have a great long scope given them to range in: for
they take it as a principle most surely rooted in their hearts, that that day
is a far off. If they be threatened with the coming of Christ to judgment, you
shall see them make of the matter no more but a scoff and a mock: oh sir, if
ye give me so long a day, nay then I shall do well enough: and here they can
fall to gybing, and make themselves merry with the talk of the welchman, who
having robbed a man of his budget, and being threatened that he should answer
for it at the day of judgment, made answer, that if he might have so long a
day, he would have the cloak too: and thus miserable caytiffs they think they
have notably prevailed, when thus they have scoffed out the matter: but alas,
pore souls, it is no more then a laughter from the teeth forward: for when
they have put from them the day of the Lord as far as can be, and that God
for a time let the^ play upon the hook, yet alas, there is a thing within
their breast, that sometimes will sting them to the heart in spite of their
teeth: but yet here-withall you see how common this is amongst men, that the
day of the Lord is a far off: Amos 6. 3.
for when we can so readily give such answers as this, If ye give me so long a
day, etc. surely we bewray our own hearts unawares, that we are persuaded in
our breasts, that it is long to that day. And the same opinion have we in like
manner of the day of our death; there is scarcely found amongst us any so old,
but he will think he might live one year longer, or at least one month, or one
day, so far he is off from thinking on his death: if we be young, oh then we
think our selves as sure from dying, as God had sealed us his letters patents
for our life till old age: and hereupon it comes, that in our lusty youth
(as they term it) we never think to make our selves ready to Godward: nay
so far are we from all (...) of God, that unless we play the wild coltes in
all licentiousness and sin, we think we have not well spent our youth
according to the course of nature: and into such beastlines we are gone, that
we have framed an heathenish, nay worse then heathenish, rather a deuilish
proverb, A young saint, an old devil; as if so be we should begin to be
holy in our young age, it were the next way to make us devils when we are old:
and as though it were the best way to be a devil in thy young age, that thou
might be made a good holy man in thy old age. But I pray thee, what if thy
God call thee while thou art a young devil, what shall become of thee in thine
old age? if the Lord cut thy years short, and make an end of thy life, while
thou art playing the young lusty devil, I warrant thee thou shall never come to
be neither old saint nor young saint. This I speak (good brethren) with grief
of heart, to see into what miserable blindness we are tumbled, that the thing
which God has hid from us so secret to himself (the day of his coming, and
the day of our death) as though we were of Gods counsel, we will be so cunning
in it, as if he had not only revealed it unto us, but also had sealed unto us
the assurance of it. And all this we do, that we may more boldly sin without
controlment, thinking when we are old, we will then begin to frame our selves
to godliness: but alas, good brethren, we deceive our selves, it is not so, we
have no assurance of our life, we can not tell when it shall please our God to
call us, at midnight, noonetide or cockerovve, we are not certain one minute of
an hour to live, and therefore let us not drive off from day to day, and
think he will amend, least he come upon us unawares, and find us unprepared.
Take heed, good brethren, that we do not flatter our selves, to think I am
but young, and I trust I shall not die so soon, I will take the pleasures of my
youth a while, and when I begin to be old, I will then wholly apply my self
to Gods will: or thus, although I be some what aged, yet I trust I shall not
go so soon, I thank God I feel my self strong and lusty, I can eat my
meat well, and I will not yet settle my self to be ready, when God calls
me: I may continue yet a little while in my craft and subtlety, til I have got
but such a piece of ground* or so much money to lie by me, and then I will
amend: when I shall begin to be sick, then I will settle my self wholly to
God-warde: Let us take heed, good brethren, of these blasts and temptations of
Satan, that we be not deceived; do we not see both daily and hourly how that
the Lord calls as well the young as the old? and what patent have we of our
life, that we are not in the number? Do we not see that God calls men even
suddenly, when they are in as good health as can be, yea even when they are
eating their meat at dinner, even supping an egg is the last breath that ever
they draw? wherefore does the Lord this, but only to let us understand and see
before our eyes, how soon our life is gone, that so we might always be in
readiness: we see these things continually, and yet alas how smally we profit
by them: wherefore we see it needful, and a thousand times more then
needful, to have this soundly imprinted in our heart, and the remembrance of
it continually before our eyes, that we must hence we can not tell when, that
our heathenish ears, and Epicures pleasures may be cut off by the continual
meditation of the same, otherwise undoubtedly, good brethren, when we think
our selves most at ease, we shall understand the sentence here that Christ Jesus
spoke, Luc. 12. 17, 18.
That we shall be taken in an hour, when we least think. That rich Epicure that
wallowed and tumbled in his wealth, little thinking upon his death, but soked
in his sinful pleasures, sits at his ease debating with himself how he
may make his life most easy, and at length concludes with himself such a
way, as he thinks to live most pleasantly and easily for many years: he will
pull down (forsooth) his old barnes, and build him greater, that shall be able
to receive all his grain, and then like a jolly carnal swine, he will say to
his soul, Oh soul, eat and drink, and make lusty good cheer, for thou
have enough laid up for many year* here is nothing with him but cherishing the
belly and pampering the body, as though God had put life into him, and set him
in this world for none other end, but like a bruit beast to cra^me up his
belly to the corge, and feed him self fat against the (...) of slaughter:
this miserable caytiffe has forgot himself that he must die, there is no
remembrance of death, but as though he must live ever: but when the carnal
belly-god in his chiefest ruff and (as he thinks) in his greatest felicity,
his cheer was clean changed in a moment, he heard a voice that daunted his
courage, it was said unto him in the self same hour, Luc. 12. 22.
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul shall be taken from thee, this night
thou must needs die, and what shall thou then be better for all this false
conceived joy in thy pleasures and riches, when thou must not enjoy them one
minute of an hour? I am afraid, good brethren, it is too lively and too true a
description of us Englishmen, which have never done with feeding the belly and
clothing the back, as though we should live here ever. I am afraid too many
of us have utterly vanished out of our remembrance the day of our death, Amos
6. 5.
or else have put it a far off, as though it would not come of a long time: I
am afraid too many of us say in our hearts with this worldly wretch: Oh, if
such a thing and such a thing were brought to pass, I would say to my soul,
take even thy full pleasure, eat and drink thy belly full, make merry, take
even thy hearts desire. Alas, good brethren, let us take heed unto our selves,
what shall it avail us, when God shall suddenly take us from all our pleasures
in a moment, and throw our souls into everlasting torment? The cause of this
loosenes amongst us is, because we do not practice that doctrine that is
taught us out of this sentence, namely that the day of our departure is
uncertain, even oftentimes when we least think: wherefore I desire you in the
fear of God, for the love we bear unto our own souls, that we make our
profit of this sentence better then we have done heretofore: let us apply it
unto our selves, and call our selves to an account, every one of us enter into
his own heart, and thus say, What wickedness do I know by my self? Am I a
thief, a murderer, a covetous person? is all this hid from man? yea. But alas,
God does see it, and has appointed a judgment to punish it, therefore I will
no more continue in it: I will now repent while I have time, I will not da^me
mine own soul, for once I must appear before the judgment seat of God. And
if the devil would go about to suggest into thine heart, that it will be long
before the day come, and that that thou have yet a long time to live, Matt. 24.
51. and 21. 44.
and therefore thou may a while continue in thy sin, answer him with Jesus
Christ's words, that then I shall have my part with the wicked servant in the
continual burning lake: that the time is not known to any creature, it is
uncertain, it will be sudden when we least think: and therefore defer not to be
always in a readiness: if he will reply and say, it is not like to be so soon,
for that all things are well, and there appears no tokens of sickness, much
less of death, answer him again, that even therefore I ought more to suspect
the day to be near, ^. Thessalonians. 5. 2.
because it shall be at such a time, as men shall think all things well and
quiet, even then shall it come and take men unprepared. Let us, good brethren,
in this manner apply this doctrine to our selves, that we may profit by it in
newness of life: let us not defer the time till to morrow, the Lord God
knows where we shall be to morrow: we are al of us here now, God be thanked,
but the Lord knows whether we shall ever come together again or not: the
Lord may take us before we go out of the Church-doore; so uncertain are we of
our life: wherefore let us for Gods sake defer the time no longer, but every
one of us now begin to amend, and lie no longer in our sin, but turn to
the Lord by true repentance, knowing that our time is uncertain; thus doing, we
shall find the Lord our God merciful unto us, he will increase in us his
graces and gifts of his holy spirit, that we may grow on forward from faith to
faith in sanctification and newness of life, till it shall please his goodness
to call us in his good time to everlasting rest.

Thus we have heard, good brethren, what we have to learn out of this
sentence, it remains that we knowing it, put it in practice, and that we do
not think it sufficient to come hither to sit here, and to lend our ears to
the preaching to give it the hearing, and have yet notwithstanding no purpose
of ame^ding, but rather some hard heart still to continue in our sin, as we
we came: for assuredly if we do so, the eternal God will never suffer
unrevenged such horrible contempt of his blessed word: it is an horrible abuse
of Gods word, yea of God him self, when we so dally with God: ye, if I that
preach the word should think it sufficient for me, when I have told you Gods
will out of his word, and yet not apply it to my self, to reform my life
after the same, assuredly I should answer that horrible contempt of Gods
majesty before his eternal throne of justice: if ye shall then (good
brethren) harden your faces against this word of God, and shake it off, and
say still in your hearts, For all this I will continue in my sin a while, and
for all his threatening I trust I am not so near death, but I may amend before
that day come, let him say what he will, I will not yet begin: then I testify
unto you before the eternal God, that the master of the house will come in an
hour, Matthew. 24. 5.
when ye least think, and give you your portion with hypocrites, where shall
be vveping and vvayling and gnashing of teeth: and then when ye would it is
too late, Romans 2. 4.
alas ye can not. If ye shall now abuse this day of mercy, and Gods long
suffering that draws you to repentance, 2. Pet. 3. 13.
and like carnal beasts fling abroad, and kick up your heels against the
Lord, violently throvving from you all godly admonitions, whereby he goes
about to pull you unto him, he shall come upon you like a fierce lion, and
utterly consume you in your greatest pride, when ye least think: but I hope
better of you, brethren, and good cause I have so to do, I thank God for it, I
trust the Lord will work in your heart, that ye will not defer the time,
but even now begin to turn to him, while he offers you mercy, and
presume not of hereafter. Remember the five foolish virgins, Math. 25. 11.
that had no oil in their lamps, and yet for all that took no thought, but
snorted and slumbred without all care, thinking they should have time enough
to prepare, but alas they were deceived, for the bridegroom came suddenly, and
those that were found ready entered in, and those jolly fools that deferred
so long were shut out, and shall never enter in: for Gods sake, brethren, let
these things enter deep into our head and heart: let us have these things so
deeply imprinted in our hearts, that we may think upon them continually, and
say alvvay with that holy man, whether I sleep or wake, me think I hear
continually sounding in mine ears, the trump of the Lord that says, Arise ye
dead, come to judgment: let us alvvay be prepared against that day, and
alvvaies say in our heart with the saints in the Apocalypse, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, I am ready for thee, Revel. 22. 20
come when thou vvilt: that our hearts may still long after it, Phil. 1. 23.
and say with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee, o
Christ: otherwise if we shall defer it, and take our pleasures in this
world, then alas even the remembrance of death, Oh how bitter will it be to
him, that has his heart upon the things of this world? it will nippe our heart
a sunder to part with our goods, to part with our pleasures, and all because we
have so long abused Gods long sufferance, and prolonged the day of our
repentance, till suddenly we are taken: then we could with the wicked
contemners of God, wish the very hills and mountains to cover us and hide us
from the presence of the fierce judge, Luc. 23. 30.
whom we have so stubbornly contemned: Revel. 6. 17. and 9. 6.
but alas, it will not prevail, we must even be hayled before his judgment
seat in spite of our teeth: wherefore, good brethren, let us think upon it,
and think upon it again, that it never part from us: these be weighty
matters to be thought upon, these be things that must always keep us
occupied, and not heard with the ear for the space of an hour, but they must
be our continual meditation our whole life: I trust by Gods grace ye will think
upon it, that you may profit by it: I hope well of you, as good cause I have,
especially because I see the Lord has moved you to this good work, whereunto
you are assembled, that you think not much neither of cost nor trauail for the
benefit of the commonwealth and ease of your brethren: continue and go on
forward, be not weary of well doing, seeing the Lord is with you in blessing
your labors, remember the time we have is short, let us be doing good while we
have time, remember that your callings require the same, being magistrates of
peace, to be careful of peace: remember that ye must once be called to account
before the judge for your calling, and then though all the men in the earth
would clear you, if God do condemn you, there is nothing but destruction:
let the vprightnes then of your consciences be in these your meetings, that ye
may be void of vain glory before men, and be simple before God to do good,
and then the Lord will bless your labors in this life, and in the life to
come ye shall receive full joy both of soul and body for ever. Ye see then
the meaning of this sentence, and how the Apostle takes it to his use, to take
his profit by it, in setting it always before his eyes, to keep him thereby
in a continual awe of God, while he skanneth his doings, not only by man, but
especially by God, who has his judgment to call us unto, to answer the matter
when we least think: and herin how we are admonished to do the like, and to
take our profit by it in like manner; thus much, I say, has been declared out
of this place, in that sense and manner that it is used by the Apostle. There
is yet further doctrine in particular to be delivered out of the same very
profitable for us for our instruction, of which we must in like manner gather
our profit: for whereas it delivered unto us, that we must once appear before
the judgment seat of God, we are not only thereby taught to be raised up to
a more diligent view of our doings, that they be sincere before God, which the
Apostle does here, but further having entered into our selves, and found in us
many imperfections, yea and horrible sins, which the Lord hates, and which
he has pronounced to be punished with his heavy curse and eternal
condemnation, knowing that he is both a just God and a true, which has set
this punishment down, and has already summoned us to his judgment seat, we
are hereby (I say) admonished carefully to consider how we may be discharged in
that judgment day, and delivered from that same punishment, which our sins
have deserved. This is a special point to be considered, and deeply to be
waighed of every one of us, and not slightly to be passed over: it is our
chiefest joy in our life, our only comfort in our death, and our true
happiness after death. Without this we are most miserable of all creatures,
yea in worse estate then the very brute beasts: for they (silly poor things)
yet shall have an end of their misery and toil in their death: but we if we
know not this, shall then in death and after death begin our eternal torments,
which shall never have end. Without this although we live in this world most
pleasantly, most wealthily, and most gloriously, yet we are of all creatures
most unhappie: for what shall it avail us, if we win the wealth, pleasure,
and glory of the whole world, and at the day of judgment loose our own
souls, and be thrown down into eternal torment? what benefit does that rich
glutton, that now lies burning in hell, and shall, what benefit does he reap
of all his good cheer, that he devoured in his life time? what is he better
for all the fine apparel, that he clothed himself withal? all? what does he
now gain by all the glory that he inioyed in this world? what does it help him
now, when he is in everlasting torments? He would now have ease for a minute of
an hour, and can not. Ye see then it is a most needful thing to think upon
this now while we are living; that seeing we must once appear all before the
judgment seat of God, we may now begin to be careful to know the ways and
means how we may be set free in that judgment, and so come to eternal life:
for unto this end the Lord gives us life and being here in this world, to the
glory of his name, to learn all this while we live here the true ways and
means how to be delivered in that day to live ever and never die: you see
this, it is a special and a most principal point, that we be here taught,
that is, that we be most careful to be discharged in the day of judgment,
because it stands us in hand in pain else of casting away both of soul and
body into eternal fire. But it is lamentable to see the great ignorance among
us in this most chief and most necessary thing: there is none almost but he
knows he must come to judgment and looks for doomes day, but alas, how or
by what means he shall be discharged in that doom and judgment scarsly shall ye
find the hundredth person, that know eth it: in this point generally the whole
earth is ignorant. It is too lamentable, good brethren, especially among us
that have the name of Christians, yea in the time of the gospel that we
should be ignorant of this chiefest point, how we are saved by Christ. The
multitude generally are so ignorant in this, as is marvelous: ask the^ how
they hope to be saved in the day of judgment, they can not tell: some
peradventure will give answer in general words, Even as it pleases God, or by
Gods mercy, I put me wholly to his mercy, or by Christ, or such like words: but
ask them further how and by what means it pleases God to save them seeing
their sin must be punished? or how they trust to be saved by Gods mercy seeing
God in justice must punish their sin? or how or by what means they hope to
be saved by Christ? these things, I say, they are utterly ignorant of. And you
shall see not only simple souls (as they call them) ignorant of these points,
but commonly even those, which otherwise have great gifts of wit, and skill of
things in the world: ye shall see a company that are so skillful in any matter
almost which is to be skanned before a mortal judge, that they will go near to
go beyond a good skillful lawyer, and put him to his pinch, and yet
notwithstanding examine them of this law point, how they shall be saved in the
day of judgment, they have no wit to answer it, they are not book learned
forsooth, as though only book-learned men shall be saved, and not the simple as
well. Nay come also to those that have excellent gifts to serve in the common
wealth, and seem to be of great countenance and wisdom, and I warrant you, if
due examination were made, they should be found to be ignorant in this point,
and not to know the way and means of their salvation. I speak that which I
know, it is a lamentable thing to see it. I have dealt with such men diverse
times, and have found them utterly ignorant in the knowledge of their
salvation, and yet otherwise men of great wisdom. Wherefore the case is too
lamentable, that that thing which the most simplest ought to know, even the
most excellent are ignorant of. Nay there is yet a further thing that
augmenteth the matter, and makes it worse: namely, that me^ are not ignorant
of this so needful a thing, but also they are altogether retchlesse, and have
no care to seek to know it: we have never done with carking and caring for our
bodies, we ride, we run, we dig, we delve, we labor, we toil, and all
we think too little to preserve our bodies, and in the mean time what shall
become of our souls and bodies in the day of judgment we have no regard:
and yet every one of us will confess that we ought to be more careful for our
souls, then for our bodies, more careful for the life everlasting, then for
this present momentarie life: and yet contrary to our own conscience,
contrary to our own knowledge we leave the principal not regarded, and bend
our whole force, wit, skill and travel to the other, that indureth but a
moment in comparison of the other, what do we now hereby good brethren, but
only make our selves inexcusable before the throne of God: Nay further, even
all the whole parts of us both of soul and body, which God has given us to
be most chiefly exercised about the heavenly life, we make them even so many
witnesses against us in the day of the Lord, because we have abused them to
serve our turn in this bodily life, far above the heavenly life. So that the
Lord need no other witnesses against us to condemn us in the day of
judgment. The wit that God gives us, which we have so carefully used to
devise for our bodies in this life, and never bent it carefully to seek for
the life to come, must needs bear record against us in the day of judgment:
the tongue that we have used so carefully to speak and crave for worldly
things, and has been so dumb in heavenly things: the feet that have so
speedily run about worldly gain, and have been lame in heavenly profit: the
ear that could so carefully listen after worldly gain, and was deaf at
heavenly matters: and to be short, all the whole parts both of our souls and
bodies, that we have so carefully and miserably used about these worldly
things, and so slackly used about heavenly things which should have been the
chiefest: all these, I say, shall be sufficient to condemn us before our God,
when he shall come in judgment. It stands us in hand then, good brethren, to
be more careful how we may be discharged before the judgment seat of God, and
so come to eternal life: more careful, I say, then we have been. The matter
must once come to handling, and it is a weighty matter, it touches the life
everlasting. There is none of us all, but if we had a matter to be ansvvered
before an earthly judge, if it were but touching a parcel of our lands and
goods, if it were but an hundredth pound matter or a thousand pound, there is
none of us all, I say, but in such a case we would be marveilous ^^refull for
the answering of it, and seek all the means possible to know the remedy in
law how to be discharged: but if it were a matter that touched the loss of
our life, oh then we would trudge post up and down for counsel this way
and that way, and seek all the means that could be: we could never sleep
quiet in our beds, till we knevv how the matter would fall out. But in the
case that must be answered before the heavenly judge, and touches the loss of
the lands of heaven, the loss of the goods of heaven, the loss of the life
everlasting, O Lord, how careless are we? we never care for it, we never ride
nor run for it, we never break our sleep for it: we shall see men in this
behalf as senseless as can be, utterly overwhelmed with a brutish security:
and yet we think our selves notable Christians, and to have wound up the matter
very cunningly, when we can have given some general answers, as to say, even
as it pleases God: but as he has revealed himself in his word, we never
seek that, but only keep our selves contented with such general speeches,
and never seek in his word the mean how. If there were any such one among us,
as having a weighty matter before a judge to be answered, cared not for it, and
would seek no counsel, nor use no ways nor means for to answer the matter,
would we not sharply rebuke the man, and bid him take heed to himself, to
seek for help in time, and cast not himself away, and his wife and children,
and so forth? and yet if the stubborn man would notwithstanding be careless
of the matter still, and wilfully cast himself away, will we not say
straightwaies, he was well served? he might have helped the matter if he
would have sought for it in time, but he would take no counsel, and therefore
he has cast himself away? we can have these speeches too common in our
mouths concerning these worldly matters, and yet in the mean time do ye not
see, how we give sentence against our selves? for, there is none of us all, but
we have a great weighty matter of life and death, of soul and body to answer
before the great judge Jesus Christ, and yet as though the matter were nothing
we will not now in this time of mercy be careful how we may answer it, but
only wipe it away with a word: even as it pleases God (say we) even as it
pleases God. True it is, that all must be as it pleases God, that is true,
and that God will deal with us in that last judgment even as it pleases him,
all that is true: but seeing God has set down in his word how and by what
means it pleases him to deliver us and discharge us in that judgment, if we
shall now not seek to know that same means of our deliverance, which he has
so plainly left unto us in his word, surely we can not but be guilty of our
own condemnation, and must needs confess, that we are but rightly served at
the hands of our Judge, when he gives sentence of condemnation upon us,
because we would not seek that counsel, that the Lord had left us, nor
seek to know the way and means of our deliverance, when we had time,
although we can cover it never so closely, with, as it pleases God, as it
pleases God. We shall find that it pleases God to punish with everlasting
destruction such horrible negligence and contempt of our salvation. Away then
with all such vain colors as Satan would cast before our eyes to make us
negligent still: and let us in the fear of God begin to seek carefully how
we may be discharged in the day of judgment, and so come to everlasting life.
It is a weighty matter, it is a great matter, it must be looked unto, it
passes a Westminster matter, this touches lands, goods, and life
everlasting. The reason that makes men so retchlesse and negligent in caring
for the heavenly life, is because we dream it to be but an easy matter to
come to everlasting life, we think it but a small matter and soon gotten, and
therefore we busy our selves the less about it. True it is we will not say so
with our tongue and lips, that it is but a small matter, but it is evident,
that we accept it so in our hearts, seeing we take so little pain about it.
For that we might obtain the things that we judge hard to come by, we do not
use small pains, but great care and labor, for otherwise we think that can
not be had: that is it that makes us so careful for the bodily life, because
we see it so hard a thing, that do we what we can, all is little enough to get
us our living. So that if we were persuaded, that if it were as hard a matter
to get everlasting life, as we see it is to get a temporal thing, we would
bestow as much pains in the one, as in the other: and therefore say what we
will, our own heart condemns us, that we count it but an easy matter, and
therefore are too negligent to provide for it. And again, the griefs and
miseries of our souls we do not feel half so much, as the pains and griefs
of our bodies, and therefore that makes us to be so careful to provide
remedies for the one, and utterly to neglect the other: if our bodies be but a
little touched with sickness, we can feel it straightwaies, we can complain,
sigh, and groan, and because we feel the pain nip us, there is riding and
running for the physician, no cost, no labor spared, yea if our little finger
be but cut, we make a do in wrapping and saluing, and all because we feel the
grief of it: and yet for all that the silly poor soul, that same nice body
is pained with sickness even unto death, wounded unto eternal damnation with
the fiery darts of whordome, covetousness, usury, oppression, crafty
dealing, idolatry, superstition, vain glory, and such like others, and like
senseless blocks, we feel it never a whit, it is no grief unto us, no pain
unto us at all. These diseases of our souls do not grieve us a whit, and
therefore we are not careful to run to the physician Jesus Christ to be
cured: if the body be but a little pinched with cold, nakedness, hunger, or
any other calamity, we cannot abide it, it grieveth us, we are marveilously
troubled with it, and therefore are we so careful to provide meat for the
body, and clothes for our back, we have never done with that, all is too
little, that we can cramme into this our filthy paunch, and to hang upon our
lasie backs, all is too little, we have never done purchasing, and preparing
for it. What shall I say? whole towneships and lordships will not serve to fill
this our greedy maw, and cloth our fine and delicate back. And yet in the
mean time alas, our poor soul within, starued with hunger, pined even to
death with cold and nakedness, and we not a whit careful to provide for it
the bread of life, the food of life to relieve his hunger, nor the
righteousness of Christ to cloth the nakedness of it, least it die eternally:
we are not a whit careful for that, because we feel nothing at all the misery
and danger that our souls be in. The whole world is asleep in sin, wallowing
and tumbling themselves therein, in peril and danger of eternal destruction,
and hell fire everlasting, and yet do not see it: they think themselves in
no danger, and that makes men so careless, that they never seek for any
remedy. Oh a hard world, a hard world. God help, never so hard a world,
we have much a do to live, it is so hard a world: (thus can we say touching
the body) never so much poverty, and such exclamations and outcries for the
pinching of the body as is marveilous, and I partly believe them to be true.
But in the mean time in this great misery and peril of our souls, in the
great hunger of our souls, who does exclaim upon that? skantly the hundredth
person: and although it be exclaimed upon, yet it is but coldly looked unto for
the remedy of it: other things yet touching the hunger and harm of the body
they are looked unto to be remedied, and this hunger of our souls which
brings to eternal death is smoothly passed over. I can not see but it is the
Lords just scourge to punish us with our rods in sending such scarsenesse in
so great plenty, because we will needs contrary to his commandment be more
careful for our bodily life then for our heavenly life. For if we did
chiefly and above all seek for the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 6. 33.
God gives his promise that all other things needful should be ministered
unto us: but because we will needs be wiser then God, like a young scholar to
set him to school, and whether he will or not, needs before the kingdom of
heaven seek the kingdom of this world, he lays our own devises upon our
own necks, and gives us neither the one nor the other. Therefore let us
repent in time, for a judgment will come, there is no remedy, we must all
appear, there is no remedy. Let us now be careful to be saved in that day
both in soul and body; let us be careful for it, it is a weighty matter, it
is not so easy a matter as men think. The Lord Jesus tells us so, the way
to the devil and eternal destruction is easy, Math. 7. 13.
broad, and wide, and many find it, they flock thither even by heaps; but
the way to life, he tells us, is very painful and rough, many pricks in our
way, and therefore few find it. It is not a tush with thy mouth, and a fillip
with the finger, and three words speaking, as they say, at a man's death, that
will bring a man to heaven; nay the Lord Jesus says, that in that day there
shall be many that can say gloriously, Lord, Lord, yea and with great knowledge
have taught other the Lord, and yet for all that shall have their portion with
the devil in the burning lake. Men think it not so weighty a matter, because
they do not see in what peril and danger they stand in, they think themselves
in good case, because they see a great number worse then they: they think they
shall do as well as the rest, and they are content to take part with the rest,
and because Satan has blinded them, they think if they be void of great
notorious crimes, such as are punished with death by the magistrate, treason,
murder, theft, and such like, they think God can not justly condemn them;
what (say they) I labor truly for my living, and I thank God I am no thief
nor murderer, I trust I shall do well enough in the day of judgment: so he
thinks because he is not an outrageous sinner, his other sins be but small
petie sins, and that God must needs forgive, and so he flattereth himself:
and because he sees not the danger of his sins, he never cares to provide
the remedy. But alas, it is far otherwise, the punishment even of the least
sin, if it were but in thought is the eternal curse of God, and his
everlasting vengeance: the Lord God himself has appointed it, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
which can not go back. Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed, says he, be every one, which does not fulfill all things, that are
written in the book of the Law: Mat. 5. 22.
where be now your small sins, when God appoints his curse to all? And
our Savior Christ tells us, that he that speaks but a railing word, as
fool or such like, is guilty of hell fire: where be now our pety sins,
when a word speaking is hell fire? Let me see what man upon earth now is
not guilty of hell fire. Prove. 20. 9.
Who can say, My heart^ pure? 1. Kin. 8. 46.
there is none but he sins; and the revvard of sin is death: 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
who is there then not in danger of death? if our case stand thus, Eccl. 7. 22.
then good brethren, have we not need to look how this may be ansvvered
before the judgment seat of God? Romans 6, 23.
have we not need to be raised out of our security, seeing the great danger
we stand in? God is just and true that has spoken the word, Romans 3. 4.
and therefore must punish our sin with his curse: Ioh. 3. 33.
it stands us in hand then I trow (unless we will damme our own souls, to
look for the answer of this gear Well, the ways and means how to answer
it, is by Christ, and it is set down unto us in every point to the full in the
word of God, for the answer of the matter, which by Gods grace I shall declare
unto you hereafter more largely: but because it is weighty, and contains
much matter, I leave the full handling of it till the next day: I trust by Gods
grace, ye shall have the whole matter out of the word of God, as fully answered
before the judgment seat of God in his heavenly court, and as strongly as you
have your evidences to confirm your goods and lands before the judgment
seat of man, in their earthly courts: in the mean time, because I will not
pass mine hour, I do here end this matter, desiring you in the fear of
God, good brethren, to apply unto your selves all that have been here taught:
have always before your eyes the remembrance of this judgment seat, and
think with your selves it must once come, and therefore frame your doings so,
as they may be clear before God, not only have a fair show before men: and
away with this crafty dealing, which does so ouerflow in this our country:
begin to deal simply and plainly, knowing that Jesus Christ will once call
you to account, and because the time is uncertain, be always ready, defer
not one minute of an hour. And because our account must be taken by the Son
of God, whose eyes we can not desell with our iuggling shifts; let us be
careful to see how the case of our salvation will stand in that day: let us
as carefully look for that, as we do use daily for the safeguard of our body:
consider it, it is a weighty matter: if our case fail (...) in that day,
remember all the pleasures that we have had will stand us in no stead, when we
must be thrown into continual torment for ever without end: good brethren,
for the love of the Lord Jesus, for the love of our own souls, let us look
to this gear now whiles we have time, and then our God shall be merciful
unto us, he shall increase in us continually his heavenly graces daily more and
more, till it shall be his heavenly will and pleasure to take us to him self,
to reign with him in continual glory for ever and ever. The Lord in mercy
grant it. Amen.

John More.

THE SECOND Sermon.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, etc.
OVT of this portion of Scripture (good brethren) the other day we were taught
to examine all our thoughts, words, and deeds, how they should be allowed
before God, and not to content our selves either with the vain allowing or
applause of man, nor yet with the simple discharge of man, because our God,
when all men have done and can find nothing by us, has afterward his
judgment seat, whereunto we must be brought to answer the matter there where
no wrangling nor crafty iuggling must prevail, but things must be laid open
even as they are in deed, and not as they appear to be before men: and
moreover because the Scripture leaves this time uncertain, we were admonished
always to be in a readiness, and not to defer the time from day to day,
because we know not when it shall please God to call us, for that every moment
we are subject unto death, yea oftentimes when we think our selves most safe,
and furthest from death, it pleases God even then oftentimes to call us
suddenly, whereof we see daily examples before our eyes: And even since that
time that we were last here, it has pleased God to teach us by experience,
how true these things are by one of our neighbors in Yarmouth as ye know,
whom suddenly the Lord took away even in drinking of a cup of beer,
otherwise being in as good health as could be: thus the Lord lets us see in
what case we stand in the uncertainty of our departure hence, that we should
not give ear to the flattering allurements of Satan, to sleep in security,
but to be awaked out of our drowsines, and fall earnestly to repent, and make
ready for the Lord against he call. We are all in the same taking that he
was, he thought himself as sure of his life as any of us does now, and yet now
he is gone ye see; and after him must every one of us go, how soon we can not
tell, whose course among us is next we know not: but every man persuades
himself it is not he: so far off are we from that which god would teach us
herby, that is, that we should every one of us think that our own course is
next, so far are we from that, I say, that we think clean contrary, it shall
not be we: it is marvelous to see how little we profit by such examples for all
that, that every one almost thinks he has notwithstanding assurance of his
life for as many years, as he himself shall think good: it is wonderful, I
say, to see how such examples move almost no whit at all, but are
straightwaies buried in forgetfulness, as though there were no such thing: well,
for my part, I can not, nor dare not, let such examples slip, but put you in
mind of your duty by them, especially when I see God speaks, as it were
from heaven, by such examples, and as it were by his own finger to write out
our lesson, Luc. 13. 3, 5.
I dare not but with the Lord Jesus say, Unless ye repent, ye shall all in
like manner perish: gaze not so much upon the man, but look into your selves;
it is for us, for us (good brethren) and not for him alone, that we might be
taught hereby to think that all of us are in like case, if God should call us:
we be too carnal, we think our selves too sure of our life: the Lord would
open our eyes by such signs, if we were not to stubborn and willful to shut
our eyes against them.

It pleased God then at our last meeting, to use my tongue out of this portion
of Scripture, to admonish you to be alvvaies ready to this judgment of the
Lord, because our life was so uncertain, that we are often taken away when
we least thought, and it has pleased God to confirm the same hard by us, by
this example of this our neighbor, now suddenly gone from us: let us take it
as though God in heaven himself had spoken unto us, and said, Ye Norffolkeme^
beware, look that ye be ready when I call you at a minutes warning: then we
shall like the dear children of God, well profit by the Lords dealing, and not
like stocks and stones without sense never be moved, though the Lord should
knock us on the head with a beetle: you know how Christ Jesus teaches us to
apply such things to our profit, Luc. 13. 3. 5.
to stir us to repentance: Let us do it then in deed, God loves no delaying:
he would have us begin, and therefore uses all means to draw us thereunto.
And thus much for that point.

Now whereas the holy Ghost calls us to the judgment seat of God, we were
admonished the other day not only to view our doings before God to be sincere,
not double, nor dissembled, but also we were further taught to provide for a
remedy when as we see our selves in so much sin and wickedness, considering
that God, as he hates sin, so because he is just, must needs punish, and
because he is true must punish with the same punishment, which he him self
appoints: considering this, I say, we were taught to seek for remedy
against this evil, how we might be discharged from this punishment in that
day: for it is not sufficient, that moved with this fear, we endeavor our
selves to vprightnes of life only, unless our consciences also be persuaded of
our full discharge in the same judgment day from the great debt that we owe
unto God for out daily sins: this, I say, is the chiefest thing to be
carefully considered upon, while God gives us now time: and hereunto we were
exhorted the other day, and our negligence herein condemned, I trust we have
amended it: and now if the Lord has given you ears willing to hear, and
hearts ready to embrace, I purpose to lay out the matter more at large, and
fully to set before your eyes, as plainly as God will give me grace, the ways
and means how we are discharged before this judge from whatsoever can be laid
against us: and because the matter is touching our care before a judge, I
purpose to handle it even after the same manner, that ye use to handle your law
matters before judges, saving that I mean not to bring such slender stuff for
the proof of the matter, as you use in your brablings. I dare not so deal
with so weighty a cause, especially before so wise and sincere a judge, that
can not be deceived, and will not be corrupted: I mind to bring into this
heavenly court no other evidences, but of such strength and soundnes, as shall be
able to abide the pearcing eyes of this severe judge without blemish, and that
is even out of Gods blessed word: I purpose to bring no other evidence,
witness, nor writing, then is there found, and that only will stand for good
stuff in this high court, Ioh. 12. 48.
and no other thing, for so says the same God, that by his word he will judge
in that day: he will not go by hearsay, nor by had I wist, nor by
conjectures, nor receive one man for favor, an other for fear, but look how
he answers the matter by proof out of Gods word, so does this judge
pronounce upon him sentence, either of salvation, or of damnation: all devises
of men's brains, what goodly shows so ever they have made here in this world
must needs vanish away as smoke, before the heavenly judge. I purpose
therefore, as I say, to handle this matter of our salvation even after the same
manner, that ye use to handle your court matter, that it may more deeply sink
into our dull brains: for we can good skill of law matters, we be maruelously
practiced in them, every countri-clowne here amongst us in Norffolk is able to
set a good lawyer to school, in worldly brabbles, about worldly goods, lands,
and livings. Well, because ye have so good a fancy to law, I will teach you, if
ye will learn, to be as cunning in this great law matter touching the goods of
heaven, the land of heaven, the living in heaven. I would, if it pleased God,
that all Norffolk men were men of law to answer this weighty matter in the
high court: 1. Cor. 9. 10.
we must all to it: the simplest must answer it: we must needs appear to the
action, and that by no atturny, but in our own person: we must all be summoned
to appear there personally, the writ is already gone out, and served upon us:
The Apostle Paul here is our herald, shrieff, sergeant, or bailiff, that does
ascite us before this judge: we be arested already, and the mace upon our
shoulders, to be ready at a minutes warning (when we shall be called) to answer
to an action of high treason committed by us against the King of kings, for
that he taking us to be his subjects, we have traitorously forsaken him, and
joined our selves with a foreign prince enemy to this high king: and further
also to answer an other action of rebellion against his majesty, for that he
favorably receiving us to mercy, after our treason committed against him,
have never since ceased to rise up against him, but continually spurned against
his will, and never would suffer our selves to be ruled by him, but like proud
rebels have started up against him, seeking to thrust him out of his throne,
and to place our selves, and our own devises there, that we might rule and
reign after our lusts: and for these and many such like heinous crimes are we
to receive judgment, to loose the hold we have of Gods kingdom in heaven, and
to take possession of the eternal torments in hell. These great and weighty
matters are we summoned to answer unto, not in Westminster court before my L.
chief Justice, my L. Chauncelour, the Q. Majesty, or her counsel; those be
men flesh and blood, and not appointed judges of so weighty matters, they must
needs come to be judged them selves, and yield up their account then and there:
but we are summoned to answer these matters in the Court holden in heaven,
before the kings majesty of the whole earth, and his counsel and assembly of
glorious Angels, before my Lord chief justice of the whole earth, and
Chauncelour of the whole world, the dear Son of God, Jesus Christ the Lord
of all: before him we must appear personally then and there, to answer these
and such other weighty matters, as shall be laid to our charge. Thus we are all
summoned and ascited, and thither must we go whither we will or not, there will
no bail serve, we can not use any shift to wind us out of his presence, we
can not fee the officer with bribes, that the might friendly in our behalf
return, Non est innuentus, the Lord will find us, I warrant us: we are found
out already, and apparent before his eyes. Well, thus stands the case, what
shall we do then? flying will not serve, bribing will not serve, bolstring
will not serve, there is no remedy but appear we must to the action, and
stand to the answer, and submit our selves to the sentence: what shall we do
then? I told you before, because we might see the matter more plain before
us, I purposed to handle it after the common process in law, as we use to
deal with our common worldly matters: what then would we do any of us if we
had a matter to appear unto that we must answer, the writ and all served, what
would we do in this case? we would strait ways first learn out at whose suite
we are troubled, who it is that is our accuser, then we would learn out
diligently what matter he has to lay against us, what it is that he purposes
to charge us withal: and last of all we would be glad to know what evidence he
can show for the proof of his matter: all these things we would be glad to
know if we can by any means before we come in open court: and if so be that
we have once gotten out, who is our accuser, what matter he has against us,
and what sound proof he can bring in for to make his matter good: when we
know all this, we know in a manner before we come there how the matter will
go: for then we will seek out our evidence on our side, what sound geere
we have, and how we may make answer to his evidences on the contrary side:
thus we use to do in our worldly matters. It stands us in hand I trow to be
as careful in this our heavenly action. Now before we come to the judge,
unless we will loose the hold of everlasting life, and throvve our selves
headlong into everlasting death. It stands us upon loss of life and goods
everlasting to look to this geere, both to look out our accuser and pursuer
of this matter against us, and also what we are charged with: and finally
what proofs he has for it, that knovving the matter thoroughly, we may be
careful to see it ansvvered now before the great judgment day come suddenly
upon us. Who is then our accuser? can we know that? I told you the word of
God will lead us strait to all those things that must be handled in this
judgment, as strait and more straight then any counselor can infourme us of
our worldly matters out of his law book. Apoc. 12. 9.
The holy ghost tells us plainly, that the devil is our accuser, for so he
says, the great dragon, that old serpent, which is called the devil and
Satan, which deceives the whole world, and the accuser of our brethren,
which accuses them before God day and night, the same old subtle beast,
says he, is thrown down. Lo here the spirit of God gives us to understand,
that we have an old subtle serpent, the devil, that by his craft has
deceived the whole world, we have such a furious beast our accuser: yea, that
does not reserve his matter till then only, but even now is always accusing us
before our God, and never cease night nor day: it is high time for us then to
look about us, seeing we have so crafty an accuser that has by his subtlety
deceived so many, and by his long experience is an old worn soldier in such
dealing, yea, and our old sworn enemy, furiously set on rage against us to
destroy us in a moment if he could: be sure we shall have no favor at his
hand, but whatsoever he can lay against us, for he has been privy to most of
our naughty doings, yea the very author him self, and we his slaves in doing
them: well then ye see, seeing we have such an enemy for our accuser, we had
need to furnish our selves on all sides against him. But what can he lay to
our charge now? let us see that: has he any matter of weight to lay to our
charge? He lays to our charge matters of high treason against God the
supreme King, and rebellion against his majesty, and there withal puts in
his plea, to prove us guilty of the forfeiture of our heavenly inheritance,
and therefore to be thrown out into everlasting fire: these matters then
touches the quick, seeing they concern life everlasting, or else death
everlasting: if we be convicted, there is no way with us, but everlasting
torment. But let us see what proofs he has for his matter, what evidence he
can bring into this high court to prove this great action: for if he have
nothing to prove and make good that, which he lays against us, then,
although the action be never so great, it is to no purpose, it must fall and
come to naught: for it may be he plays with us, as a company of his members
uses to deal with poor men here about us, who put in their actions of
thousands and thousands, and make simple men believe that great matter is
against them, and when all comes to all that poor men have been tossed from
post to pillar up to London, and down again, and emptyed their poor purses
among the rich lawers, then the matter falls out neither so nor so, neither
thousands nor hundreths, no not of a farthing weight, not the very turning of a
straw: and yet great a do made about it till it come to the trial, as though
it concerned infinite worlds and mountains of gold, and at the length all
not worth a straw. It may be then their master Satan purposes so to deal
with us, as he has taught these idle fellows his servants to play with poor
folks. It may be, I say, he purposes to face out the matter with great
bragges in this high court, and make us believe we be in danger of hell, and
loss of life everlasting and such like, and when it comes to the trial,
nothing so: therefore let us see what strong evidence he can show for the
proof of it. He brings in for the proof hereof no smaller stuff then the
very word of God: he brings in the great charter made betwixt God and us,
wherein the Lord binds himself to be our God, and we to be his people, if
we perform the covenants therein contained: and we on our side do assent to
the performance of the same, if he will vouchsafe to be our good and gracious
god, and take us to be his servants and tenants: this great charter and
handwriting of God confirmed, sealed, and ratified unto us, first by the old
seal of the blood of calves and goats, secondly in the new seal of the blood
of the Son of God: this same great charter and hand writing of God does Satan
bring in against us, to prove us guilty of forfeiture of the kingdom of God,
and heirs of hell sire, because we have not performed the covenants of that
writing; for that is one clause of the charter: if we do not fulfill all the
covenants, that then we should be excluded from the joys of heaven, and have
Gods curse reigning over us, as it does appear Deuter. 27. ^^ut. 27. 26.
Cursed, says God, is every one, which does not fulfill all that is written in
the book of this law: Gal. 3. 10.
and the Apostle Paul brings the same sentence in, to prove that all of us
are guilty of curse and comdemnation, and says moreover, that the law does
condemn us, because we did not perform the covenants contained therein. Ye
see then what is brought against us to prove us to be cast off from God, and
guilty of the wrath and curse of God, here is the word of God brought against
us to prove the same, because we have broken and transgressed the covenants
which God gave us to walk in: and further to prove that we have broken them
(if we should be so impudent as to stand to the denial) there is avouched the
self same word of God, which flatly convinces us, and tells us that there
is no man but sins; all have sinned and stand in need of the glory of God:
1. Kin. 8. 46.
If we should say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, Romans 3. 23.
and there is no truth in us: these evidences and records out of the word of
God do beat us down to the hard ground before the judgment seat of God, 1.
Ioh. 1. 8.
besides the record and testimony of our own consciences, which stands in
greater force to condemn us, then a thousand witnesses, 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
especially before God, who is greater then our conscience, and knows all*
yea many things which our consciences be not touched withal. Thus you see here
is brought in, in this judgment, sufficient proof against us for our
condemnation, it is no slight nor slender stuff, but sound proof out of the
word of God: Mat. 5. 17.
here is no counterfeit deeds, no forged evidences, but such as are sealed and
ratified by the Son of God himself, Mat. 5. 18.
which testifies of himself, that his coming was not to disanull them, Luke
16. 17.
but to fulfill and accomplish them: we must not then think, Ioh. 12. 48.
but that this gear, that is here brought in against us, Matt. 24. 35.
will stand and be allowed even before the Lord in his tribunal seat, because
it is nothing but his own word, by the which he tells us he will judge us:
and though heaven and earth pass, yet that word never passes: wherefore it
stands us now in hand to see how this matter may be answered on our part: we
had need to look about us, and seek for as good stuff for the answering of
the matter to our discharge, as is brought in against us to our condemnation,
or else (the Lord knows) we be in miserable case: unless we have as sure
proof out of the self same word of God for our discharge, there is no remedy
but we perish every mothers child: for the Lord can not go against his word.
let us see then, good brethren, how we can answer the matter, and let us beware
that we bring not our own cauills against God, not the devices of our own
brain, nor that which we think good of our selves, unless it have his
ground on the word of God, which only must be the great court rolls that
this heavenly judge will use in this court. And this is one special cause
that mooveth me to handle the matter of our salvation before the throne of God,
and not as here upon earth, because every fond devise of our own foolish head
seems to us while we keep us here below to be most excellent and sound,
as nothing can be more: every toy and trifle that likes us, seems to be so
firm and strong, as God must needs yield unto our liking: but it shall be far
otherwise when is comes to be handled before God: all such imaginations
must needs vanish away as smoke before the judgment seat of God: nothing
can abide his presence there, but only his own blessed word, and that which
is grounded upon it. Let us therefore so examine the matter of our salvation,
as it may stand steady and strong before the eternal God against Satan, sin,
and all the powers of hell. Let us come now to the answering of the matter.
There has come proof against us as ye have heard out of the word of God,
that we are all of us accursed of Gods own mouth, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
because we have transgressed his law and holy commandments, Gal. 3. 10.
this is proved against us: what shall we say, can we deny it? not unless
we will deny God himself, 1. Reg. 8. 4^.
for it is proved unto us out of his word, that all of us have sinned, Romans
3. 23.
and none but sins, we can not then deny that; 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
and if that be granted, the other must needs follovv, that we are therefore
subject to the curse of God and eternal death, because it is written, Romans 6.
23.
that the reward of sin is death: and, Cursed is every one that does not
abide to fulfill all that is written in the book of the law: Gal. 3. 10.
it is then apparent, that the wrath of God is pronounced upon us for our
disobedience to God: that can not be denied, what shall we say then? we stand
before God to answer the matter, what shall we say to it? I am afraid a
great number of us are far to seek in these law points of our salvation,
although we be otherwise never so excellent, cunning and skillful in other
law matters to handle them marvelous subtly and vvisely, I am afraid for
all that we are far to learn in these most chief and weighty causes of
life and death eternal. And yet I know we be not altogether without our
answers, such as they be, very simple (God knows) and slender, far unmeet to
come before so glorious a judge in so weighty causes. We do not deny but we
have broken these blessed commandments of God, we confess that, but in the
mean time, we have our shifts and gloses to assuage the matter withal: we
can allege for our selves, that although we have broken Gods commandments
and offended God, yet they be not so great offenses as deserve any great
punishment: and herein we be marveilous eloquent to paint out the matter, to
make our selves believe that our sins be not so great, because we see other men
have done greater: or, because we see our selves void of notorious crimes, and
such as be punished by the magistrate: we can very readily allege for our
selves; what man? I trust I am not so great a sinner, I thank God I am no
thief, I labor truly for my living: nor, I am no murderer or common
whoremaster, and such like: and hereupon we set our selves in a good stay, and
never busy our selves to answer the matter any further before the throne of
God: but conclude with our selves that God must be good unto us, because we be
not so notorious sinners, as outrageous men be. Yea (good brethren) but will
God be so answered think you? will this stand for good evidence before the
throne of God? Does the word of God say, Cursed be every one that does not
abide in the greatest commandments, as in abstaining from murder, man
slaughter, whordom, these and such like? does it speak on this matter only? no
it goes further and says, Cursed be every one that does not abide, and
fulfill all that is written in the book of the law: it does not say, some
part, but all: and so forth in the rest. Although thou be no whoremaster nor
murderer, and yet be a swearer, thou have not fulfilled al. And therefore the
Apostle S. James reproves such kind of people as dare so boldly blanch with
Gods commandments, to think themselves in good case for doing one or two of
the commandments, James 2. 10.
and neglecting the rest. He tells us, Whosoever should filfill all the
commandments, and yet break but one of them, is guilty of the whole burden
of the law; which threatens curse to the transgressors and breakers of any
one, Mat. 5. 10.
yea even of the lest, as Christ Jesus also witnesses: yea further, Gods
commandments be so pure, dear, and precious, that they are to be fulfilled
and done not only with our outward body, but especially with our heart: for the
commandments of God are spiritual, (so says Paul) and pearce even to the
heart: Romans (...).
and God that gives them, is not God of our bodies only, but also of our
souls, and therefore gives us laws not only to tie our hands from doing
evil, but the heart also from thinking and devising evil, because he is a God
that loves pure truth and sincerity, not only in outward show, but especially
in the in ward heart, Psalm. 51. ^.
as testifies the Psalm. Therfork Jesus Christ does tell us, that they be
broken, not only when our body does commit the outward fact, but also eue^
when the heart does break it, although the body have not done it, that thou art
guilty before God, Mat. 5. 28.
when thy heart has broken it, even when thou have lusted after thy neighbors
wife, Mat. 5. 22.
thou have committed adultery in thine heart, says Christ: yea, and if thou
speak but a railing or reproachful sentence, thou art guilty of hell fire: and
although thou never neither kill thy brother nor smite him, 1. Ioh. 3. 15.
yet if thou hate him in thine heart, thou art a mankiller before God, who
condemns the thoughts of our hearts. Yea and further, it must be done not
only with thy heart after a cold fashion with some part of thy good will and
liking, Matt. 22. 37.
but cheerfully with all the heart, with all the mind, yea and with all the
soul. So that although we could fulfill all the commandments of God, and yet
break but one of them once in all our life, yea and although it were but in our
heart, yet that word conde^neth us as guilty of Gods curse, Gal. 3. 10.
which says, Cursed is every one, which does not fulfill all that is written
in the book of this law: if any one commandment be but once in all our life
broken, all is not fulfilled, and therefore is a curse pronounced against us.
This is brought in against us ye see, and alleged to prove us guilty of the
curse and vengeance of God, for breaking his commandments: the least of them,
although it were but in thought, yet sufficient to throw us down to hell: all
this is brought against us out of the word of God in this judgment, and
therefore cannot be answered with gloses: we may well enough surmise of our own
head what we think good here below, when we come before god nothing will serve
but his word. It will not avail thee a straw (when thou shall stand before
the judgment seat of God) it will not avail thee to say, O good Lord, I
grant indeed I have sinned, but yet they are but small sins, for strait thou
shall have answer, Cursed is every one that does not fulfill all, not only
the great, but also the small, these gloses will not serve at that day: and
yet see how many are carried away now a days by such imagination of Gods
commandments. For a great number think, that if they be not notorious sinners
before men, they shall be well enough: for they think that the rest of their
sins are not of so great weight because they be known only to God, and not
greatly hated of the world: and this the, fall into because they measure the
breach of Gods commandment by the rule of their own judgment, or by the
common opinion of men. But alas (good brethren) it will go far otherwise
with us before the judgment seat of God, Romans 6. 23.
who vvil measure the breach of his blessed will not by men's word, but by
his own word: and that word tells us, that the revvard of the lest sin
is death. We must seek then for more sound stuff then this to answer our
cause, or all will else go vvrong with us. We go on yet further with the
matter, and when we are convicted that our sins are great and grievous
before God, we acknovvledge it to be so, but we have remedy enough for it, as
we think: for we bring in to answer the matter, the punishments vvhervvith
we have punished our bodies, as pining our selves with fasting, whipping,
scourging, and such like: and these things we think be a sufficient
reco^pense to God for our sins, as so much as he must needs be satisfied with,
and therefore we call them Satisfactions. oh, (say we) we have sinned indeed,
and our sins be grievous, but yet for all that we have pinched our body for our
sins, we have scourged our selves every day, we have gone on pilgrimage in
frost and snow barefoot, and therefore although we have sinned, yet we have
satisfied God for our sins: we trust this will be a sufficient reco^pense to
God for our sins: yea but let us see, whether this will be a sufficient answer
before God, whether God will take this recompense for our sins or no. The
Lord our God has appointed in his word a far greater punishment and
recompense for our sins, then can be fall the body of man: when they have pined
it all that ever they can: the punishment and due debt of our sin by the word
of God, is not only a punishment of the body but also of the soul, not only
for a certain time of days and years which have an end, Matt. 25. 4^. and
10. 28.
but days and years which never end. It is the fire which never goes out,
Marc. 9. 44.
which can never be quenched: it is the worm which never dies: Apoc. 20. 6.
and 21. 8.
it is a second death, where men be always dying, and never can make an end,
because it is everlasting; this is the just recompense of our sins: we must
not then think we have trimly satisfied for our sins, when we have undergone
and taken upon us certain punishments in our bodies, which we think be very
grievous; for although we should our whole life long pine our selves with the
greatest and extremest torment that could be, it is nothing in comparison of
that full measure of punishment for our sins, which God sets down: for
that is not for a day or two, or as long as we live, no not for twenty
thousand years, but for ever, ever, ever, and has never end: and not only
in the torments of the body, but also in soul, the grief whereof can not be
expressed, a thousand times more intolerable then any grief that can come to
the body. Does the Lord God say, VVhipped be that body for certain years,
which does not fulfill all that is written, Gal. 3. 1^.
etc. no, he says not so; but he says, Accursed be he: I trow the curse of
God stretches further then the body of man: the curse of God contains in it
all the torments that can be devised both in soul and body, even as his
favor and goodness contains all happiness. This curse of God which is due for
our sins, as it contains all the torments which can be devised both of
soul and body, so is it set forth unto us in Scripture by such things as
seem terrible unto us, to express unto us more deeply the terror of it by
such things as seem terrible unto us in this earth: Matthew. 5. 41.
as fire that can not be quenched, burning lake, Apoc. 19. 20. and 20. 10.
second death, damnation, where is weeping and wayling and gnashing of teeth,
and such other like kind of speeches, Marc. 9. 44.
to express unto us the horror of the same: not that any terrible thing in
this life can sufficiently express the horror of these pains, as they are in
deed, for the tongue of man can not utter, nor heart think the torment
prepared for sin. The burden thereof caused the dear Son of God to sweat,
not usual sweat, but drops of blood, not one or two drops, but in such
abundance, Luc. 22. 44.
but in such abundance, that it came flowing down to the ground: the weight of
the punishment of our sins, is more grievous then men do think. Let us not
then flatter selves, good brethren, and dally in this matter with our God,
bringing in recompense and satisfaction for our sins, after our own
devising, it will not stand for good stuff before the judgment seat of God:
if we will take upon us to satisfy for our sins, then we must take upon us
hell fire, the curse of God, eternal death, for these punishments has the
Lord God appointed to be due for our sins. Gal. 3. 10.
Let us not then think that the torments of our body, Romans 6. 23.
although it be never so heinous as long as we live, although it be an hundredth
year can be any sufficient satisfaction unto GOD, no not for the least of our
sins, for we see flatly that the Lord himself has appointed far greater,
to be endless both in soul and body forever. Peradventure it may be, that we
shall think our selves well enough eased by these satisfactions, so long as we
are quiet here be low, and no torment comes to our consciences, but alas,
when we must answer it before our God, all these our dreams must needs vanish
away as smoke, from the presence of our God, because they have not their
ground upon the word of God, by which all things must be tried in that day.
It is alleged us before the great judge, that we have sinned: Ioh. 12. 48.
we confess it, but we say, we have satisfied for our sins, we have pined
our body with fasting all our life long, we have gone on pilgrimage barefoote
and bare legged, we have whipped our body till the blood every day, we have
worn hairecloath upon our body, and this we have done for a recompense for
our sins: God answers us by his word, I have appointed the due recompense
for sin, my everlasting curse, Marc. 9. 44.
the worm that never dies, the torments of hell, have ye suffered these,
Matt. 16. 28.
and overcome them? we must needs confess No: but we say, yet good Lord we
have suffered a little (in our body: but he says, the punishment which I
appoint is both of soul and body everlasting, and therefore that punishment
which ye bring in, is not able to answer the debt, it is but only a forged
recompense of our own brain. This gear then good brethren, can not fall out
iumpe in the judgment seat of God, the Lord our God will not be satisfied with
our answer to the debt, which we forge of our own head, but he will be answered
the true debt in deed: the true debt which we owe our God in deed for our
sins, is the everlasting curse of God, which never has end, it is not a
certain punishment of the body for a certain time, that is but false and
forged of our own head, that is not the right debt. Is it not an intolerable
thing, and not to be suffered before a mortal judge, when as the right debt is
a thousand pounds, to bring in stead thereof a false forged debt of half a
mite, and there face out the matter, as though all were discharged, because he
can bring proof enough, that that forged debt is discharged? can this be
suffered among earthly magistrates? and shall we think to gloss out the matter
with our forged debts before the heavenly judge? There is sound proof come in
against us, that we are indebted unto our God the penalty of his curse,
everlasting torments both of soul and body, this debt must be answered unto
our God, or else we shall never he discharged, this our right debt must be
paid, and sure proof brought in how it is paid, or else we shall never have
our general acquittance, but lie in the prison of hell for ever. The like is
to be said of all other the satisfactions, that have been forged by man, they
can nor stand in this judgment. That same great and horrible Mass, which has
bin thought to be a sufficient recompense for the sin both of the living and
the dead, it can not stand before the judgment seat of God, it is but a
counterfeit payment of our debt: the true payment is to pay the true debt of
our sins, and that is the curse of God, but the Mass is not the payment of
that debt, that is too weighty and heavy both for the masser and the mass it
self, to overcome the torments of everlasting death; that can not recompense
God there for our sins, seeing the true and only recompense is, to undergo
the torments of hell due for all our sins. Neither can their forged
purgatory pains be a recompense to God for our sins, because the true debt
which must be ansvvered, is infinite and without end: the full punishment
which we owe for our sins is incomprehensible and infinite, even as our God,
against whom the offense is committed. All these then, and whatsoever have bin
devised by man, will fall out in the day of judgment to be no payment, but
only forged payments, and so we found always guilty, and our debts
unanswerable: it stands us in hand (good brethren) to look to it, you see it
is a more weighty matter, then men do commonly judge it, it will not be so
soon discharged as men do dream: let us take pains in it for Gods sake,
now while we have time, and not flatter our selves with our own weenings, the
Lord will not so be answered at our hands: he gives us now time to look for
the answering of it, he gives us his blessed word, wherein we may learn how
to answer it, even to the full: if we carelessly pass over this time of mercy,
and seek not for this gear, we shall herafter taste of his judgments without
mercy. Well, thus ye see all this stuff that is yet brought in, will not
serve to answer the matter: we must try further what we can say for our
selves: we go on yet further, and will acknowledge that we have sinned
grievously, and that our sins are horrible, but we think although we have
done many ill deeds, yet because we have done many good deeds, we think God
must needs hold us excused: and therefore we think our alms deeds and many
prayers, and fastings, must needs bind God to give us heaven for them, we
think we may addle heaven (as they say) by our good deeds. But the answer is
given us herein, that was given us before, that the recompense to God for our
sins, is not two or three good deeds, no not twenty thousand thousand, but
the curse of God, death, and damnation: that must be sustained and overcome, or
other recompense to God is there none. True it is that the Lord promises unto
us everlasting life for doing his commandments: he that does them shall live
in them: God promises life to the doing of his commandment, yea even
everlasting life, but then he requires that they be done not in part (as has
been said before) but in whole, Matt. 22. 3^.
and that with all the heart, with all the mind, with all the soul: upon this
condition in deed, that we do all his commandments, and never break one of
them, he puts us in good assurance of everlasting life, and surely he will
not fail us, if we perform all those covenants: but if so be we break but
one of them, we then forfeit our hold, and incur the penalty of the breach of
the covenants, which is the everlasting wrath of God: Gal. 3. 10.
for so does God say, Cursed is every one which does, etc. The life everlasting
is, as ye would say, let to farm to us, to have and to hold to us and our
posterity for ever, upon this condition, that we perform all such and such
covenants as are contained in the book of God: Do these, says God, and thou
shall have life. But provided always, that if thou break any one of them once
in all thy life, then accursed be thou from my face: here is indeed heaven
promised to us, if we do Gods commandments, but then we must do all, and not
some one, or else we forfeit all. Now let all the men upon the earth come and
stand before the judgment seat of God, and let me see amongst them al, that
ever have been, or ever shall be to the end of the world, let me see if any one
can be found, that ever has done all these commandments of God, that he may
justly challenge his right and interest in heaven by it: let me see if such an
one can be found; only one excepted. Jesus Christ God and man. The Scripture
and word of God flatly condemns all of us of sin, Gal. 3. 22.
and therefore can we challenge no right nor interest in heaven by our deeds,
Romans 3. 23.
because we have not done all: 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
but rather our interest for our deeds is of right in hell, because we have
broken some one, 1. Reg. 8. 40.
yea all, Prove. 20. 9.
and all again even the best of us all. We must not then seek to claim
heaven by our deeds, but we must be careful how to be delivered from hell,
which we have deserved by our deeds. Thus you see then it will not avail to
allege one or two good deeds before God, no nor twenty thousand, unless
thou bring the full performance of the deeds of the whole law: for God
promises not life but to the performance of the whole: our good deeds will
not serve us then to set against our evil for payment before God, seeing one
of our evil deeds, even the least which we do or think, condemns us to
hell. We can not seek life then in our works, because we are not able to
perform all, Gal. 3. 20.
and never offend: and that is that the Apostle so often says, That by the
deeds of the Law, Romans 7. 4. and 3. 20. and 4. 15.
no man can be saved: that the law works death, brings the knowledge of
sin, works wrath, can not give life, etc. because we do not fulfill it.
This will then seem for no answer before God, Gal. 3. 20.
to say I have sinned, but I have done so many good deeds for the recompense
thereof: Romans 6. 23.
for he answers out of his own word, that the reward of sin, is death,
and he will take no other recompense, but that which he himself has set
down, and therefore we must look that that may be carefully sought. Thus
then, good brethren, in viewing the true and right debt which we owe to God for
our sin, it brings to naught all forged debts of man's brain: for seeing
the curse of God, everlasting death and damnation, is the just punishment which
God has set down for our sins, and all our fastings, masses, pilgrimages,
pardons, scourgings, mans-merits, wilful poverty, watchings, prayers, alms
deeds, purgatories, will not serve to recompense God, because the punishment
is far greater then all these, and a thousand such like: And yet herein, good
brethren, I would not have you take me, as though I did speak against fasting,
praying, and alms deeds doing, I do not mean so; the word of God straightly
charge us both to fast, pray, and exercise our selves not only in alms
deeds doing, but also in all other kind of well doing, and the Lord knows
we are too slack in such matters (but I shall have occasion to handle those
matters hereafter, God willing:) my meaning now, I say, is not to speak
against fasting, prayer, and other good deeds, for the word of God commands
them to be done: but here only I tell you out of the word of God, that these
and all the good deeds that ye do, can serve for no part of the least
recompense to God for one of your least sins: for the least deserves
everlasting death. You see then it is a greater matter to satisfy God, the^ to
bring in a company of good deeds, seeing our least evil deed has the threat
of Gods everlasting curse: that debt must be satisfied, or else the Lord our
God will never be satisfied. The Lord will not accept our own forged debts,
but he will have the true debt answered: this is a great matter, and deeply to
be wayed, good brethren, that we may understand the depth of our salvation to
be more weighty, then it is generally accounted. This makes men so careless of
their salvation, as common they are, because they dream the price of sin to
be so vile, that a certain pining of the body will satisfy God for it, or
that a little holy water will wash it away, or certain deeds doing, or
certain prayers said, will please God for it: they do not way that the debt
for sin is Gods curse and condemnation. And surely now in these our days in
the time of so great light of the gospel, the people are maruelously ignorant
of their salvation: generally they know no other way to be saved, but by their
good deeds, and yet they be void of them too (God knows) and hereof comes
that common saying, framed in the time of darkness, and continued still among
us, that we must carry nothing with us but our good deeds and our bad; and
where is Christ Jesus then? Ephesians. 3.
If he be not in our hearts, we shall never come to life eternal: if we have
Christ, we have life and all: if we have not Christ, all our good deeds and bad
deeds we carry with us, shall nothing avail us, but throw us down to hell.
This will not then serve before our God, to bring in our good deeds for
recompense of the debt we owe, which is the very wrath of God: we must then yet
look further, what we have to say for our selves, and lay in for answer of the
matter. We go on yet further, and will acknowledge our selves sinners, and
all that has been said before, that the punishment of sin is everlasting
death, and that nothing that we can do is able to recompense or satisfy God
for it; but yet we have our starting holes, and windings whereby we can wind
and wring our selves iollily out of the matter, that we may more safely lie and
continue still in our most senseles security and wilful wretchedness and
blockishnes. We flatter and soothe up your selves with the mercies of God, and
because we hear that the Lord God is merciful, we sleep in the matter, and
never go about to see his justice answered, but content our selves with these
vain gloses, that he is a merciful God, and therefore we will never trouble
our selves about the matter to see our sin answered: for why? God is
merciful, we shall do well enough with him. Yea, but is not God also a just God?
Romans 3. 4.
is he not also a true God? is he not an hater of sin? Ioh. 3. 33.
is he not a sincere and grievous punisher of sin? VVilt thou make the Lord
so merciful a God that he shall not be also just? will thou make him so
merciful, that he shall not be also true? shall God become so merciful to
forgive thy sins, that he shall not be also just to punnish thy sins? will thou have him so merciful, to pass over thy sins, that he shall not be also
true to execute to execute that, which he has appointed for the reward of thy
sins? The Lord has appointed for all sins, yea for the least breach of
his commandments, (as has been proved before) eternal death. ^al. 3. 10.
Is God false and untrue when he says, Cursed is every one, which does not
abide, and fulfill all that is written in the book of the Law: is not this
sentence true? will thou have God in forgiving thy sins go back with his
word here, and play as men play, say and unsay, one thing to day and an other
thing to morrow? and will thou have the Lord of truth in forgiving thy sins
to forget all truth, as he shall not look unto the execution of the curse upon
thy sins, appointed by the everlasting truth? It will not avail thee to
allege Gods mercy to forgive thy sins, unless thou seek also the
satisfying of Gods truth and justice which punishes thy sins. The Lord God
can not of his justice and truth, but he must needs punish all sins of all
men with his heavy curse, which he has appointed for all sin in all men, as
he is also a merciful God notwithstanding when he has appointed a mean to
save from this curse all those that be his, God cannot then go back with that
which he has spoken, because he is the truth that can not lie: he must
therefore needs unless he should deny him self, punish thy sin with
everlasting curse, because he has so spoken, that both meant it, and can not
go from it, but must needs execute it. If thou say; yea but he is merciful,
and therefore I trust he will not: it is answered, he is just and true, and
therefore he must and will. Let us see now what all the vvranglers upon the
earth can say to it, in bringing in all their brabbles against God to impeach
Gods clear justice and truth, to establish their fleshly mercy, such a mercy
in God as they dream, that does uphold their carnal security and beastly
pleasures. Nay, nay, they shall find him a God of justice, a severe revenger
of all such contempt, a sharp judge against all such worldly hearts, that
under pretense of Gods mercy set them down in all sin and filthiness,
never seeking for the remedy hereof in this time of mercy, they shall find
it I warrant you too true. The Lord God give us hearts and minds to think
upon it while we are here, for all such gloses can not prevail against God in
the day of the Lord. True it is, that the Lord is a merciful God, a God of all
mercies, 2. Cor. 1. 3.
yea so merciful that all his works are judged with his mercies, Psalm. 145.
^. and 86. ^5.
yea even unto those that he does of his justice condemn. They can not deny,
even the damned caytiffes can not deny, but that the mercies of God have been
powered upon them abundantly, yea a thousand thousand fold: it is Gods mercy
that makes the comfortable sun to shine upon them, that makes his sweet
showers to water their grounds, that makes their land fruitful, that gives
them eyes to look upon the light* ears to hear, feet to walk, to take the
profit and benefit of all Gods blessings: these singular mercies and a
thousand more, it can not be denied but God shows upon the wicked and
damned creatures, as well as upon his own children, but they like carnal
swine do abuse them every one of them: they will not give their ears to
hear the word of life, they will not give their hearts to take pleasure in
it, they will not use their feet to seek after life, they cast of all these
heavenly mercies of God, and abuse Gods benefits to deuilish uses, there ears
are open to hear wickedness, vanity, and filthiness, their tongue loose to
speak lies, abomination and naughtiness, their feet swift to shed
innocent blood, and all other the great mercies of God do they horribly abuse
to their utter condemnation, so that they can have no just cause to wrangle
against God, but must needs acknowledge their condemnation to be most just,
having tasted so many of Gods mercies, and utterly abused them. So then this
their wrangling shifte of Gods mercy will help them not a whit in that day
of judgment, but rather increase their damnation; and let us that be the
children of God here also be admonished that it will not avail us to allege
Gods mercy for us, unless we can also as well allege how his justice and
truth is satisfied. And this must now be looked for, while we are here, God
gives us our life to this end: we must seek for it more earnestly a
thousand fold, then for our bodily life, as ye often have heard. Let us not
flatter our selves with these speeches, God is merciful, God is merciful, and
therefore will forgive us our sins, but also let us acknowledge that God is
just and true, and therefore must punish our sin even with that same
punishment, that he himself has appointed: and let us be careful now to
seek out how and by what means this same justice and truth of God in
punishing our sin may be answered, that we may be saved. Well then, because
God is true, which has appointed every of our sins to be punished with
damnation, and therefore will have it so, we must therefore seek how this
same may be undergone and overcome. Are we able to take this heavy curse
upon us, and make an end of it? It is endless, the worm that never dies,
the fire that can not be quenched. Mark. 9. 44.
The most highest, that ever were, are, or ever shall be of the posterity of
old Adam must needs shrink under this burden, Matt. 25. 40.
no flesh is able to sustain and overcome it: the damned souls indeed do
feel the weight of it, and shall both in soul and body feel the full measure
of it after the last judgment, but they shall never be able to overcome it,
they shall always be dying and never die, they can not make an end of it,
they can not overcome it. Let all flesh stoop then under the heavy judgment
of God upon sin, let us pull down our lofty crestes, which we so proudly
set up, and let us learn at length to humble our selves under the hand of our
God, and seek otherwhere then in our selves the discharge of this heavy
burden of our sins, which so presses down all the posterity of Adam,
that the holiest quail under it. It is time for us to look to it, and high
time: ye see what is laid against us in this high court, whereunto we are
summoned, even matters of high treason against the king of glory, we can not
deny it, the matter is so evidently prooved against us by Gods own mouth in
his word, and therefore guilty of the forfeiture of our hold and interest of
everlasting life, and to be punished with everlasting death, as a just
recompense for our treason and rebellion against our God. No other forged
recompenses of our own fancy will be received, no presence of Gods mercy will
color the matter against Gods truth and justice. What shall we do now? we in
our selves cannot endure and overcome that same punishment of our rebellion*
shall we stand to it, and stick by it, to take the debt upon us? then we
utterly perish: and if we bring any other debt but that, it will not serve; so
that both that debt, and no other forged debt must be answered, and we also are
not able to pay it. What shall we do in this case? Justice must proceed, the
law must have his course: if it were a vvorldly matter we could devise shifts
for it, to save us from the Iayle: when the matter is fully concluded against
us, that the debt must needs be answered, and we not find our selves able to
discharge it, our last refuge is to try our friends, and try if we can
find any of ability, that can and will pay it for us, and if we have found
out such a one that will undertake the debt for us, we are discharged: We
shall see, good breethen, if we will be conversant in the word of God, that
the Lord God has been as careful for us in this point, as any of us could
be careful for our selves in our own vvorldly causes: he has provided for
us a good and trusty friend, that freely and frankely has discharged for us
the whole debt. We find in the word of God that same true and trusty friend,
that has paid the debt for us; that although the angels can not help here, 1.
Ioh. 2. 1.
nor the Saints, nor any other creature in heaven or earth, the Son of God
steppeth out, and takes to him that which pertained to us and was ours, and
whatsoever Gods justice and truth does require on us, he willingly has
performed it for us: whatsoever is due for our sins, he has willingly taken
it upon him, and discharged it: and because he could not taste of the punishment
of man's sin, unless he had been man, he took upon him true flesh of the
virgin, Gal 4. 4.
that he might become perfect man, Heb. 2. 9, 10. and 4. 15.
as we are subject to all infirmities, sin only excepted: 1. Tim. 2. 15.
and that he might not only as man sustain and abide the punishment due to our
sins, but also (which no man can do) overcome and make an end of it, he
joined his God head with his manhood, so being perfect God and perfect man,
has fully in our nature paid whatsoever the justice of God can lay against
us. What is due to our sins? death: he has sustained death. Romans 8. 3.
What is due to our sins? curse: he became accursed for us, sustaining and
abiding the fierce and terrible wrath of God for our sin: Gal. 3. 13.
as testifies the Apostle: that he delivered us from the curse of God in that
he became accursed for us: for it is written, Cursed is he that hangs upon
the tree. This was an apparent proof unto us that he has undergone the curse
for us: Matt. 27. 46.
and partly he gives us to understand the heaviness of it, when he mightily
cries unto his father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He felt the
taste of abiection to be cast off from God, Esa. 59. 2.
for that same is a part of the curse of God which is due to our sins,
according as the holy ghost says, that our sins do separate us from God:
we deserve then to be cast off from God, Luc. 23. 46.
and this same sharp abiection did Christ sustain and yet overcame it: for
although he cried never so lovvd as forsaken of God: 1. Cor. 4.
yet he willingly yields his soul into the hands of his Father: Ephesians. 1. 20.
Father, into thine hands I commit my spirit. And although he suffered death,
yet by suffering he overcame death, and rose up from death, and is ascended up
into heaven, above al power and principalities of things in heaven, in earth,
or in hell. Here then you see Jesus Christ the Son of God, taking upon him
our nature has borne and overcome for us whatsoever God of his justice and
truth can lay against us. And here behold the depth of the mystery of Gods
eternal wisdom, his mercy and his justice joined together: his mercy in
forgiving our sins, his justice in punishing our sins: his justice that
would not suffer one of our sins unpunished, but even with his heavy curse does
reward them: and yet his mercy toward his elect, that he does not punish their
sins in themselves, but lays them all upon the shoulders of his own dear
son for us. Here behold the wonderful wisdom of God, who in saving of his
children, yet omitteth no part of his justice, but punishes their sin even
to the full with that self same punishment which he himself has appointed: and
this which he has suffered is a full recompense for all our sins, according
as the holy ghost alleges, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, 1. Ioh. 2. 1, 2.
even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation or ransom for our
sins, so much as is sufficient, and well pleasing the Lord our God, it is a
sweet smelling sacrifice before our God. Ephesians. 5. 2.
This then is sufficient for the sins of the whole world. But here yet
arises a doubt, for seeing Jesus Christ has sustained and borne the
punishment of our sins, so much as the sins of the whole world deserves,
it should seem then that all the world should be saved: but we see the clean
contrary, Matthew. 7. 13.
even by the testimony of Jesus Christ himself, who says, that many run to
damnation, and few in comparison to salvation. How can this be then that
Christ has satisfied the punishment of all our sins? True it is that Jesus
Christ has borne whatsoever is due for all our sins, and that which he has
borne is also sufficient punishment for all the sins of the earth, and yet as
true it is also that a great number are damned notwithstanding, and that
because they have not the hand of faith to take some part of this recompense
for their sins. For the blessed word of God, which sets forth unto us
Jesus Christ a full ransom of our sins, does also give us to understand,
that none are benefited to salvation, saving only those, which do believe. So
God loved the world, Io^. 3. 16. 18.
that he gave his only begotten son, to the end that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life: he says not, all the world; but,
all that believe: he says on the contrariwise, whosoever does not believe is
damned: Verse. 18. 36.
look now, none are saved, save only those which do believe in Christ: if we
do not believe, the word of God says, we are condemned: ye see then although
Christ has suffered for sin, yet unless we believe, we can not be saved.
But yet here arises another doubt, which might seem to bring with it also a
liberty to sin, for it should seem, if all are saved that believe in Christ,
then all England, France, Ireland, Spain, Italy, and all Europe shall be saved;
and none should be damned, but the Turk, Jew, and such other as deny Christ:
for all Europe do believe in Christ, and acknowledge Christ, whether they be
papists or protestants, none does deny Christ: all believe that Christ is God,
the son of God, borne of the virgin and so forth, therefore it should seem
that none of those should be damned, for they all believe. True it is, I
grant, all these do believe, and so do the devils too and yet are damned. They
do believe and confess as fast as the best of them all, Mat. 8. 29.
that Christ is God, son of the living God, Mark 5. 7.
we know who^ thou art (say they) even Christ the son of the highest God: yea
they believe he shall come to judgment, Iam. 2. 19.
art thou come to torment us before the time? to be short, there is no article
of our faith but they know it as well as we, and believe it to be true, and yet
notwithstanding they do nothing but tremble, and shake, and must utterly be
damned. The whole company of them that bear the name of Christ, and are called
Christians do believe, that Christ is God* so do the devils. They believe that
Christ is the son of God, so do the devils: They believe that Christ was
borne of the virgin, suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crucified for man's sin,
rose again, ascended into heaven, and shall come again at the latter day, all
this do the devils believe, and yet are damned: seeing the^ the word of God
sets down unto us two kinds of faith or believing in Christ, the one, such
as the devils and wicked members of Satan have to damnation: the other, such as
the children of god have to salvation, we must therefore be very careful to
seek out that true and sound faith of Gods people, lest we flatter our selves,
and think we believe well enough, when we have no other belief, then the very
devils in hell have: we must be therefore very careful to know in what points
the devils faith does differ from the sound faith of Gods people. First of all
the devils although they believe that all that Jesus Christ did was truly
done, yet they do not believe that he did it for them: although they can
acknowledge and confess all the articles of our faith, yet they can not apply
them unto themselves: although they can believe that Jesus Christ is God, and
soon of God, and has paid the punishment of man's sin, yet they can not
believe that he has done this for them, they can not believe that he has paid
the punishment for their sins, they can not believe that, for they have not
assurance thereof out of the word of God: nay they know the clean contrary,
Hebr. 2. 16.
that Christ came not to save the^: for the Apostle to the Hebrews writes,
that Christ took not upon him the nature of spirits and angels to ransom
them, but the nature of man: therefore although the devils can say never so
fast, we believe that Christ has paid the punishment of ma^s sins, yet they
must needs withal say, acknowledge, and believe, he has paid the punishment
of man's sins, but not for ours, and therefore we look and believe to be
tormented. This is then the most chief and principal point in our belief,
that is, that we believe whatsoever Christ has done for the salvation of man,
pertains to us our selves as well as unto others: we must believe every one
of us that will be saved, that the ransom which Christ has performed is even
the ransom of our sins, yea every one of us particularly must apply it unto
himself, and say, I believe that Jesus Christ did suffer to pay the punishment
of these my sins, I believe that he has purchased everlasting life even for me
as well as for others. Otherwise if we believe never so much that Christ has
suffered for the ransom of others, and not for us our selves, it is no faith,
but a devils faith, such as makes us tremble before our God. For alas, what
would it avail me if I could never so much believe, that Christ had ransomed
other men's sins, and in the mean time could not believe that he had ransomed my
sins? I believe indeed, he has purchased life for others, his elect, but alas
not for me. I must look for nothing but hell, what, I say, could all this
belief help me? Alas nothing, but make me look for Gods dreadful vengeance,
and therefore every hour tremble and shake. So could that miserable poor
caytiffe Francis Speyra acknowledge and confess, when they brought out of the
word of God that Christ was the Savior of the world, the ransom of men's
sins, that by his death he had pacified Gods wrath, that he had purchased
everlasting life for us, and so forth: all this is true, says he, I believe it
as well as you, but all this pertains nothing to me, he has done this, says
he, for his people, not for me. I believe, says he, that he suffered the
punishment of the sins of his people, not for my sins, I look for nothing
but extreme horror, which I do already taste of. For this cause does the word
of God set forth unto us Jesus Christ to be ours, not only other men's, 1. Cor.
1. 30.
but our own. Christ is become our righteousness, our justification, our
sanctification, our redemption: Romans 8. 15.
and for this end is the holy spirit of God sent into our hearts, that we
might cheerfully believe God to be our Father: he bears record to our
spirits, that we are the children of God, not only others, but that we our
selves are the children of God. And this our true faith does not only let us
see Christ a far off to appertain unto others, Ephesians. 3. 17.
but brings him to us, and makes him ours, even to dwell in us, even in our
hearts, not only in others, but in us, yea in our hearts. The promises of God
which be in general to his people the particular faith of every one applies
them to himself, and makes him say, I am fully assured, that neither life nor
death, principalities nor powers, Romans 8. 38.
neither things present nor things to come, neither height nor depth, nor any
other creature can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. And for the confirmation of this in us, be the Sacraments ordained
to be applied to every one particularly, not only to be delivered to others,
but also to every one of us to be partakers of the^, that we might be more
certainly persuaded, that the benefits of Christ's passion wrought for the
salvation of his flock in common pertains even to every one of us
particularly, as certainly as we be partakers of the outward seals and pledges
of them. This is then the chiefest point in a sound belief, wherein it
differs from the devils belief, to apply whatsoever Christ has done to our
selves, not only to other men: this is a special point, and pertains to the
true faith of the children of God. The devils can not believe that Christ is
theirs: peradventure they may say Christ, Christ, and Lord, Lord, but they can
not believe in their heart that Jesus Christ is theirs with his death and
passion; and that is also another point in true and sound faith, that is, not
only to say with the tongue notably and finely, that I believe that Christ is
mine, and dyed for me, etc. (for so can the devils and damned creatures say,
and yet lie impudently) but it is to believe, and inwardly to be persuaded
thereof in the heart, which no devil nor damned creature can do, but rather
they feel the horror of Gods judgments in full measure in their hearts and
consciences. True and sound faith of Gods children is not then a whirling
knowledge and speculation of the brain, but it is an inward feeling of the
heart: for a great number have a knowledge what they should believe, and yet
not an heart to believe: yea further, not only a knowledge what they ought to
believe, but also be able notably to set out the matter, to teach others how
they should truly and rightly believe, and yet they themselves damned
creatures, members of Satan, and firebrands of hell, Mat 6. 10. 1.
as the miserable caytiffe Judas, who with the rest of the twelve went and
preached the Gospel of the kingdom, and sealed it with miracles in Christ
name, and as Christ Jesus testifies of many that not only know to say Lord,
Lord, but also had knowledge to teach others, and prophecy and preach in his
name, and yet Jesus Christ refuses them to be his. Let us then, good brethren,
look well to our selves, and content not our selves with a vain babbling
tongue-faith, that will not serve in the day of the Lord, it must be an
heart-faith: let us look whether we feel Jesus Christ there or not. Therefore
says the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 3. 17.
that this true faith makes Christ Jesus dwell not in worldly bravery in our
tongues, but in our hearts, in our hearts: in our hearts, good brethren, in our
hearts. It is too too lamentable to see how the world is bewitched with this
tongue faith, with this carnal gospelling-faith: it is an horrible abuse of
Jesus Christ's gospel, we shall dearly abide at his hands, unless we speedily
repent: it is evident enough that Jesus Christ dwells not in that inward
heart, where the devil apparently shows his horns (as they say) in the
outward deeds* there is not Jesus Christ in that heart, but the whole power of
Satan, and therefore no children of Gods faith in that heart, but a devils
faith. Let us not deceive our selves, good brethren, a true and a sound faith
admits Christ with further entrance into us, then our tongues, and lodges
him into our hearts: I can not enter into your consciences, but there is a Lord
Jesus that sees them: only I desire you in the name of God, to enter every
man into his own heart, and examine himself diligently whether he believes
that Christ has redeemed him and ransomed, or not, whether he believe that
Christ Jesus has purchased everlasting life for him, or not; Let him examine
him self thoroughly whether he believe it in his heart, now while it is the
time of mercy: for once we must come to judgment, and so let him rest
himself in the Lord Jesus with full assurance of everlasting life, not
mistrusting our good and gracious God, nor doubting of his good will toward
him: Iam. 1. 6.
for he that doubts is like the waves of the sea, that be tossed to and fro:
such wavering is far from the certentie that true faith brings unto our
consciences, Romans 5. 1.
whereby being justified by faith, we have peace with god. Ephesians. 3. 12.
For this true and sincere faith makes us to have entrance unto our God with
boldness, so that it is far from the wavering uncertainty of the wicked
unbelievers, and yet the dearest children of God, even the most faithful, have
often marvelous assaults to shake their faith, and oftentimes feel themselves
almost deadly wounded, as though they were almost past al hope, but yet their
faith gets the victory in the end. At that stay was the Prophet, Psalm. 77.
3.
when he said to himself, Has the Lord forgotten to be merciful? is his
mercy clean gone? but yet they use to strive and stir up themselves by
calling upon God and tarying Gods leisure: and 42.
Why art thou vexed, o my soul? (says David) why art thou so troubled within
me? etc. So that although the children of God be oftentimes maruelously
assaulted with distrust and doubtings of their salvation, yet they strive
against them, Phil 5. 6.
and at Gods appointed time and leisure, they feel the peace of God which
passes all understanding. Thus far ye see then the full answer of our cause
and matter of our salvation before the judgment seat of God, against Satan,
sin, devil, death, and hell, that we that be the people of God do fully
believe, not only say with our tongue, but believe assuredly in our heart,
that Jesus Christ has satisfied whatsoever Gods justice does require for our
sins not only for other men's sins, but even for our sins, whereby we
feel our selves at peace with God, reconciled by the death of his Son, and
brought into an assured hope of everlasting life: thus far have we heard
taught, and now yet further least any carnal wretch should thereby take
liberty to sin, saying within his heart, If there be nothing but this, that
whosoever believes shall be saved, then I care not what I do, I will continue in
my sin, and then I will believe to be saved, and I shall be saved, I can believe
when I list: the word of God to answer all such filthy sin, does testify
unto us, that this true and lively faith of Gods people to salvation, is not in
the power of man, to believe when he list, but it is only the work of God:
Matt. 16. 17.
Flesh and blood, says Jesus Christ, has not revealed this unto thee, but
even my heavenly father which is in heaven: it was the Lord which touched the
heart of Lydia to believe the doctrine of salvation preached by Paul: Act. 16.
14.
It is the Spirit of God that bears record to our spirits, Romans 8. 15.
that we are the children of God, and heirs of everlasting life: all the men
of the earth if they would come, and bear record with us in the day of
judgment, that we are saved, can not prevail, unless God be witness unto our
hearts and consciences: no if all the men of the earth should but speak to a
pore soul in this life, and say, I warrant thee man, my soul for thy soul,
thou shall be saved, unless God touch his heart and persuade it, their warrants
be nothing. Alas what can the witness of the whole world prevail, when the
Lord is witness in the heart of the poor man against himself. So could
Franciscus Speyra cry out to the^ that persuaded him to believe assuredly that
Jesus Christ has saved him, I would, said he, I would believe, but I cannot:
faith is Gods gift: all the world can not give it me: you fare with me, says
he, as if one were fast tied with chains, and the passers by bid him come out
and loose himself, but they can not help him, neither can he help himself,
although he would never so much: even so, says he, ye pity my case, and bid
me believe in Christ; I would do so, but I can not, for it is Gods gift, and I
have denied him before men, and therefore he has denied me, and will not give
me an heart to believe. Let all the skoffers upon the earth that think it so
small a matter to have a true faith in Christ, and therefore take liberty to
sin freely, let all the pack of thembe taught, if they will be taught, by
this horrible judgment of God, that they can not believe, unless it be a
special and mighty working of God: and let us (good brethren) let us hereby
be admonished and all the dear children of God with us, to seek the Lord now
while he may be found: and let us in this good time of mercy that he gives
us, enter deeply into our selves, and examine it to the full, whither we have
this faith or no, in this full assurance that we be saved: if we have it not,
let us never rest knocking, asking, and seeking at Gods hand till he give it
us: we shall surely have it, if we ask, for he promises that never deceives
any, Math. 7. 7, 8.
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. Can a father deny his child any good thing, if he have it? this is
a good thing, and our God has it in store, he will never then deny it us.
Thus then ye see it is a greater thing to have faith, then a great number of
men make account of, it is the only work of God, and a rare work of God
which he bestows upon his children only: men may have peradventure a
certain fleshly persuasion, and some carnal opinion of their salvation, which
peradventure may seem unto them, while all things be quiet and no distress of
conscience, to be marvelous strong; but alas, because it is not from the
spirit of God, but only a fleshly bravery, as soon as God does but touch
them, it vanishes away as smoke: as that carnal brag of Peter, which was at
the very look of a little damsel clean daunted. So all the worldly
persuasions of men, which for a time keep them in very great security, must
needs fall before the judgment seat of God: there can nothing stand against
the devil, death, hell, sin, and Satan, but only that which proceeds from
him, who has overcome hell, death, sin, Satan. It may be that for a time it
may be covered as it were a sparkle of fire in ashes, but gathering strength by
gods promises, and depe^ding only upon him, it passes through al douts, til at
length it gets victory. Thus ye see the^ the true and lively faith of Gods
children, is not in the power of any to have it when he will, it is the
special gift of God, and peculiar only to his people, and therefore can give
no liberty to sin unto the carnal man, in hope that he can believe when he
will. And yet here on the other side we must beware of an other vice tending to
the same, and yet growing of a contrary cause. A great number of worldlings
and others, which care neither for God nor devil, hell nor heaven, so they may
live at ease in this world, those, I say, hearing that faith whereby we come to
salvation, is the only gift of God, and not in man's power, these jolly
fellows set cock on hoope (as they say) and utterly cast away all care of
their salvation. For say they, seeing faith is the gift of God, and not in our
own power, wherefore should we trouble our selves about it? we will never care
to seek for it, for if so be God will give it us, we shall have it, though we
never seek after it, but lie snorting in our beds: and if God will not give it
us, we can never have it, therefore we never purpose to care for the matter,
but even sit us down, and take our ease, and fill our paunch, and if God will
give it us, he will give it us even in our greatest security. But here I ask
these senseless caytiffs, of whom they have their life and being, and who
does feed their bodies, and preserve their life: they must needs confess it
to be God that gives food to all living creatures: I ask them whether they
will sit them down, and never neither eat nor drink, because it is God that
feeds us: they should within a little while taste of such horrible contempt,
and be guilty of their own death, at the hand of that God that gave them
both life, and the means to preserve their life. For although God does feed
us, yet he does it by the ordinary means of meats and drinks, which if they
be rejected, the life it self is rejected. Even so the Lord our God has
prepared a remedy against these wranglers against their own salvation: for
although he only do give faith, whereby we come by salvation, yet he plainly
in his word does show unto us a way whereby he gives it unto us, and that is
the preaching of the word, Romans 10. 17.
for so he says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: and
least we should think it were a sufficient means the hearing of the word read,
he adds and says, verse. 14.
Who ca^ believe without the hearing of the word preached? by this mean of
preaching the word has the Lord appointed to give faith ordinarily, and by no
other ordinary means; For who, says he, can believe without a preacher? and
unless we believe, there is no salvation, for whosoever believes not is damned:
if this the^ ordinary means of preaching the word be rejected, Ioh. 3. 18. 36.
we reject our salvation, and so are we willingly guilty of our own damnation:
So then the Lord only does give faith, yea but he gives it ordinarily by the
preaching of the word. It may please him, I grant, to give faith otherwise, if
he see it good, but we have no warrant out of his word to come by faith, but
only by the preaching of the word. So it may please him, if he see it good, to
feed us otherwise then by meat and drink, but if we refuse these ordinary
means of feeding, surely we shall die, and be guilty of our own death. 1. Cor.
1. 21.
The Lord has appointed to save his people by preaching* so says the Apostle:
he can save them otherwise if he will, but it pleases him by this means to
save them; if this be neglected, our salvation is neglected, and whereas this
fails, the people perish. Alas, what shall we say to the state of this people
here in this land? skarsly the twenty parish has a preacher, Ioh. 3. 36.
and can they be saved then? Shall we make God a liar? Romans 10. 14.
he says, whosoever does not believe, is damned: and none can believe without
a preacher; if then we will have the people of the Lord to be saved, let the^
have preachers: It is a great blessing of God, I grant, that we have it as we
have it, for the Lord knows a great number can not so have it: but alas,
seeing the Lord gives us this mercy and quietness, that we may have further
care of it, let us for Gods love be careful for the souls of our brethren,
poor souls that starve round about through the lack of the food of their
souls: but alas, I ca^ not preach to the whole land, but for the discharge of
my conscience, I desire you, good brethren, so many of you as have any voices
in place and parliament where these things may be reformed, consecrate your
tongues to the Lord in the behalf of your poor brethren, that ignorant and
blind guides which have the conducting of Gods people to the great danger of
loss of the souls both of the leaders and the people, that these blind
guides, I say, be removed, and true preachers placed in their rooms, that
they may labor cherefully to get the Lords harvest into his barn, to enlarge
Gods kingdom: the Lord shall then bless this land and kingdom, wherein his
kingdom is first sought for: Matthew. 6.
for so he says, First of all seek the kingdom of God, and then all other
things of this earthly life shall be given you: be careful for this, good
brethren, when ye come in parliament where these things may be provided for
through the whole land, that Gods people may be taught: In the mean time let
every one of us do what we can by prayer to God, to thrust forth laborers
into his harvest let us bestow our labors carefully to seek for them: let us
stretch our purses to relieve them, then the Lord our God shall bless us with
all spiritual graces daily more and more. Alas, let us remember, good
brethren, that they are in danger of damnation, unless they have the word
preached; the Lord says so, let us not be wiser then God. Let those especially
that by the government of this Church have the providing and placing of guides
over the Lords flock, let them be careful that they seek out those only
which be preachers, otherwise, good brethren, the people do perish, but they
shall not escape skot-free that were the causes: whether it were the covetous
patron in presenting, or the negligent Bishop in admitting, or the blind
guide in taking upon him that weighty charge of leading Gods people. The Lord
will have the blood of his people answered: he will call to an account both
Bishop, patron, and blind guide for the loss of the souls of his people.
The same price of blood which is taken by the covetous patron, whereby the
souls of Gods people are bought and sold, although he laugh in his sleeue and
think himself in good case when he has pursed his hundredth pounds for the
benefice, yet that same price of blood shall speak aloud in the ears of the
Lord to his utter condemnation in the day of the Lord. I am not ignorant how
the patron will shift it off to the Bishop, and say it is the Bishops charge
to look to its and that he as patron has no more to do but seek out his
clarke, the Bishop shall answer for it, if he admit him and be not able: and the
bishop on his behalf can as cunningly shift off the matter from him to the
patron, and say, he can not stay them, for the patron has presented them,
and if he should not allow of them, a Quare impedit would come upon him, which
he purposes not to bear for none of them al. And the ignorant blind guide, he
has his letters of orders, institution, and induction, and has filled the
purse of the patron, he thinks himself as well discharged as the best, no
law in England can put him out: and thus the pore sheep of Jesus Christ, which
Christ has bought with his precious blood, they perish for it, and are
devoured of Satan. But let the^ wash themselves as clean as they will, they
shall be found before the judgment seat of God no more innocent of the blood of
Christ's flock, then was Pilate of the blood of Christ himself: let them shift
off the matter as fast as they can, the people of God perish by them: I knit
them together all of them in one farthell, and throw them into the pit of hell
as guilty together of the death of the Lords flock, if they do not repent this
perishing of all the Lords people. For Jesus Christ that bought them with so
dear a price, will not have them perish of so vile a price as they are bought
and sold for. Seeing the^ the people perish without preaching, it stands the
patrons in hand, I trow, to present, and the Bishop to admit none but those
which be able to preach, unless they purpose to be guilty of the blood of the
people that perish for want of preaching. Neither shall the people that are led
by an ignorant guide, and so perish, be excused before God: for although they
can allege for themselves, we could not do withal, he is placed by law,
presented by the patron, admitted by the Bishop, all the laws in England can
not remove him, all this will not serve for excuse before God: for although
there be no law in England to displace him for his insufficie^cy, that by law
is placed; yet I answer there is no law in England that forbids thee to
place a preacher besides, if thou will stretch thy purse: I know no law that
forbids providing and seeking for preachers, unless it be the law of our
purse: and if thou say, I am but one, the rest will not, I can not maintain him
my self: then, I say, if thou can not get preaching to thee, there is no law
in England that forbids thee to go to it, to transport thy dwelling thither,
where thou may have it: there is no law, I trow, forbids this, unless, I
say, the law of the purse. And if thou say, I can not there be able to live: I
answer thee, first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
and all other things needful shall be given unto thee, as overplus. So we see,
there is nothing can excuse us before God, unless we get us preachers. I know
there be other kind of excuses, that we frame unto our selves as we think
sufficient to exempt us from the preaching of the word: but let us not deceive
our selves, unless there be preaching, the people perish: unless they have
believed, they are damned: and believe can they not without preaching. Away
therefore with all vain excuses, which might make us think our selves well
enough without preaching, these gloses will not serve before God; the Lord will
have his people taught, there is no shift, otherwise we shall all of us answer
for it, so many of us as have our hands stained with the blood of them that
perish. And let all of us in the fear of this our God fall seriously to
meditate of this gear, and now at the length begin to make more diligent and
careful preparation for the preaching of the word then hitherto we have done,
seeing it so stands us in hand under pain of damnation. God may otherwise
save us as I have told you, 1. Cor. 1. 21.
if he will, but it has pleased him to let us understand, that he will have us
saved by preaching: if we shall not be careful and careful again to prepare
for that means of our salvation, surely we shall declare our selves either to
be wiser then God, esteeming his heavenly wisdom but base and foolish, or else
plain contemners of God in despising so heavenly and wholesome ordinance.
Wherefore (good brethren) if ye will be saved, get you preachers into your
parishes, that may instruct you in the ways and means of your salvation
against that day that ye must appear before this judgment seat: bestow your
labor, cost, and travel to get them, ride for them, run for them, stretch
your purses to maintain them, we shall begin to be rich in the Lord Jesus, and
so much riches also of this world we shall have, as our God shall make us
contented withal: and then our joy shall be full in the last day, when we must
leave all these earthly things, and receive at the hands of the Lord Jesus an
heavenly and an everlasting crown. Thus far then, good brethren, how we are
discharged in this judgment seat from the everlasting curse and condemnation
which every one of us have fallen into by breaking Gods commandments: Gal. 3.
13.
ye have heard how we are discharged from this punishment by Jesus Christ who
has fully taken it upon him and overcome it, Ioh. 3. 16.
how it is made ours and applied unto us by faith: Romans 8. 15.
not such a faith as the devils have: Ephesians. 3. 17. 12.
but such as teaches unto us all that ever Christ did for us, Matt. 16. 17.
and makes Christ dwell with us, not in our tongues but in our hearts, Romans 8.
15.
not in a wavering manner, but in a true certenty, not by a vain persuasion of
the flesh, by the lively witness of Gods spirit: and all this to be delivered
unto us by no other ordinary means, but only by the preaching of the word.
Here is then the full ways and means of our salvation declared unto us to be
in Christ, and only in Christ, in no work, deed, or merit of ours, or any
saint or angel for us, but in Christ alone, and none other: and herein
remains our whole comfort and joy, which passes all the joys of the earth.
But I have yet one thing more to answer, which the devil might bring into the
head and heart of the carnal gospeller hereby. What? says that filthy
Epicure, this is sweet doctrine in deed, now I may take my pleasure at will,
and live at lust in my sin, for I believe in Christ, and therefore must needs
be saved: it makes no matter I will sin my belly full, for I believe that
Christ has borne the burden of my sin, and therefore what need I care. I
answer, these abuses of Gods mercy, that if there be any such that either has
such a blasphemous tongue to speak, or an heart to purpose to sin, or one
minute of an hour to continue in sin, because he believes that Christ has
paid the punishment of his sin, if there be any such that thus say or
purpose, I say with the word of God, that such have no sparkle of true faith:
for the word of God sets forth unto us this true faith, not such a faith as
fills the heart with sin and all uncleanness, as these carnal Epicures
speak of, Act. 15. 9.
but such a faith as makes the heart pure, such a faith as does not encourage
men to sin but such a faith as makes men to hate their sin, Roman. 8. 9.
loathe, and abhor it; Ephesians. 3. 17.
because this true faith of Gods people proceeds from the spirit of Christ,
Romans 8. 15.
and makes Christ dwell in us by his holy spirit, which spirit of Christ can
never dwell in one and the same heart with sin and wickedness in such manner,
as to be at agreement with it, to like well of it, and take pleasure in it, but
continually striveth and struggleth against it. And although sin do
continually hang on us, yet this spirit of Christ dwelling in us will not let
sin reign and rule in us: therefore such carnal wretches as shall love sin,
take pleasure in their sin, do sufficiently declare that they have no part
nor fellowship with Gods spirit and consequently no true and lively faith. They
have no part of the spirit of Christ that suffered death for sin, but the
spirit of Satan the author of sin, the spirit of the world, the imbracer of
sin, the spirit of the flesh, the nource of sin; for it fills the heart
with the fruits not of the spirit but of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19.
lust, whordom, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, vanity, filthiness,
covetousness, extortio^, usury, oppression, pride, contempt, disdain, flattery,
dissimulation, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, malice, division, drunkenness,
gluttony, etc. And I warrant them, let these carnal swine, that thus wallow in
their sin, taking their full joy and pleasure in it, and yet say stoutly,
that they have a belief that Jesus Christ has paid the punishment of their
sin, let them, I say, enter a little more deep into their own heart, and they
shall find a thing within them that shall speak the clean contrary; even their
own conscience does cry aloud within their breast, if they would let it speak,
that they believe no whit at all of the discharge of their sin by Christ: for
then they would not love and like well of their sin, which was the cause of the
death of Christ. Is it like they hold any thing of Christ, which join hands
with the wicked Jews to put Christ to death? They never therefore have any true
faith in Christ, unless they detest their own sin, which was the cause of the
death of Christ. Therefore this true and lively faith of Gods people is so far
from making men lie wallowing in their sin, that until such time as they have
it they never have a perfect hatred of their sin: then only when we have
faith, and never till then begin we to take pleasure in those things, Roman. 6.
4.
which are allowed and liked of God. For this true lively faith makes us new
creatures, Ephesians. 4. 25.
bears us a new, and makes us the children of God, Galat. 3. 20.
whereas by nature we are the children of Gods anger, Ioh. 1. 2.
that he can neither love us, nor any thing that we do. Ephesians. 2. 3.
Then begin our blind hearts to be lightened to perceive our sin, which before
we did not see, then begins our hard heart to be softened and effectually
touched with grief and horror of our sin, which before we did like well
of: whereas we had a delight in deceit and craft, flattery and briberie, now
we begin to abhor it, and to love plain and simple dealing, whereas before
we were covetous, hard hearted, unmerciful, usurers, oppresours, now we begin
to hate it, and to study after pity and compassion. The self same tongue that
had a pleasure to talk of filthiness, lying, and blasphemy, now is framed a
new to hate all cursed speaking, and has a delight to speak the truth, and
talk of godliness, and to reprove wickedness. To be short, when we have
this true and lively faith wrought in us by Gods spirit, we are then framed a
new by the same spirit into an inward lothing of our sin, and continually
pricked on forward to strive against our sin by true repentance, and not to
say, we purpose to continue in our sin, but to labor continually against our
sin. Let us therefore, good brethren, diligently enter into our selves, and
examine the thoughts of our hearts, whether we have our delights in our craft,
subtlety, whordome, fornieation, uncleanness, and such like: whether we set
down with our selves to abide in it yet a certain time: and if we find such
an unclean, filthy, and beastly heart in our selves, let us not flatter our
selves, good brethren, undoubtedly there is no true faith in such a heart, but
only a fleshly and carnal persuasion, there is not the spirit of Christ,
which ouercometh sin and death, and the devil in us, and continues firm,
steadfast, and strong even in the great and terrible day of the Lord, there is
not that spirit in us: but the spirit of the world, which perishes with the
world, the spirit of Satan which shall be confounded with Satan, and the Spirit
of the flesh, which brings forth in us the works of the flesh and
darkness, and therefore shall come to naught with the deeds of the flesh. Let
all those therefore that have shadowed them selves under the name of the
gospel, and say they do believe, and say they have faith, and yet when they
come home nearer to themselves into their own bosom, and find no love there
to the gospel, to Christ, to holiness and righteousness, but a lust, liking,
and pleasure in all their wonted sin, let them once for all be answered out
of Gods blessed word, that they have no portion with the gospel, that they
pertain not to Christ, not his sanctification and holiness: and let all such
as by these filthy beasts, which pretend the gospel and yet have such
abominable hearts and carnal lives, are carried away to mislike Christ's
glorious gospel, and to forsake the truth therein thorough these carnal
professors: let all such as have bin drawn away by them, I say, be answered,
that the Son of God never takes such carnal professors for his, that they
be no true gospellers, that they be none of his members, none of his faithful,
but mere members of Satan transformed into an angel of light: and therefore
that although they cloak them selves with the name of the gospel, and can
say, Lord, Lord, and Christ, Christ, that they may more safely work all sin
and wickedness to the shame of the gospel and Christ, yet in the great and
terrible day, when all must yield up their accounts, Matt. 28. 41.
he shall give sentence against them, Depart from me ye cursed caitiffes,
workers of iniquity, I never acknowledged you for mine, depart from me into
everlasting torments, to the devil and his angels, to whom always you
appertained, and whom in heart you served, there shall be weeping and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore let us all humble our selves under the hand of
God: abuse not his gospel, so many of us as the Lord has called to taste of
the sweet comfort in his gospel, let the fruit of it appear in our life and
conversation to the glory of Gods gospel. For the Lord is a severe revenger of
the blasphemy done to his heavenly gospel, if we shall seem to profess it,
and through our conversation cause it to be ill spoken of. Wherefore, good
brethren, let us remember our selves, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
that we are called to an holy calling, the Lord is holy and loves holiness
that has called us, we are called to holiness, and not to filthiness, let us
walk then in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Thus
then, good brethren, you have heard the ways and means of our salvation
handled before the judgment seat of God at large, how we are delivered from
sin, death, hell, and Satan by the means that Jesus Christ in our nature has
overcome them all for us, that so many as take hold of him by faith should be
delivered from eternal destruction, and have everlasting life: ye have heard
that this true faith is not to believe generally, but to reach all that Christ
has done unto our selves, not to say with the tongue we believe, but to feel
in the heart, not with a worldly persuasion of the flesh, but with an inward
persuasion of Gods spirit, that seals all these same in our hearts,
ordinarily by the preaching of the word, whereby we are transformed into the
image of Christ, and renewed in the inward heart to have our delight and
pleasure to walk in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life:
all this we have heard, as it has pleased God to give me wisdom and knowledge
out of his word to understand it, and utterance to deliver it. I have been
peradventure longer in handling the matter then some would have wished, to
whom these principal grounds of religion are known well enough, and
peradventure therewith all looked for more curious speeches in handling of the
matter: but such must understand, that my purpose is to instruct the ignorant
in the ways and means of their salvation: not to speak to the ears of men,
but to the hearts of men, if I can, that the devil may be pulled out from
thence, and Jesus Christ planted there. I will never so abuse Gods blessed
word to satisfy the vain humor of men, so long as I live by Gods grace, it
is sufficient for me that I know Jesus Christ and him crucified. The matter of
our salvation is weighty, and such deep matters can not be passed over in a
word or two: and the best of us all can never learn it too much, nor hear
it too often: it must be our comforts, and our only joy in death and after
death: it must be that which must stick by us when we must shake hands
with all the world, and say, farevvell father, farevvell mother, farewell my
dearest friends, farewell my riches, wealth, and vvorldly joys, it must then
be our only joy to say, vvelcome Christ, vvelcome heaven, welcome everlasting
joy. Happy shall be the day, and blessed shall be that hour, when we shall be
crowned with an everlasting crown of glory, Phil. 1. 23.
when all tears shall be washed from our eyes. The Lord God for his dear
sons sake grant us to have hearts and minds to long after it, and to say
with the holy Apostle, I desire to be dissolved and be with the Lord Christ:
and that we effectually think upon it, and take our profit of all this that
has been taught us, let us pray to the Lord our God, that he will give his
holy spirit to write it deep in our hearts, and seal it in our consciences,
that it may bring forth fruit in us to the comfort of our conscience and
glory of our God. O most merciful God and heavenly Father, etc.

John More.

THE THIRD SERMON.
Ioh. 13. 34, 35. I give you a new commandment, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you, that you even so love one another: by this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples if ye have love amongst your selves.
WE have heard, good brethren, heretofore sufficiently I trust out of the fifth
to the Corinthians declared unto us, how we are cleared and discharged before
the judgment seat of God, reconciled unto our good and gracious God, by the
means of his dear son our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, our only
reconciliation and atonement applied unto us by the holy spirit of god,
working in our hearts a true and a lively faith, which takes hold of all the
righteousness, ransom, and satisfaction of Christ, and makes it ours, whereby we
are justified and holden as righteous being clothed with the righteousness of
Christ, and so our conscience pacified before the throne of Gods glorious
majesty. All this, I say, we have sufficiently heard uttered unto us out of
the blessed word of God: and this is the chiefest and most principal thing
that we must labor for during the whole scope of our life, and our only
comfort in our death, and our only life after death, and therefore I trust it
has been well marked of us and considered, and in our hearts deeply
imprinted. Now it follows, that knowing how we be set at one with god, we do
also endeavor our selves to be at one with man: for which purpose I have chosen
out this piece of Scripture, which you heard now read unto you, which
contains a short exhortation to love: a short lesson, and soon learned, that
we love one another; in a word, it is no more, but that we have sincere love
one with an other: it is an easy lesson and soon borne away, the dullest
memory that is here present may easily bear it away, and the simplest wit
among us may without any great discoursing of the matter, straightwaies
understand it, that we need not pretend any excuse of simplicity and
dullness, whereas the playnnesse and shortness will straightwaies convince us.
It is then a lesson soon learned, which we have here taught unto us, to love
one an other: if nothing else were required, but as scholars in grammar school
to conne it by heart, and say by rote, we might dispatch it in a minute of an
hour: but alas, good brethren, because it is in Christ's school, we must not
only like grammar scholars have it by heart, but like Christ's scholars have
the feeling and love of it in our hearts; not only by rote like children say
it with our mouth, but like Gods children practice it in our deeds. And herein
(good Lord) how smally have we profited this xv. years, learning the practice
of this lesson in Christ's school? or if we have learned it, how soon have we
forgot it? or if we have both known it and thought upon it, in what case are we
that so generally have used continually against our own conscience and
knowledge to do contrary unto it? Well, for that which is past let us
repent, and now in the fear of God let us begin more deeply to consider the
thing, especially seeing the dear Son of God exhorts us thereunto, and
says, I give you a new commandment, that ye love one an other: if a prince or
any noble personage speak unto us, exhorting us to any good thing, we use to
give attentive care, and for the authority of the person the words have
credit with us, that we dare not do contrary thereunto for fear of loosing
their good will and favor: what shall we then say to our Savior Christ, the
king of kings, above all the nobles upon the earth, who does here exhort us to
love one an other shall we make none account of his words, but without regard
fling them at our heels, not caring for the loss of his heavenly favor, who
gave his own self to the death to purchase our life? Surely we should then
declare our selves to be worse then the bruit beasts, who yet use to have some
regard to their masters that feed them and show them favor. If we should not
then carefully take heed unto those things which are spoken unto us of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has so dearly loved us, even* the very bruit beasts
should be sufficient to condemn us. Let us therefore in the fear of God look
unto it, not slenderly and with dull ears, and hard hearts consider of it, for
it is the dear Son of God that speaks unto us, that requires of us, that
we love one an other. If he had but slenderly handled our matter concerning our
redemption, we had been but in slender case: if we shall now give but slender
ear unto that which he speaks unto us, and make it as a thing of course,
surely we provoke his judgment against us, whose majesty we dare so boldly
abuse: if it be high treason to cast off the words of a prince, and make no
account of them, what shall we say of the rejecting the words of this our
heavenly prince and Savior? Ye see then it stands us in hand diligently to
hear, prudently to mark, and deeply to weigh these words which here be
spoken, for they are the words of the Lord Jesus, who of his unspeakable
love, has given him self for us. And yet further then this, if we consider
the circumstances of the time when these words were spoken, it will make us yet
a little more careful to think upon them: It was at such time as he was now
near his death, for in the verse going before he told them, he was going from
them. These words were uttered then by our Savior Christ, when he was going to
his death, as a thing specially to be marked of us, and which he knew to be
most needful for us, and therefore of us more to be considered and marked,
yea and never to be forgotten, but always deeply imprinted in our mind. You
know those things that are spoken of men lying upon their death bed use to
pearse much, that commonly the words be never forgotten, but still almost as
fresh in memory as when they were new spoken: those words which be spoken by
a loving father upon his death bed unto his child, take great effect in a good
child: if a tender father at the point of death does call his son unto him,
and utters these or such like words; Oh son, thou seeest in what case I am,
I am even now ready to go from thee, these be the last words that I shall
speak unto thee, remember them well, thou shall never hear me more speak, I
must go from thee, yet for a remembrance, that thou may think upon me when
I am gone; I will give thee one lesson from my mouth while I live, that thou
may remember me when I am dead, as long as thou live; I charge thee
therefore, as thou love me, do this or that, etc. thou know I have had
many troublesome days for thee, much cost and pains I bestowed upon thee,
now I must go from thee, think upon this that I charge thee, even as thou
love me: if a tender hearted father give this or such charge unto his son
upon his death bed, will it not make the heart of any natural child to bleed
in his body to hear such tender words of his loving father: alas, those
loving words never be forgotten of any natural child and good son, unless
he be an unthrift and past all grace, which cares neither for father nor
friend, living nor dead. Even so in like manner will these words of our
Savior Christ, spoken at his death, pearce the hearts of any of the children
of God, unless they be bastards and no sons: we can not if we love the Lord
Jesus, but remember this his last lesson, which he gives us for his farewell.
And I am sure unto the children of God it pearceth a thousand times more their
tender hearts to hear them so lovingly taught of their loving Lord, then any
other rough manner of dealing, because they be children and not slaves, and
therefore serve of love and not of slavish fear; although it be sometime
needful for the best of them to feel of the loving correction of their
loving father for the taming of their wild flesh. But because in the house of
God all be not children which have the outward countenance of children, but
there be a great company of dissembling hypocrites, which take the liberty of
the Gospel to live after the flesh, and do nothing but only make a mock of
all loving kind of dealing and laugh in their sleeves when they hear any such
exhortations, because they will not be taught by fair means, and as ye would
say by manner of entreaty: therefore the Lord Jesus for their cause especially
deals after an other sort here in this sentence, and calls this same his
admonition to love not only a friendly exhortation as by way of request, but
also a commandment. Not only a matter of entreaty forsooth, to do or not to
do as best likes us, but a special commandment to be done whether we will
or no, whether we like it or not like it, unless we will abide the penalty of
disobedience. And herein then he deals with us, not only as a loving friend
to exhort, but also as a prince of authority to command, that if we should
violently cast off from us all kind of friendly admonitions here, and think
we have escaped well, because we have broken in sunder all the fast bonds of
loving exhortations; we should yet understand he is our Prince, that has his
judgment seat to arrayne us there to answer the breach of his blessed
commandment: and that we should not think or say, Oh I will indeed love my
brethren, but it shall be at leisure, when I see my time, and when I think best;
but rather think because it is commanded us, we must do it whether we will or
no, not at our pleasure, but at the pleasure of the commander, unless we will be
guilty of his curse in his judgment seat. So then ye see what we have to
mark in this, where the Lord Jesus does not only exhort, but command us to
love one an other, that is, that we not only have a cold affection thereunto,
but that we be lively touched with the authority of the commander, setting
before our eyes his princely judgment seat, where he will bring in trial all
stubborn breaches of his blessed commandments, although they be never so
smoothly passed over in this life. Ye see then this has, or at least wise
ought to have a vvonderfull weight force with it, where the Lord Jesus
falls a commanding, and therefore ought of us deeply to be considered, and
not coldly for fashion embraced, because it is the Lord Jesus, that not only
wills, but commands it. But alas, it is a vvonderfull thing, to see the
authority of the Lord Jesus so smally regarded among us: if once the will of
a prince be but known, it is a vvonder to see how ready we are to frame
our selves thereunto; but if he fall a commanding, who do not then tremble at
his displeasure? But the Lord Jesus may entreat, pray, and beseech, nay
straightly charge and command, and for all that not regarded of a straw. It
declares certainly, good brethren, that there is no fear of God among us, but
only a certain worldly fear of man, and yet the one kills the body alone,
Math. 10. 28.
the other throws both soul and body into hell fire eternal. Oh, good
brethren, let us not deceive our selves, it is the Lord Jesus that commands
us, let us obey: he charge us to love one an other, let it be done, not only
said, but done: done, done. Let us earnestly repent, that we have been so
slack in doing this commandment for our Savior hitherto, that we have done
nothing, but only make a mock of it: oh it is his mercy that has saved us
hitherto, and has not thrown us down to hell, as we have deserved, but in
mercy has kept us till this day: let us now from henceforth think earnestly
upon this commandment of our Lord Jesus Christ, and now begin to practice it,
that there may be love among us, and not such brabbling, brawling, and
contention, as we see daily, and is too lamentable, but like to good scholars
in the school of the Lord Jesus let us have love and peace among us; and
surely then he will dwell among us, and protect us for ever.

Now it is said in the text, that this commandment of loving one another, is
a new commandment: it may seem strange that he calls it new, and yet was
given so long ago by the Lord God himself in his commandments, Lev. 19. 18.
and is the very sum of the whole second table, as it does appear by the
Lord Jesus Christ his own interpretation, Matt. 11. 39.
that we love our neighbor as our self. This then seems not to be new,
which was delivered to Moses a thousand year before and more. True it is our
Savior Christ does not here call it new, as though it had never bin uttered
before, but because he would call a new to the mind that which they had heard
of old out of the law before: he calls it therefore new, which is newly
renewed again in memory: and moreover also now at his death, because he would
have it stick continually in their minds, as a thing new told fresh in our
minds: for we know things that be old done or spoken are not so ripe in our
heads, as that that is newly done or spoken: that it might be therefore unto
us continually new, and fresh in our mind, he calls it new, not old and
raw, but fresh and new. We have therefore well to consider of it, and every
one of us to enter deep into our selves, and try our hearts whether this
commandment be new, fresh, and green in our minds or no, or rather whether
it be so old unto us, that we have clean forgot it. I am afraid if we well
try and examine our selves, we shall find it fresh and new amongst a very
few or none of us, but so old that it is even at the last cast with a great
number of us, and a new commandment come in the room of it, not from Jesus
Christ, but Satan and the devil: a new commandment, that we love not one an
other, but every man him self. This same new commandment of Satan of loving
our selves, oh it is marvelous rife, fresh, and new amongst us: but the new
commandment of the Lord Jesus of loving one an other, it is so stale and worn
out of use amongst us newfangled englishmen, and especially amongst us
Norffolke men: if Jesus Christ had given us this commandment to love our
selves, how notably could we have practiced it? and what a number of followers
thereof should we have found amongst us at this day? all England, all Norffolke
should have been found very perfect in it: But alas, good brethren, it is
clean contrary, that commandment which he would have new amongst us, is
not to love our selves, but to love one an other: this is that which is very
rare in our days, and must be new, fresh, and rife amongst us, there is no
remedy, or surely the Lord will begin a new work amongst us: he cannot
abide to hear his commandment so contemptuously and despightfully trodden
under our feet: therefore let us be careful in the fear of God, to amend
that which is amiss in us, and now begin to embrace this new commandment
of the Lord Jesus of loving one an other, and utterly forsake and remove that
old Satan's commandment of loving of our selves, that we may be right
disciples and scholars of Jesus Christ, as we say we are Christians, and hold
of Christ. Well, thus you see what weighty charge is given of our Savior, to
love one an other: it is no small matter, and therefore not hastily to be put
up, because it is both a commandment, and proceeds also from him that has
authority over all things to command, which has his judgment for us in the
life to come, if we will not be taught by fair means here in this life.

Now it follows in the text, Even as I have loved you: This sentence serves
both for a reason more vehemently to persuade us to love one an other by his
own example, that so tenderly loved us, and also it serves for a pattern to
try our love by, whether it be sincere or fained. The reason whereby he
exhorts us to love one an other, stands thus: I so tenderly loved you, that
being from all eternity with my father in joy eternal, Phil. 2. 6.
humbled my self to become man in your nature, Hebr. 4. 15.
subject to all miseries and sorrows as you are, and for your love yielded my
self not only to all spite and villainy that wicked men could do unto me,
but even to the very death I submitted my self, and that to the most shameful
death for your death, to bring you to a glorious life: and this I did not only
when ye were no friends of mine, but also when ye were mine utter enemies: Romans
5. 8.
ought not you then in like manner much more love one an other, being thus
redeemed silly poor souls by my bitter death? Ioh. 15. 13.
you were all alike subject to eternal hell fire, and now I so loved you* 1.
Ioh. 3. 6.
that I gave my self a ransom for you, ought not ye then much more considering
my goodness, love one an other? If a king should of his great goodness give his
own life to ransom a company of beggars being in bondage, and besides not
only deliver them out of slavery of a foreign prince, but also exalt them to
the state of lords and nobles, by dividing his inheritance amongst them, were
it not, I say, an intolerable thing, if these exalted beggars, forgetting
their former estate, should now be so puffed up in pride, that one of them
would not vouchsafe to look upon an other, but contemn, hate, and disdain
one an other, were not this thing intolerable and not to be suffered amongst
men, so to requite the goodness of their king? nay would not we rather give
our verdict upon them, and think them well served to be set again all alike
in beggerie and slavery as they were before, and look if they could agree any
better among themselves there? yes surely would we, and think them well
served; even so, good brethren, if we will not love one an other since our Lord
Jesus Christ has so tenderly loved us, that he has given him self for us, to
redeem us from hell, surely it can not be otherwise thought but that we
deserve to be thrown down headlong to hell eternally, and look if we can
agree any better there. It pleased the Lord Jesus to redeem us from damnation,
that we might love one an other, as he loved us: if we will not then love one
an other, what is it else but even to provoke the Lord Jesus to leave us even
where he found us, that is, even firebrands of hell, and look how we can away
with that gear. Wherefore, good brethren, let us take this argument to our
selves, and although we would not love one an other for no other thing, yet at
the least let us love one an other for Jesus Christ's sake, who so tenderly and
dearly loved us, that he gave his own life for us: if not for his sake, yet
good brethren, for our own souls sake, which shall perish in hell
everlastingly: thus ye see what force this reason has, which the Lord Jesus
uses here charging us to love one an other, as he has loved us, that is, that
it makes us inexcusable before his judgment seat, if we can not find in our
heart to love one an other, seeing he so dearly and tenderly has loved us. It
carries with it also a further thing to be considered and thought of, and that
is this, that it serves for a notable and most excellent pattern for us to
try and examine our love by it, whether it be sincere and sound or no: for
when he says, Let your love among your selves be such a kind of love as mine
was toward you, he condemns all feigned and vain love, all corrupt love,
gainful love, tongue-loue, false love, and such like; and bids look as his
love was toward us, so let our love be one toward an other: his love was not
toward us, when we were his friends, but even then he loved us when we were
his enemies, and gave his life for us: this is a special point to be
considered of us, good brethren, and pithely to be waied; for it touches us
very near: we be so corrupt in judgment, and measure all things so by our
own ease, that we think it sufficient, if we have made some countenance of
love to them, that never did us harm, when as in the mean time we rage like
cruel beasts against those, which have but a little touched us with harm and
injury, and we think we may do it lawfully, it is so general a thing, and
touches the corruption of our nature so near, that if he do or speak but
any ill by us, we think we may very justly be incensed against him. Romans 5.
8.
Yea, but was the love of the Lord Jesus so in that manner, nay he loved us even
when we were his enemies, and tells us that our love must be in like manner
one toward another, not only to them that love us, but also to them that be
our enemies. Our Savior Christ tells us, Matthew. 6. 32.
that the very heathen will so love one another as long as they have no harm,
and we would be ashamed being Christians to be no better then they: we say we
are Christian men and not heathen, let us then I pray you proceed one step
further then the heathen, who will as fast as we for our lives love them that
do them good: let us, I say, go one step before them, and follow our Savior
Christ, who bids us love one another as he loved us, not as the heathen use
to love. Oh says one, I could be content to love him, if he had not so railed
upon me, and done me so much spite and villainy, I could have been content to
have borne it, but it is too too, no man can bear it: and I pray thee, has he
done thee more spite then thou have done to the Lord Jesus Christ? I trow not:
thy spite and villainy has put the Lord Jesus to death, and would thou
have him not hate thee for thy spite done to him, as thou do thy brother
for the harm he has done unto thee? thou should be in hell then
straightwaies. Look now then, I pray you, whether it stands us not in hand
to put well in practice this lesson that our Lord Jesus Christ here teaches
us, when he says, our love among our selves must not be to avenge our spite,
to wrecke our malice, but even as he loved us: to be content to forgive our
greatest enemies, and put our hatred and malice out of our hearts against them.
Matthew. 6. 12.
Jesus Christ teaches us to pray for forgiveness at Gods hand even as we do
forgive others: would we think it a good prayer to pray to God in this manner:
O Lord God if my sins toward thee had been but a few and small, I could
have been content, thou should have forgiven them unto me, but because they
be so many and so spiteful, now I would have thee even pour out all thy
displeasure upon me, for so do I use to do with them, that do offend against
me, therefore I pray thee, deal even so with me now, good Lord, for after
this manner I do use to forgive them that offend me: I use to do the worst I
can to them either by word or deed, therefore I pray thee, do the worst to
me thou can: were not this, I pray you, to pray for vengeance upon our own
head? yes surely: and certainly even so do we, as often as we dare pray the Lords
prayer, and yet can not find in our hearts to forgive offenses done against
us. Good brethren, let us not deceive our selves, Matthew. 6. 15.
the Lord Jesus flatly tells us, we shall never be forgiven, unless we can
be content to forgive others, let us say what we will, the Lord Jesus says so,
we shall never be forgiven, unless we can forgive others, there is no remedy,
the truth has spoken it: let us flatter our selves as long as we vvil, we
cannot be forgiven unless we forgive, therefore if ever we will be forgiven at
Gods hand, unless we will be thrown into the pit of hell, let us forgive:
and away with these fond and brabbling excuses, to say they be so many, and so
great, I can never forgive him. Would thou be contented that the Lord Jesus
should answer thee so, when thou come unto him for forgiveness? If he
should say unto thee, O silly poor soul, I could be content to forgive thee,
if thy sins had not been so many and so great, but because they are so huge
and so heinous, I can not forgive thee, go thy ways to hell, for I can not
find in mine heart to forgive thee; would thou be content with this answer
at the Lords hands for thy sins? I trow not: And yet cruel hearted tyrant
thou can be content to say so, and think so of them that have not offended
thee the thousand part so much, as thou have done the Lord thy God. Do
thou think then thou can so s^^ly escape the Lord thy God? thou can not,
thou can not: and therefore there is no remedy but either thou must forgive,
or surely thou shall never be forgiven: look now to it, as thou will, and
fling away from God as fast as thou will, they be words of the Lord Jesus
which can not lie. Let us for Gods love look unto them, it stands us in
hand: think we to be forgiven of God our great and intolerable sins, and
can not be content to forgive small sins in comparison? No surely, it can not
be. The Lord Jesus sets out this matter more largely in the 18. of Matthew,
Matt. 18. 23.
by the example of a king, which minded to take a reckening of his servants,
whereof one was brought unto him, which did owe him a thousand talents, and he
not being able to pay, commandment was given, that he, his wife and children,
should be sold and payment made: the man with pitiful tears fell down at
the feet of the king, desiring him only to bear with him for a time, and he
would pay him the whole: the king taking compassion upon the man forgave him
the whole debt: this man being so discharged went his way, and found one of
his fellows that ovved him a certain small trifling piece of money, and
ragingly caught him by the throat, commanding him to pay that he ovved; the
poor man amassed fell down at his feet with weeping tears, humbly besought
him to be good unto him, and he would pay him all. The other would not hear,
but cruelly commanded him to be cast in prison, and there the poor man lay.
The king hearing of this cruelty, called him and said, I forgave thee the
whole debt when thou besoughtest me, ought not thou to have had compassion
upon thy fellow also, as I had on thee? and the king in great displeasure
commanded him to be delivered to the tormentours. Verse. 35.
Even so, says our Savior Christ, will my heavenly Father do to you,
unless you forgive one another from the bottom of your hearts your sins
and offenses done one to another. This is the doctrine of the Lord Jesus, it is
not mine, they be his own words, and therefore they must be marked. It is a
vvoonder to see how much we can make of a small offense done unto us, and how
small account we make of our great offenses done to God: if one do but a little
contrary to our mind in any small matter, oh we make it so great a matter we
have never done with it, and hardly shall a man bring us to any good agreement:
we be so hard hearted, it will not out of our stomach, but we must be revenged
strait ways, we will wait him at the advantage once in our life time, to be
even with him if we can: What is this else but to provoke Gods fearce wrath and
indignation upon us, and to heap Gods judgment upon us? Jesus Christ tells
us, even so will our heavenly father deal with us. Does it not now then stand
us in hand to forgive one another, to put malice and hatred out of our hearts,
and now at the length to learn perfectly this lesson at our Savior his hand
to love one another as he loved us? not only them that do us good, but even
our enemies, and them that hate us. True it is, we must never love the sin
of our enemies, nor of none else, but always be in deadly hatred with that, but
yet we must love and pity the person of our enemies, that is in dangered
thereby. And if this were well waighed, you should see that we had more need to
pity, then to hate our enemies. If there be any injury or harm done unto us
either by word or deed, Matthew. 5. 22.
they that do it are guilty of hell fire, so says Jesus Christ: would it not
pity our hearts to see any in the torments of hell? alas yes, if we were not
worse then bruit beasts, we would take pity upon them: and surely in that case
are all those which do us harm, unless they repent: and therefore the Lord
Jesus pitied the case of them that put him to death, because he knew in what
dangerous estate their souls were, whereas they in spite and rage against him
were so blind, that they could not see it: but alas, he saw it, and pitied
their case, Luc. 23. 34.
and prayed, saying, O Father, forgive them. they can not tell what they do,
they are even almost in the gulf of hell, and yet see it not, they are so blind
in their rage, that they run headlong to hell, and never think upon it. The
same affection must be in us toward our enemies, if we be of the same spirit
of Christ: we must pity their case that have done any harm or injury against
us, and thus think, O Lord God, this their fact is damnable before thine eyes,
they have deserved hell fire, and yet, O Lord, they see it not, Good Lord give
them hearts and minds to see their sin, that they may see in what danger
they be in, and so turn unto thee and repent. Thus you see, how we must pity
our enemies, and pray for them, and do what we can to bring them out of the
danger: there is none without so much natural affection, but he will pity the
life of any thing being in danger, if it be but an ox or an ass to put it out
of the mire if he could, there is none so brutish that will suffer the life of
a beast to perish if he can help it, much more is the life of man to be pitied
being in danger, but much more is the everlasting life of the soul of man to
be tendered being in danger: while thine enemy rages against thee with all
despite and villainy, his poor soul is in peril to be drowned in the gulf
of hell, ought not thou to pity his estate, and reach out thine hand to
help him out, and not like an unmercifull man to plunge him down to be
drowned, that thou might revenge thy spite and malice for the injury and
harm he has done unto thee? There is none so cruel that would deal so with
a very beast. If we had received any harm at any beasts hands, either a
stroke with an horse his foot or such like, if we should happen to see the
poor beast after that, in peril of drowning, is there any so cruel that he
might be revenged of the harm done unto him, would let the poor beast starve,
or else violently push him headlong, and hold down his head to drown him?
Surely none would do it, unless he were worse a thousand fold then a beast.
What do we mean then, seeing the souls of our enemies in so great peril by
continuance in their sin, that we do not pity their case, to pray for them,
to help them out, but rather to revenge our malice, do sooner push them in
forwards headlong to destruction? Nay rather what do we mean in pushing
them forward to destruction to throw our selves down headlong with them to
the pit of hell? For what is it else when we bear hatred, spite, and malice
against them? It is murder before God, and therefore guilty of hell sire.
Have we not then notably prevailed against our enemies, Ioh. 3. 15.
when for pure spiteful love, and reuengefull good will toward them we will
even iumpe with them into the dungeon of hell? This is not to love one another,
as the Lord loved us: well then, good brethren, I pray you, let us look unto
it, we must love one another, yea, even our enemies, for so did Christ love
us his enemies: we must love their souls, and pity their souls, and help
them even as we can: we must not so much regard the spite they have done
unto us, as the danger their souls be in before God, and this may make us to
stay our rage and reuengement against our brethren, when they have offended
us: for what is the cause that we be so out of patience with them that have
done us injury, that we can not find in our hearts to forgive them? Surely
even this, because we do only look upon the hurt done unto us, we muse upon
that, we make much ado about that, and so marveilously weigh what loss we
have by it on every side but in the mean while, we do not consider the soul
of him that did us the injury, continuing in impenitencie: for then we should
be driven to pity him for the danger before God, and not hate him for our
loss before man. The want of this is the only cause then why we be so
hateful and malicious toward our enemies, which have iniuried us, because we
look upon our own harm, and not on the harm of the soul of man before God:
but we must do it, certainly the Lord Jesus commands us, Pray for your
enemies, do good to them that hate you: and here bids us, love, as he loved
us, even enemies to him. Well then, good brethren, thus ye have heard, how by
the love that Christ loved us, we be taught, to frame our love one toward
another, even toward our enemies, in pitying them, praying for them that they
may be brought to amendment, not for the hurt done unto us, but for the
avoiding of the hurt of their souls. I have been somewhat more long in this
matter of love toward our enemies because I know it is so hard a matter for
flesh and blood to be satisfied in this point to stay from revengement: it is
marveilous near grown into the corruption of our nature, and therefore it must
be more carefully taken heed of us, and we must bend our force more to resist
it, and so shall we not only be hearers of this lesson of our Lord Jesus, but
also followers of the same.

And yet further, when he says, that we must love one another as he loved us,
he gives us to understand, that our love must be sincere, without respect of
gain or advantage. Such love then as is commonly amongst us Norffolke men will
not serve, that is to love a man as long as we can get any profit by him, and
then farewell: no, our love must not be so, but it must be as Christ loved us,
which was not for any great gain I trow that he hoped to get at our hands,
and yet this is so common amongst us, as is marveilous: there is scarsely found
amongst us any other love, then that which is for gain: a lamentable thing: If
we have money enough, we make our account to get friends enough, and without
money or hope of gain we shall hardly find any great store of friends. Is this
the love, good breethren, which ought to be amongst us? Alas no: such love may
be found amongst the very devils in hell: and yet we will be Christians
forsooth, yea, and protestants to, but it is but only in name: for Christ
says, that among his true scholars, love must not be for advantage, but as he
loved us. Moreover, we are hereby taught also, that our love must not be
dissembled in fair countenance outward, and within nothing but rancour and
malice, it must not be in a fair flattering outward show, but it must be as
he loved us, even in very deed from the bottom of our heart: from our heart,
from our heart, from our heart: Oh this must be marked, good brethren. The
Lord Jesus seems to pluck us English men by the sleeue, and condemn our
fair flattering dissembled love, which reigns so commonly among us: Such
fair looks, sugared words, loving salutations, and courteous embracings as is
marveilous, as though there were such perfect love and friendship amongst us,
as could possibly be required, and yet such deep dissembled hatred and spite
in the bottom of our breasts, as we would (if we could) even pull their
hearts out of their bodies, and eat them with garlic, as they say. Alas,
good brethren, is this Christian like? is this as Christ loved us? No, no, it
is Iudas-like, fair kisses, and false dissembling hearts. Is there not a God in
heaven think you, to revenge it? yes, no doubt, and I warrant us, we shall
feel it, if we do not repent. We think we have done notable finely, when we
have made a man a fair countenance, and in the mean while practice his death
if we can: we go slily on with the matter, and laugh in our sleeue when we
have thus done, as though there were not a God in heaven that did see, view,
and try all the secret thoughts of our deep dissembling hearts, and spy out
all our crooked ways, and when we have made fair with all the earth, will
then call our crooked practices to account. Did that cruel wretch Cain any
thing prevail, when dissembling his cruel malice toward his brother, he
made fair words with him, till he gate him in the broad wild field alone, and
then fell upon him, and killed him: did it any thing prevail with God, I say,
that none was at the deed doing to accuse him? needed God any such thing,
which was privy to his wicked malicious thoughts? No, but he brings in the
very blood which he shed, and the earth which received the blood to bring
evidence against the man to condemnation: what shall we say then? will our
fair looks and sweet words one to another prevail before God, when there is
nothing so in our hearts but murder and malice? No I warrant you, he will
bring in account even the very secret wicked thoughts, that we conceive upon
our beds, he will bring in even our pillowes to bear evidence against us to
our condemnation, if this geere be not amended, look as smoothly on the matter
as we can: God will have an assaying with us, when we have made all whole with
man. Wherefore, good breethen, in the fear of God let us look to this geere,
let us give ear to Jesus Christ his teaching, that commands our love one
toward another to be as his was toward us, and away with this same
dissembled love, which reigns so amongst us, this Judas love, these love,
devils love, and let us like good Christians here in Norffolke once at the
length begin to embrace Christ's love, true love, unfeigned, from the bottom
of the heart, and sincere, to the glory of our God, and comfort of our souls:
And thus much for this part, where we are commanded that our love should be as
Christ's love toward us: now it follows. By this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, if ye love one an other. This is an other reason to persuade
to the obedience of that commandment, which he has given in the verse
before, that we love one an other as he has loved us, for that men shall
thereby take them to be his scholars, his disciples, Christian men: This is an
argument which carries with it great force to persuade amongs men, for there is
none but he will say he is a Christian, every man will say so, yea and every
man would gladly so be taken and esteemed of men, we would say so all of us,
and so would gladly be counted Christian men: well, then let us look if there
be love among us, for saying will not serve, he tells us men shall take us
for Christian men, not because we can boldly say so, but because they see
amongst us love; sincere love, pure love* no dissembling, coloring, nor
glosing, but simple tender love one toward another, even as he loved us: that
is the cognizance, whereby we be known amongs men to be the servants of
Christ; as the princes and noble men's servants are known by their cognizance
and badges to be the servants of their several masters, so is this the
cognizance and badge of true Christian men from a false dissembling Christian:
its intolerable to abuse any princes name without some warrant, and shall we
be so bold with the Lord Christ to abuse his name with the title of Christian
men, when we be nothing so? if any durst be so bold as to make a facing and
bracing unto the pore people, and say, I am the Queens servant, and under that
title exercise all the authority of the Queens majesty's service, and yet
never authorized into service, nor received her cognizance to be known by,
could such dealing be well passed over without punishment amongst men? No
surely, it could not be: such things would be or else should be severely
punished, and that justly, for else no man should live vnbeguiled by such
counterfeyts, and the authority of the prince abused, to the undoing of her
subjects. And shall we think then that the Lord Jesus shall so slightly
ouerpasse the abuse of his name, and authority of Christians, when we be
nothing but only counterfeits? for he tells us we can not be his disciples,
we cannot be true Christians unless we love one an other: Let us say and face,
and brace it out never so much, all will not serve: for he says, he that can
not lie, that by this we shall be known, whether we be in deed Christian men or
no, if we love one an other. What shall we say then, good brethren, to us
Norffolke men, amongst whom reigns too much strife and contention, hatred,
malice, brabbling, brawling, and wrangling? shall we say we be Christian men,
and so flatter our selves in our sin, and deceive our own souls? Jesus
Christ tells us the contrary, that we can not be justly accounted of men to
be true Christians, much more shall he the searcher of hearts condemn us. What
a lamentable thing is this amongst us in this little country of Norffolke,
that we should be so far from the badge of Christian men, that clean
contrary, such contention, strife, and brabbling, is amongst us, that we are
become infamous thereby to the whole world, when there is found more wrangling
in this same little part, then is in xx. parts of the land besides? What a
thing is this, good brethren, that the Judges in their assizes in other places
find in some place four, in some place three Nisi priuses, and here amongst
us x. score and more: comes this because there is so much love amongst us?
and yet we will be counted Christians; but Jesus Christ says, that then we must
love one an other, it can not otherwise be, he has spoken it that can not lie.
Therefore on Gods behalf, good brethren, let us look unto it, let us not
flatter our selves, and so die in our sins; we can not be Christians, Jesus
Christ tells us so, unless there be love amongst us: and I pray you, what
appearance of love is there amongst us, where there is such brabling and
brawling, that never the like was heard of in any place of the land? nay, I
think in Turkie-lande: and yet we will be Christians. But the Lord Jesus says
we be not, save only in name, and in what case are we then, I pray you? even
firebrands of hell, unless we do repent. Wherefore, good brethren, let us
look unto it, and look to it earnestly in deed, that at the length we
Norffolke men may become Christian men. I can not speak alas, to all
Norffolke, my voice will not reach so far, but I exhort you, good brethren,
for Gods cause every man put to his helping hand, that such strife and
contention as is amongst us my be suppressed, and the badge of Christians,
which is true love, may come in the room. Where ye hear of contention
between your neighbors, persuade with them as you can to take it up amongst
themselves charitably, and that they do not like bruit beasts one revenge all
their spite they can against an other: persuade with them and take pains with
them, and you shall see God will bless your labors. And you, good brethren,
which are here gathered together, whose hearts the Lord has touched to take
pains in such matters, I desire you in the fear of God to continue, be not
weary of well doing, the Lord is with you, God does bless you, and your
labors, ye serve God in it highly, the Lord Jesus Christ accounts you
happy, Blessed, blessed says he, be the peacemakers. Although it be some
pains unto you, and a little cost and charges, yet remember it is done to the
Lord, and the commonwealth, whose you are, and to whom you owe your service
and duty. Although you shall hear some that like not of it, and peradventure
of some countenance, yet good brethren, be not discouraged, the Lord likes
well of it, he which is of the greatest countenance of all, the Lord Jesus
himself he likes highly of it, and calls you happy and blessed, Blessed be
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Be not discouraged
then from doing good, because some do not like of it: Alas, they are deciued
with false and slanderous lies, that men blow abroad in corners, I warrant you
when they shall hear and know the truth, there is no good man but will well
like of it, and further the like to the uttermost. In the mean time go you on
forward, and content your self with this that ye see the Lord so greatly
bless your labors in so small time, that all your cuntrie is so clean swept
of rouges, whereas in other places they abound, and so few misdemeanors found,
scarce the tenth part that was before, and which is in other places and that
eue^ very nere you. You see this God has wrought by this means in so small a
time, besides that the whole limits is so quiet and void of all contentions and
brabbles, that now it is not one to an hundredth that was before, and in
comparison of other places round about you. This ye see God has brought to
pass in a short time, for this must you be thankful unto God, and give him
the honor and glory, and continue and go forward in your well doing* leaving
the success to his majesty, as he knows shall be most for his glory, your
discharge, and the benefit of his people.

Thus you have heard out of this text the earnest exhortation of our loving
Savior, joined with authority in commanding us to love one an other sincerely
without dissimulation, even as he loved us: a needful lesson, but very ill
practiced of a great number of us, who yet continually will needs be counted
Christians: well, let us think upon it more carefully then we have done, for
we cannot deceive him with titles. Let us look unto it, especially in this
country, that have been this long time so far from true Christianity a
great number of us, that we have not so much as the outward cognizance, whereby
men should know us from dissembling Christians: let us in the fear of God now
begin, good brethren, and let us not be ashamed now at length of the liuerie
of Christ, we bear his name, let us not refuse his liuerie: throw away the
devils liuerie, which we have worn a great long time, we abhor the name of
the devil, away then with his liuerie, and let us give a loving ear to Jesus
Christ thus friendly speaking unto us.

John More.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND TRVLY RELIGIOUS S. ROBERT Iermine Knight, and M.
Robert Ashfield Esquire, Justices of her Majesty's peace for the county of
Suffolk, the continuance and increase of all needful blessings spiritual
and temporal in this time, and everlasting life after death. *
MAy it please your Worships to understand, that I have many years since, by
the request of you both, committed these Sermons to writing; at which time I
thought nothing less then of the publishing of them, especially in these days
in which by the grace of God there is such variety and store of sermons, both
preached and printed, as it may seem nothing can be added unto the^: yet since
it has so fallen out, that these copies have been multiplied, and are
diversely dispersed in the hands of many, and are still desired of some:
whereupon I have thought it good by this one labor, both to ease my self of
this burden in time to come, and also to satisfy the earnest desire of those,
which have been lingering about it this long time. Not that I have any hope in
this argument to add any thing to the treatises before written, (for what can
be said in this great plenty and diversity of writing which we enjoy, that
has not been spoken before?) but that by saying the same thing again, yet
after an other manner, I might somewhat deceive, and so in part satisfy the
unquiet minds of some, who in their trouble can not long savor any old
comfort, be it never so good, but through a loathsomnes in themselves are still
inquiring after new. And if we in love thus stoop to the infirmity of the
sick patient, by preparing the same meat diverse ways to deceive his taste for
his good, when he abhors the daintiest meat: then seeing in the soul of
man there is much more loathsomnes, whereby they sometimes refuse all comfort,
(as the Psalmist complains in the person of the whole Church) if they may be
delighted with any thing here, as seeming new unto them, and so feed upon it
to their comfort: neither my labor herein shall seem superfluous in doing
that which seemed to be done before, nor they repent them for tasting of that
as it were in an other kind which they refused before, yea if through weakness
in long sickness, all places are so wearisome to them that it is an ease unto
them sometimes to be brought back again unto that place which they were
weary of before: why then may there not be hope also in the tired souls of
men, through the continuance of their trouble, that by bringing them back
again unto those places of holy Scripture (as it were of rest) which they had
left long before as finding no ease in the^, eue^ in the very same they should
find some comfort at the last, and lie down in peace in them, as it were in
their old lodgeings dressed and prepared for them: In which kind if I shall
attain unto any thing, its all that I desire, or hope to perform. The
argument of the latter Sermon agrees with the former, for commonly in trouble
we are discontented with our present estate, and that makes us impatie^t,
therefore it is necessary that such should be persuaded to think well of
their estate as that which the Lord knows to be best for them: and therefore
to determine to bear that, and to be quiet under it; which if they do not,
they shall find, that when they be out of it, some other thing will disquiet
them, and so they shall never be contented. In handling of which I have not so
much tied my self to that special text chosen for that purpose, as labored
out of that, and other parts of the word to conclude a general proposition of
a contented mind. Herein I crave pardon of your Worshippes, that for these
causes I have made that common to others, which was first proper to your
selves: which I hope so much the more easily to obtain of you, because hereby
(in imparting it unto others) I take nothing from you, when, as it were by
lighting others men's candles at yours, you have notwithstanding still the whole
light of your own, if it gave any light unto you before. Desiring also of your
Worshippes, that as at the first you did favorably accept it in writing, so
now it might not seem tedious unto you, to have it the second time after this
manner presented unto you. I acknowledge it is unworthy of either of your
Worshippes, much more of you both, who have deserved so well a long time of thr
commonwealth and Church in our country, especially my self in many respects
am much bound unto you both: but seeing God has so nearly joined you in
situation of the country, in office and calling, in friendship, in kindred,
and yet nearest in profession and religion; I hope you will be contented even
in this small treatise not to be sundred. And thus praying God to make you
still more and more one in Christ, and one another in him, and so long to
preserve you both for the further good of our country, I humbly take my leave
of your Worships.

Norton. 26. August. 1594. Your Worships at all times in the Lord, Nicholas
Bownde.

A EERMON CONtaining many comforts for the afflicted in their trouble upon Romans
8. verse. 26. unto 30.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us, etc.
YOu can not be ignorant of the general argument that the Apostle has in
hand, which is to entreat of the matter of afflictions, to this end that he
might show, that none of them shall be able to hinder us from our salvation, that
so we might be prepared for them, and comforted in them. For he speaks wisely
and to the purpose, and therefore having proved that we are saved only by
faith in Christ (which is the general argument of the Epistle) he remoueth
those things that might seem to make for the contrary. And namely first the
consideration of our natural corruption, cleaving fast unto us, hindering us
from that which is good, and drawing us to that which is evil, even after such
time as we do believe, of which he has spoken in the other chapter, and in
the former part of this, declaring that by the imputation of the perfect
holiness of Christ it is taken away: which we know both by the fruits of it,
which is, that we are sanctified in part, and by the spirit of adoption, which
teaches us to call God Abba father. Secondly the consideration of those
manifold and grievous afflictions which may and do befall us in this world,
whereby it may seem, that our ways are not so acceptable to the Lord, that we
might have comfort therein: in which he deals in the latter part of this
chapter from verse. 17. to the end of it, showing that they shall be so far
from keeping us from salvation, as that in them we have Christ Jesus that went
before in all afflictions further then we can, and yet at the last came unto
glory, and therefore if we patiently abide, as we have not only the Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs, but Christ himself to be our fellow in them, so we shall
be fellows with him and like unto him in glory. And least that it might seem
grievous unto us, to go to so happy an estate, through so grievous a way, and
so might think that the kingdom of heaven, though it be so precious, we
should bie it too dear: he tells us assuredly that by casting the account he
has found it to be most true, that all the afflictions in this miserable and
wretched world are not to be compared in greatness or continuance, unto the
glory that shall be revealed us, verse. 18. which as it is thus great, so it is
most sure and certain, and therefore we need not in no wise to doubt of it:
for the very creatures them selves have a certain sense and feeling of it,
which but for a time are subject to this vanity (that is, corruption and
abuse) which they are and by the instinct of nature do most earnestly, and as
it were, with their heads lifted up, look for the revealing of the sons of
God, that they might be redeemed from bondage, into their glorious liberty,
and shall not be disapointed of their hope: therefore much more we that have
received the first fruits of the spirit, should with greater patience in
trouble abide the will of God, and with more certentie and earnest desire*
look for an happy chance of all our afflictions in that most glorious day, v.
20, 21, 22, 23. The which condition, though grievous for a time, but happy in
the end, that we might not refuse to undergo with the rest of he creatures,
and our brethren, he wills us to consider the order which the Lord has
appointed in saving of us, which is by hope, and because hope is of things not
seen or inioyed, therefore we must not imagine so soon to enjoy all happiness
as we believe it, but be content to want all things for a time, that hoping for
them with patience and long suffering, we might come to them at the last,
unless we will go about to pervert this most excellent order, which the Lord
has determined and appointed to use in saving us, which is by training us up
in the hope and expectation of all things promised for a season, v. 24, 25. And
because the hope that is deferred is the fainting of the bones, and we might
fear in respect of our own weakness, and the greatness together with the
continuance of afflictions, that we should not with patience under the cross
continue to hold out happily unto the end, he further adds for our singular
comfort, that the spirit which we have received, shall help to bear the
burden with us, and so though we be never so weak, yet by the power of it we
shall be able to endure, verse. 26. So that it shall be all one with us, as with
the child upon whose shoulder the father laying an heavy burden, that were
able to press him down, does so put his hand under it, that he bears the
weight and burden of it him self: and if the father will not ouerlade the
child, we need not to fear but that the Lord will so increase our strength
according to the measure of our afflictions, that we shall find this promise
to be true, that his holy spirit shall help our infirmities. For as a father
has tender compassion of his children, so has the Lord tender compassion of
us, seeing he knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but
dust, and that we flourish but as a flower of the field: which thing as it is
most comfortable to consider, so we shall find it to be most true by
experience: because our Savior Jesus Christ has prayed unto his heavenly
Father for us, that he might give us a Comforter, that might abide with us for
ever, even the Spirit of truth, as the blessed Apostle confesses of himself,
1. Corinthians. chap. 4. verse. 9. saying, We are afflicted on every side, yet are
we not in distress: in poverty, but none overcome of poverty: we are
persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but we penish not: for (as it is in
another place) his grace shall be sufficient for us, for his power is made
perfect through our weakness, so that when we are weak, then are we strong
2. Cor. 12. 9, 10. and thus we shall always find it to be most true, that God
is faithful which will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, but
will even give the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it,
1. Corinthians. 10. 13. and if there were no Scripture to prove it, our own
experience might tell us the truth of it: for if we have observed any thing,
we may remember that many times we have been low brought, and have sustained
very heavy things, and thought we should never have been able to have borne
them, neither in deed should we, but that there was an other thing far above
our selves, which made us endure and overcome those things which we thought we
should have fainted in the midst of them, so that we may boldly say with the
holy Apostle, Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
father of mercies, and God of all comforts, which comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them that be in any affliction,
with the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds through Christ,
2. Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. And this is so much the more worthy to be considered of us,
because he says that the spirit shall help us, not in some few only, but
in all our infirmities whatsoever, and there can be no weakness in us so great,
or infirmities so many upon us, which the spirit shall not strengthen, even to
the bearing of the greatest cross that may be laid upon us, as we heard the
Apostle saying before, that God did comfort him in all his tribulations; and
that his consolations did abound, even as his sufferings did abound. In the
mean season he gives us to understand, that the afflictions of the godly are
so great, that they far pass any strength that is in us to bear them: yea
that we are very weak of our selves, and subject to many infirmities, though
we be partakers of the spirit of God; for it does not rid us of them. Nay
the very Apostles and Paul him self confesses that he was not able to have
undergone so many and great things as he did being a frail man like unto us,
but that he had the spirit helping him in his infirmities. The truth of which
may likewise appear in the great complaints of David, Job, and the rest, who
though they did patiently bear many great things, yet not without many
infirmities. For Job sometimes curses his day: and David says unto God in his
have. I am cast out of thy sight, Psalm. 31. 22. and therefore we are not to
imagine of such a portion of God, spirit, that might swallowe up all our
infirmities (for then we were no men) but it must be sufficient that we are
aided with the strength of it, so that we finally fall not down, and lie
still under the heavy burden of affliction, but that there is a mixed thing as
it were in us: namely, our own infirmities to humble us, and the strength of
Gods spirit to enable us to bear: so that having so able an helper to bear
with us, we may be comforted with hope of enduring the greatest thing that may
befall us in this world, though continuing upon us never so long. And that we
might do it the rather; the Apostle further adds, that the same spirit shall
likewise stir us up in all necessities of ours to pray unto God, and to make
our moan unto him, as to our Father and shall be heard of him. For though we
sometimes through the greatness of our misery know not what, or how to pray
as we ought, yet his spirit shall stir up even then though not many well
ordered speeches or words, yet those sighs and groans, which being
unspeakeable and only felt, are notwithstanding well understood and accepted
of God, because they proceed from his spirit, whose meaning he knows and
grants, because it makes request for the Saints according to the will of
God, as it is ver. 26. wherein we are notwithstanding to consider, that though
we have received the spirit of God, even the spirit that teaches us to pray,
so that we have many times called upon God with great assurance and comfort for
and with our selves and others, yet there may be a time and that very often,
wherein we may be so distracted by some great affliction, and in that case that
being as it were astonished and overcome with the greatness and strangeness of
it, we can not tell what to pray: and though prayer then be our only refuge,
yet we can not tell how to begin it, or what to say. And so unlike shall we be
unto our selves, and that that we have been in times past, as though we were
not the same: nay our estate may seem like unto the wicked, who are at their
wits end. For if we were asked what we would have, we can not tell, and though
we have liberty to ask of God, we can not use it: for we can not tell what to
pray. A wonderful thing, but yet most true, and that which is to be found not
in some, but in the most excellent servants of God, even the Apostles
themselves, as Paul here brings in himself for an example, and in this
infirmity makes himself like unto the rest. And though we have a form of
prayer prescribed us by our Savior Christ, yet we ask those things many times
which if we had them would hurt us, and when we ask that which is profitable
and good, yet by prescribing to the Lord, the time, manner, and means of our
deliverance, we pray with such impatience and distrust, that it may truly be
said, we can not tell what to pray as we ought. This was the estate of good
King Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 14. when he was oppressed in the bitterness of his
soul (as he says) and he chattered like a Crane or a Swallow, and mourned as
a Dove. Such was the perplexity and more then infirmity of David, when
instead of praying, he roared all the day long, Psalm. 32. 3. and when he
mourned in his prayer, and could but make a noise, Psalm. 55. 2. and when (as he
says) for the voice of his groaning his bones did cleave to his skin, and
that he was like a Pelicane of the wilderness, and like an Owl of the desert,
and as a Sparrow alone upon the house top, Psalm. 102. 5, 6, 7. and when his
heart panting and his strength failing him, even the light of his eyes, he
roared for the very grief of his heart, and he powered out his whole desire
before the Lord, by sobbing and sighing, rather then by any thing else. Thus
these most excellent servants of God, in their greatest agonies, were so far
from being able to pray unto God in any tolerable manner, that in their own
sense and feeling they did but roar and cry, sobbe and sigh, mourn and
complain, and that very confusedly, even like the Crane, the Swallow, and the
Owl, so confused were they in themselves and full of disorder, and fallen into
so many great infirmities at once: Therefore we may not judge of our selves or
others by any one such or few particular cases, least we deceive our selves:
neither must we then in this great unfitness of ours be like unto the wicked,
who give over all prayer because they are unfitte for it, but strive earnestly
against this infirmity of ours, and then pray unto God that we might pray,
which if we will do, no doubt we shall find his promise to be true in this,
That even then his Spirit shall teach us to pray; for as our Savior Christ
comfort his disciples in another case. Matt. 10. 19, 20. that when they
should be brought before kings they should not take thought what or how to
speak for he would give them in that hour what to say, because it was not
they which should speak, but the spirit of the Father which speaks in
them: even so we shall find when we are most unfitte to pray, if we will not
yield to it: there shall be a secret inward working, whereby we shall be
stirred up to do something, and there shall be a labor of the heart, and an
endeavor of the mind aspiring unto that which we may seem not to attain
unto, and there shall be many sighings, though few words, many great
desires, though few voices, yea there shall be that which we can not greatly
conceive of our selves, and every thing shall be unspeakeable. For no doubt
those men that we spoke of before even at those times when they could not tell,
what and how to pray as of themselves, yet the spirit helping them, they did
pray, and there were at least unspeakable sighs and groans stirred up in
them, For it is said of Hezekiah that he then turned his face to the wall and
prayed to the Lord and wept sore, 2. Kings 20. 2, 3. and David when as in his
own feeling he did but roar and sigh: even then he poured out, and, that
very plentifully his whole desire before the Lord, Psalm. 38. and when he did
but mourn and make a noise, it was counted a prayer before the Lord, Psalm. 55.
2. and when as he says that his grouings were like the Pelicans, and the
sparrows, or the shriekings of an owl, yet to show that in them there was a
work of Gods spirit, that made them acceptable to him, he begins the
Psalm thus: O Lord hear my prayers and let my cry come unto thee. So it is
said of the whole Church of God in Egypt, Exodus, 2. 23. 24. that when for the
extremity of their bondage they could not pray unto God, yet they cried and
sighed and mourned unto him. This then is a most notable comfort in all
afflictions, that believing in Christ and pertaking of his spirit, it shall
help us in all our infirmities so, that when we can not tell what or how to
pray as we ought, it shall teach us so to do it, as we may have hope and
comfort of being heard. For this is that which he adds, that the Lord which
searches the heart, knows the meaning of his own spirit, for it makes
request to him for the Saints according to his will: for by knowing, he does
not only mean, that he understands it, as he does all other things, but he
accepts and allows it, and does most willingly grant such requests, as
though they were made in far better liking to our selves, and so is the word
taken, Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous. For, he heard
the cry of the Israelites when they did but sigh and moan, and delivered them
from the bondage: he heard Hezekiah chattering in his prayer, and raised him up
from death, and added 15. years more to his life: he heard David roaring for
the extremity of his pain, and forgave the punishment of his sin: and he
has heard us many times in our greatest need, when we have howled and cried,
rather then have made any settled and well ordered prayer: yea, when we have
rather sighed then spoken. For the Lord in this case regards not so much the
multitude of words, as he looks to the meaning of his spirit, and
grants that though we speak never a word. For even as a father having a
young Infant sick of some sore disease, though the child can speak never a
word, is ready to help it: and if it can speak, yet being full of pain, can
not call for things as it ought, yet if the mother can but by any signs guess
at the meaning of it, she will accept as much of it as if it had spoken very
plentifully: yea though it should say one thing and mean another, she would
give it according to the meaning of it. So the Lord that is filled with the
bowels of compassion toward us in Christ, far above any father or mother
though he delights to hear us pray unto him, yet when as by the extremity
of our miseries, we are oppressed or distracted, so that we can not in any
orderly manner pray unto him as we ought, he allows of the sighs and sobbes
that we offer up unto him, and grants not so much our words (which are none
or few) as the meaning of his spirit which is plentiful in us. Hereupon it
comes to pass that the Lord in his rich mercy imputes not unto his servants
the manifold rebellions of the flesh, or great complaints in their prayers, as
not unto Job or to David who were full of them: because he has respect unto
the meaning of his spirit in them: even as the father is not so much grieved
or offended with the murmurings, impatience, and outcries of his poor sick
child, as he by the least token gesseth at the meaning of him, and takes that
in good part. What shall we then say to these things? is it true indeed that
the Lord will vouchsafe to look upon the low degree of his servants, and have
respect unto poor sinful creatures, who when they are in their just
deserved misery, and even then cannot pray unto him one word aright; and when
they begin to speak, and their tongue cleaves unto the roof of their
mouth, that he will then hear their sighs and their cries? yea undoubtedly,
he that of his great mercy will not quench the smoking flax, nor break in
sunder the bruised reed; will of the like mercy hear, not only the well
ordered prayers of his Church, but even the very cryings and roarings of his
servants, though they be like the Pellicanes and the Owls: yea their mournings
though they be like unto the Doves, yea when they say nothing, neither indeed
can, their very lobbes and sighs which come from the abundance of a troubled
Spirit and can not be expressed: for he allows of the meaning of his spirit
which works those things in them, and if they could, are willing thereby to
perform better service unto him. What can be more comfortable unto us then
this? In all our necessities let us then with great boldness go unto the Lord
by Christ, and though we cannot utter many words, yet (...) us speak unto
him: for surely the acceptance of our prayers consists not in the multitude
or well placing of our words, but in the request of our hearts, and therefore
if we can pray but two words, and say with the Publicane. Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner: with the Apostles, Lord increase my faith: or with the blind
man, O son of David have mercy upon me: or with the Thief on the cross,
Lord remember me: this short thing proceeding from the spirit in us, and
offered up in the mediation of Christ Jesus and in the virtue of his prayers,
shall be as well received of him when we can do no otherwise, as if we had
spent an whole hour in prayer: and if we can not do this, yet if we lift up
our minds unto God as Hannah did, who spoke never a word, and as Nehemiah
did: yea if we do but sigh after an unspeakeable manner, the Lord will not
refuse that. Verse. 28. Also we know that all things work together, etc.
Wherein the Apostle proceeding to comfort us in afflictions ministers this
sovereign medecin against the contagion thereof, namely that all affliction
come to the believers not for their hurt, but for their singular good, seeing
that they do befall them not by fortune or chance but by the special
providence of God, and that for the same end; who as he has chosen them from
everlasting, so in the same counsel of his, he ordained that they should be
like unto his son, v. 29. and therefore calls them in time, justifies them
by faith, and so by the cross brings them to eternal glory as he did his
Son, ver. 30. and therefore concludes that no affliction shall be able to
hurt them, seeing the Lord is with them in it, meaning thereby to do them
good, ver. 31. and that he is so, we may be assured of it, seeing that he
spared not his own Son but gave him for us all to death, and therefore it
can not be, but that with him he should give us all things also verse. 32.
Therefore when he says, All things, whether it be as generally taken as it is
spoken, namely that not only prosperity but adversity also: or it be
restrained to his particular purpose, namely all afflictions of what kind
soever: true it is, that his purpose is to show, that all afflictions do not
only not hinder the salvation of the godly, but do greatly further it: which
howsoever it contains an whole and entire matter by it felfe, yet being
inferred upon the former words: The Apostle seems therein to answer a
secret objection which might arise in men's minds from thence, namely, that it
seems many times that the Lord does not hear the prayers of the afflicted,
because their afflictions be not only not removed according to their prayer,
but sometimes increased contrary to their desire. Therefore we must remember
what has been already spoken, how the Lord in granting our requests, not
so much looks unto the particular things we desire, as to the meaning of his
spirit, and grants that in turning the afflictions unto our singular good,
whereas if they were removed, it would be far worse with us though we
imagine to the contrary: for as if one in a burning fever should in the
midst of his fit ask cold water and his friend the Physician should in
stead of that give him an wholesome medecin, should in denying that
particular thing demanded, grant unto his general meaning which was that he
might have that, which might do him most good, though now being distempered he
was not able to judge of it, but did take one thing for another: So whatsoever
we ask in our distress, our meaning must needs be, if it be ruled by Gods
spirit, that we would have that, which might procure our best good: therefore
if the Lord turn our crosses to our good though we prayed for the clean
taking away of them, he fulfilleth both these promises at once. Thus when Paul
prayed thrice that the messenger of Satan might depart from him, the Lord in
giving him his grace, that was sufficient for him, and making his power known
in the Apostles weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 8, 9. did both satisfy the meaning of
his spirit, and turn his cross unto his singular good. But further touching
this matter we are more generally to understa^d, that the Apostle says not
only that the cross shall turn to our good: but that this shall be verefied of
all the crosses that ever may come upon us be they never so strange, as
sickness, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, loss of husband, wife, children,
father and mother, name, or any thing else; which is to be marked lest at any
time we might be deceived, to think if it were some other affliction, we could
have some good hope in it, but this is so great, it touches us so nearely,
that we can not possibly see which way it should bring any good unto us. Which
as the devil is ready to persuade us, and we too ready to yield unto his
persuasion herein, so that we might comfortably withstand it, we must
consider, that this good comes from affliction, not as though it were
natural and proper unto it (for indeed it is otherwise) that of it self it
makes men worse, and drives them from God, as the rod does the child from
the mother: and this Satan aims at, as in Job when he said, If the Lord
touched him he would curse him to the face: and so he prevails with the
wicked, as with Pharaoh. But in the children of God his goodness overcomes
the devils malice, and the venume of the cross is taken away by the virtue of
the cross of Christ, whereby it is sanctified, so that contrary to the nature
of it, it works good, The which that it might not seem strange, much less
unpossible to us, we must remember that even men by their wisdom are able to
make those things serve for the benefit of man which of themselves would hurt
him. For if the Physician thorough his skill can cure a man by taking away his
blood and humors, by cutting and searing his flesh, which of themselves are
hurtful: if he can by art so temper that which is poison, (as the vipers
flesh) remper it, I say, with other wholesome things, and correct it with those
that be cordial, that of it, he will make a sovereign Treacle, even that
which shall expel poison, and so make that which could cause death to be a
preserver of life: Shall not the Lord by his infinite wisdom, and almighty
power, the Lord, I say, which brings light out of darkness, and good out of
evil, and calls the things that be not as though they were: shall not he be
much more able by the most grievous crosses that can befall us, work the
greatest good for us that may be: so that when we would hope for good by our
afflictions, and so be comforted in them, we are not so much to look to the
things themselves, how they are like to work upon us: as the promise which the
Lord has made unto us concerning this matter, and so to be sure that the Lord
himself will work our good thereby, because he has said it. This persuasion,
no doubt, should work in us great patience in all our afflictions. For how
many grievous things will the sick patient suffer at the hands of a Physician
or Chyrurgion, by launcing, searing, corsying, etc. when he is persuaded that
it will work his good? but in deed here lies the point of the matter, and
this is all in all, that the poor afflicted soul knows not that the Lord by
his affliction will work his good, and therefore is he so unquiet, and ever
complaining; for give him this faith, and the feeling of it, and lay upon him
whatsoever you will. Therefore let us hearken to that which the Apostle says,
that howsoever we, because of our ignorance are uncertain what will be the
happy issue of all our afflictions, yet he knows very well that that shall
work together our good, which he speaks confidently both as a teacher of the
Church, an Apostle, and as a man of experience, and therefore we ought to give
credit unto him: even as the patient does to the Physician, though him self
had never experience of any such thing before; which especially we ought to
do, because unto his own word he joins the testimony of many others
saying, We know, meaning the rest of the Apostles and ministers, and men of
experience, that all of them know it, and therefore this word being
confirmed by the mouths, not of two or three witnesses, but having so great a
cloud of witnesses for it, should be received without all gaynsaying. For it is
all one as if the fearful patient should have not one, but a whole company
of Physicians saying unto him, that undoubtedly this medicine is like to do
you good, we know the working of it well, and have had great experience of it
in many, you need not to fear it, take it upon our credit: this would much
move him: So, no doubt, this should correct the too much fear, that is in us,
of being hurt by the cross, that we hear so many excellent and famous men
very skillful therein, to speak so boldly unto us of the benefit of it: even
those whom we are most ready to believe in all other things, why then should
we not do so in this? but that we might do it the rather, let us a little
consider in particulars of the benefit of the cross, and though the Apostle
names one great one here, which might be sufficient, yet before we come to
it, let us see what other ends of it the Scripture affords us. And first of
all we shall find it to be a special mean to draw us from the too much love
of this world, that we might use it as though we did not use it: for when we
have all things at our will, we are wedded unto this world, and think it best
for us always to abide here, and though heaven be a thousand times heavenly,
yet we desire it not so earnestly as we ought, but are still groueling upon the
earth: but when by affliction we find that there is no contentment in any
thing here below, it may move us to despise them, and with more fervent desire
to aspire at heaven, where is the fulness of joy and pleasure for evermore. For
this cause the Patriarks suffered so many afflictions, to whom so many earthly
things were promised; that they might not stay in them, but from them ascend up
into heaven which they were especially to look for, as the Apostle faith, Heb.
11. 9, 10. that Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob heirs of the promise, abode in the
land of promise, as in a strange country: for they looked for a city whose
builder and maker is God. Thus the Lord deals with many before their death,
laying long and grievous diseases upon them, that they finding no rest in this
world, might be willing to go out of it, and to desire death most willingly,
which before as most ougly, they did abhor. So that as the mother by some
unpleasant thing weaneth the child from the breast, upon which it would
otherwise always linger to the hurt of it, now when stronger meat is more
fit for it: so the Lord weaneth us by the cross from the love of this world,
and thus turns it unto our good. Moreover by the same he brings us to a
more through repentance and sorrow for our sins, and works that in us
thereby which the word did not before, when we find by woeful experience what
great miseries they have brought us unto: for if we would judge ourselves, we
should not be judged of the Lord, but when we are judged, we are chastened of
him, because we should not be condemned with the wicked world, 1. Cor. 11. 31,
32. whereunto agrees that Psalm. 107. 10. etc. that affliction humbles men
unto true repentance before God, even as we see it to be true in the Prodigal
child, who by his great misery came to repent him of his riotous life, Luke
15. 16. and the brethren of Joseph, though we may presume of them, that they
being brought up in the house of there godly father, did secretly repent there
ill dealing toward Joseph, yet many years after, about 20. or there about,
when they were in adversity, the memory of it renewed it self afresh, and
thereby they wear brought more seriously to judge them selves for it; so that
in this respect, it is compared to fire that purges the gold, and consumes
the dross of it; unto a fyle that skoureth often the rust; unto a purgation that
expels corrupt humors from the body. Therefore even as the fire does not
hurt the gold, in consuming the dross, and the fyle in taking away the rust,
and the purgation in expelling ill humors: so afflictions causing us to
abhor and leave some sin or other, which if we continued in, would destroy
us, may truly be said to work our good. In the third place, it preserves us
from many sins, which otherwise we should fall into, but that being under
the hand of God, we are kept in more awe: and as Physic serves not only to
cure us of the diseases we are fallen into, but to preserve us from them in
some tolerable health: so the cross both recouereth us out of sin, when we
are fallen into it, and preuenteth many, that otherwise might creep upon us:
so that as some sickly bodies are driven to diet them selves, and are in
continual Physic to prevent that which their corrupt estate would otherwise
necessarily pull upon them: so some are always, or the greatest part of there
lives in the diet of affliction, not so much to bring them from gross and
grievous sins which they are not yet fallen into, as to keep them from
falling, which the Lord knows they are ready to do, in respect of their
ages, callings, and places that they live in. So that if the Lord deal with us
as with untamed heyfers, which are kept from straying out of there pastures
with hedges and ditches; so he puts thorns and briars in our ways as Hoseah
says 2. 6. that is, lays affliction upon us, and so as it were stops the
way that we might not break forth by disobedience to our hurt, must we not
needs say, that even this way as well as any other, the Lord works by
affliction our singular good? and with the Prophet, Blessed is the man whom
thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him in thy law, that thou may give him
rest from the days of evil, while the pit is dug for the wicked. And Psalm.
119. 67. 71. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word:
and, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes. Besides all this, afflictions are called trialls, because that by
them the Lord tries what is in us, not that he is ignorant of it, but because
he would have thereby our selves and others thoroughly to know what is in us,
and in what measure, and what is both good and evil, which without the trial
could not so well be known: which serves for this end, that if we have
received any good grace, we might be thankful to God for it, if not, we might
labor for it. Thus speaks the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. 1. 6, 7. Now for a
season if need require, ye are in heaviness through manifold tentations, that
the trial of your faith being much more precious then gold that perishes
(though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise, honor, and
glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Where the Apostle says, that if men
by the fire will try the gold to the end that they might certainly know what
is the value of it, and yet it is but a thing that perishes, and therefore in
no wise to be compared to faith and other graces of Gods spirit: then the Lord
much more by affliction may make trial of them, to the end that all men may
see them to be so precious as they be. Thus was Abraham proved, Genesis 22. 1.
when the Lord commanded him to offer up his only son Isaak whom he loved,
which he willingly obeyed, and by faith offered him up, Hebr. 11. 17. so that
the Lord says, now it was known by good proof that he feared the Lord, when
for his sake he had not spared his only son. Thus is it known who are they
that have received the seed of Gods word into good ground, and who into stony
ground, even such as go away in tentation: and so though they believed for a
time, yet then show that the word was not rooted in them, Luke 8. 13. and thus
it is known who have builded there houses upon the rock, and who upon the
sands, who have been only hearers of the word, and who doers of the same.
Even such as when the rain falls, the floode comes, and the wind blows, there
houses stand or fall, that is, they that in affliction and tentation continue
the same that they were before, or are unlike unto themselves; to be short,
thus were the Israelites tried in the wilderness, where it appeared many ways
what was in every man, where some were murmurers, some fornicatours, some
idolatours, some disobedient, and some faithful, and all this by the several
afflictions and crosses that did befall them. Thus by the great afflictions
that came upon Job at once, appeared what was in him, when in all that he
sinned not with his mouth, but said, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord. And thus lastly by trial appeared the
weakness of Peter, who though he had made so large a confession of his faith
before; yet at the voice of a maid, when he saw greater danger, swear and
foresware with cursing and banning, denying Christ, even that he never knew the
man: therefore if it be good for us not to be ignorant of our selves, and so
not to be deceived with an ouerweening of our selves; if it be good for any man
to see his wants and weakness, that he may be humbled and seek to have them
healed, if it be good to know certainly that we have received such and such
graces, even in that measure that we have, that we might be thankful to God
and comforted in our selves: then seeing that affliction and the cross
brings forth all this at once, and by trial we find what faith, hope, love,
patience, obedience, etc. is in us, and what not, that whatsoever we seemed to
be before to our selves, and others, yet now we know certainly that we are thus
and thus, it can not be denied but that affliction works much good unto us,
and we ought to say with the Apostle, that we know it to be so. Which we may
much more confidently when we shall see (omitting to speak of many more uses
that the cross has) that last and greatest of all, that is spoken of verse.
29. Hitherto we have seen that there is great use of affliction, and that it
works much good, and that in every cross besides the present bearing of it,
the Lord offers great commodity unto us and works it in us thereby: so
that as in all other things there is the present possession of them, and the
use of them, in so much that many have great goods and yet not know how to use
them; so many have great and long crosses upon them, yet labor not after the
fruit of them. Thus seeing afflictions are common to the good and the bad, and
both do bear them, whether they will or no, yet the one must labor for the
good which the Lord offers to them thereby, which the other not once so much
as looks after: which no doubt when Gods children are some thing careless
in, then he continues his rods upon them, nay increases them, because his
purpose is to do them good: and so herein deals with them as a father (even
as he is) who spares not the rod, till his child be thereby humbled, to the
confession and amendment of his fault, because his purpose is to do him good,
when as notwithstanding he lets his servant go, when he sees that he will
not profit by words or a few stripes, as not caring for him: so the Lord when
he spares the wicked in their sins, and reserueth them to further judgment,
correcting his own children again and again, shows that his purpose is to
do them good. Therefore let no man in the continuance of afflictions be too
much discouraged, as though the Lord were continually angry with him, or had a
purpose to destroy him thereby, which he could do in a moment at once, but let
him thus reason with himself out of the word; Now I know assuredly that the
Lord loves me in deed, because he purposes to do me good by all things,
even by affliction, and therefore whereas I through the untowardness of my
nature, have not profited sufficiently by his former chastisments, he sends a
new fatherly correction, thereby to work my further good, and whereas I
through my crookednes and stubbornnes do not yet profit by them, as he would
have me, therefore I see that in much mercy he continues it, that so I might
get good by it at the last: and herein the Lord deals like a wise and
careful Physician, who purposing not so much to give Physic unto the sick
patient, as to cure him thereby, if the first medicine will do it, there he
leaves them; if not, he applies one medicine after an other, because he has a
diligent care of him: and if at any time he makes any intermission, it is
because of the patients weakness, whom he would by that means to gather some
strength, not that he means to leave him: so the Lord purposing, according to
his word, by affliction to do us good, when by the first cross we profit not
as we ought, then either he lets it lie the longer upon us, or remoouing it
sends an other in stead of it, though not presently, because we could not
bear it, yet afterward when it seems best unto him. Therefore the best
thing for every man is, soon to profit under the cross, that so it may be
removed, and not so much to labor for the remoouing of it, as for the fruit
of it, least it going away without profit, the Lord bring upon us some greater
afterward, seeing he is purposed thereby most assuredly to do us good.
Moreover, by this we know that whereas every man desires that which is best
for him, and yet most men err in the particulars, desiring that which is most
pleasant, profitable, honorable, etc. in this world; that in deed is best
for us at all times, whatsoever it be, which makes most for the glory of God
in us, our own salvation, and the edifying of our brethren, which because the
Lord works many times by afflictions, as we have heard, even they then are
best for a man: Even as when a man's body is so distempered, and some member so
putrified, then it is best for him to have his blood taken away from him, to
be launced and seared, yea to have a part cut off: therefore when any
affliction or calamity does befall us, let us not be discontented therewith,
or be impatient, but submitting our judgments and wills to the judgments and
will of God, let us quietly endure, seeing the Lord gives us that, not which
we fondly desire as the best, but which he knows to be, and is indeed the
best. Now seeing it is so, what then I pray you is the cause why not only the
wicked, but even the godly, which ought to know this, and to believe it, do
so grievously complain of there afflictions? as David, Job, and the rest, as
though they should be hurt thereby, when as we have seen they work their good
and therefore are best for them: Truly it can not be denied, but that men for
the most part do more complain of their afflictions then they ought to do,
and do not so comfortablely bear them as they should: yet this hinders not
but that men should get good by their afflictions, and be also persuaded
thereof, though they be full of complaints, whilst they are in the midst of
them: for who complains more then these two men, and yet who had more profit
and got greater good of them then they? for such is our nature, that we must
needs have the feeling of afflictions, unless our heart were hard like iron
or brass, and so we were stocks and no men: but seeing it is otherwise that
our hearts are soft and tender, it can not be but that every thing should work
upon us, and we be moved according to the nature of it, to joy, sorrow, love,
hatred, anger, and fear, and therefore tribulation must needs trouble us, and
affliction afflict, and the cross crucify, and yet we may be persuaded that
it is for our good, and look for it from thence, even as the sick patient can
not as he is man, but feel the launcing, and searing of his flesh, and so
complain of it with great grief, yea cry out for the extremity of pain,
though he knows it to be best for him then, and therefore after a sort does
most willingly suffer it. But many others are so full of complaints in their
affliction, because they are not persuaded at that time, that the very thing is
sent for their special good, and therefore such are to meditate upon that
which we have already spoken concerning this matter.

In the latter part of this verse when he says, to them that love God, as he
thereby restrains this general promise, so he shows to whom it
appertains, namely to those that believe in Christ Jesus, and are sanctified
by his Spirit, for he entreats of the certainty of the salvation of such:
now the true and faithful believers as he has before discerned them from
others by this fruit of faith, namely sanctification, so he does here by one
part of it, which is love, as in the Epistle to the Galat. chap. 5. verse. 6. so
that under one kind he comprehends all godliness, but he takes this thing
rather then any other, as most fit for his purpose; for speaking of
affliction, he says, By this we shall try our faith, if our love unto to GOD
continue even then. For whereas the wicked will pretend to love God in
prosperity, but in adversity they fall unto hatred, yea unto plain cursing
and banning: he that truly loves God, loves him not for his back and belly
alone, nor principally, but because he is goodness it self, and therefore to be
loved. And herein the one bewray their servile nature, that like as servants
love not their masters, if they once begin to correct them: and the other
their liberal and childish disposition, whom no correction or stripes of the
father, can make to change their love to him, much less drive away from him.
This is that which Satan knowing generally to be in the nature of man, thought
to have found in Job, though he was deceived, when he said, Does Job love or
fear God for nothing? have not thou been an hedge round about him? but touch
all that he has, and see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Therefore
if in affliction we cease not to love God, and in love to serve him, we shall
be sure that he vvil fulfill this promise to us, of turning all things to our
good. Moreover, seeing that the Apostles purpose is, to entreat of patience in
affliction, this no doubt, is most fit for the purpose, namely the
consideration of the love which we ought to bear unto God. For if that in
worldly matters we will bear many great things at the hands of them whom
we love, as the child at the mother; the husband at the wife; and one friend
at another; then how much more ought we to bear all things at the hands of
God, whom we know so loves us in Christ, and therefore we ought so to
love him again: and no doubt would bear if there were that love in us unto
him, which ought. When he adds in the same verse, ( Which are called of his
purpose) as he does further show to whom this promise does appertain,
even to such, so he shows the cause of it, which is not any worthiness of
theirs, or right be having themselves under the cross, as thereby deserving
it, but the free love of God, whereby he before the beginning purposed to do
them good, which purpose of his nothing can alter, but he makes all things to
further it, even afflictions? so that thus he declares the certentie of this,
for what can hinder the purpose of God? Nothing: and therefore afflictions can
not hinder the good of his children, seeing that he has purposed to do them
good, which purpose of his appears by their effectual calling, and therefore
when he had purposed to save them, he called them in time to the knowledge of
it, and from thence it came that the word was effectual to them, when it was
unprofitable unto others. So the Lord continuing the same purpose of his
toward them, it shall come to pass that though all other men should wax
worse and worse by their affliction, yet the Lord would turn all theirs unto
their good because he had purposed it. So that for the certentie of this he
leads them to the consideration of the purpose of God appearing in their
calling, which being very strange, and many things against it, yet nothing
could hinder it because it was purposed. So by the cross our good being
ordained by the uncha^geable purpose of god, how many things soever may seem
to be against it within us or without us, nothing shall be able ever to hinder
it, but we shall always find this promise to be true: that all things shall
work together for the best to those that love God, even those that are called
of his purpose. In the next verse when he adds; For those whom he knew
before, he also predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son, that
he might be the first borne among many brethren: he declares another most
excellent end wherefore the Lord lays the cross upon his children, namely,
that thereby they might be like unto Christ their eldest brother, as the Lord
has ordained, that all that are his should be: and thus especially it works
our good, when it makes us conformable to Christ: where he not only says,
that afflictions do befall us by the very special providence of God, and not
by chance, but to what end he sends them, namely that as Christ first
suffered and then entered into glory, so all others going the same way might be
like unto him, as he has appointed that they should, and therefore we need
not to fear that the cross should hinder us from our salvation, no more then
it hindered Christ from glory: nay, that we ought in the midst of it, to
have sure hope, that in the end we shall be like unto Christ in glory,
because we are like unto him in the cross.

Concerning the former, that no affliction comes by fortune or by chance,
but by the appointment of God, he not only suffering it, but first ordaining
it, and then laying it upon us with his own hands, it contains in it most
notable comfortes by it self, and is that which the whole Scripture bears
very plentiful witness unto: for seeing that we believe that God made all
things of nothing, therefore whatsoever are the means of any thing the Lord
is the doer of it, for that they did that which they did by his special power,
seeing that without him they are nothing. Therefore the servants of God have
confessed, that the Lord himself has brought all their troubles upon them,
as Psalm 66. 10. Thou, O God, have prooved, thou have tried us as silver is
tried, thou have brought us into the s^are, and laid a strait chain upon our
loins, thou have caused men to ride over our heads. And Job when all his
goods were given into Satan's hand, who stirred up the Sabeans and the Chaldeans
to spoil him, yet he says, The Lord has given, and he has taken it. The
devils besought Christ not only that he would suffer them, but that he
vvoulde send them into the swine, that they might go into them, Mark. chap.
5. verse. 12. So Matthew. chap. 4. verse. 1. Christ is said to be led by the
spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, to shevve, that
whatsoever did befall him there, the Lord sent him thither, and to that end.
And so has he taught us to pray, Lead us not into temptation, which is more
comfortable then to say, Suffer us not to be led: because therein we
confess, not only that the Lord beholds us in all our troubles, but that
he, that is our Father, and knovveth our strength, lays them upon us with
his own hand, and therefore we need so much the less to fear least we
should be ouer-laden. The consideration of this should not only make us
patient in all afflictions, but to look for some good from them, seeing that
he which has promised to work our good by them, does lay them upon us
himself: this no doubt was that, that stayed the old man Hely when he
heard that message from the Lord by Samuel, which otherwise might have
been more uncomfortable unto him, as appears by his words, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
It is the Lord let him do what seems him good. For this is all one, as if
the sick patient should have a Physician to deal with him, that were his
brother, his father, or his friend, who should not only prescribe the
medecin, but make it and minister it himself, of whose fidelity and care
toward him, because he doubts not one whit, it might make him most
vvilling to receive it, though very bitter and unpleasant, and to hope for
some good from it. Thus our Savior Christ speaks, Ioh. 18. 11. Shall I not
drink of the cup which my Father has given me? speaking of ^his
sufferings. To show us, whensoever any cross does befall us, it is the
cup which God our Father in wisdom and mercy has mingled for us; and
therefore we should not fear any hurt by drinking of it, but rather hope
that it should work our good, as he has promised. If when the child has
offended his father, he should say to his servant in his anger, Take him out of
my sight and punish him, it would be more grievous then if he should take
correction of him himself: so it may minister unto us some comfort that in
afflictions we know that we are under our fathers hand, and that he has
not delivered us unto any other, to be tormented. If one that were blind should
be suddenly taken, and carried to some punishment, he knew not by whom, he
might greatly fear, what would be the end or measure of it. Or if one
should be dealt withal as is the manner of the Spanish Inquisitours, to put
the poor soul in the greater fear, if he should have a tormentour sent unto
him uery ougly disguised, who should carry him into a dark place, he knew not
whether, that might increase the grief of his affliction the more, but if
when he were in the midst of it, he should hear the unto us, because we
look not up unto him that sends it, and we are so blind, that we
consider not who strikes us, yet when we hear out of the Word, the voice
of our Father speaking unto us, and telling us that it is he that deals
with us, how strange and deformed soever the tormentour may seem to be,
let us not be too much discouraged, because that even when he strikes us,
the bowels of compassion in him do yearne upon us more then in a mother
toward her children, and he seeks thereby to do us good. Thus we see
that all afflictions are ordained and sent of God, and that the salvation of
the Church, and every member of it is joined with bearing the cross, so that
we are not to look to be freed from it, unless we will pervert this order
established by Gods decree, neither need we to fear it when as the Lord
that has determined to save us, has appointed also this way and means to
save us, and when his decree of saving cannot be severed from his decree of
exercising us under the cross. Which that we might not look to be freed
from, or fear least it should hinder us in our salvation, the Apostle tells
us wherefore the Lord has thus decreed of the whole Church, even that seeing
his own Son Christ Jesus came no other way but this unto glory, he being
the eldest brother in the house of God, All other by their practice might
yield unto his soveraigntie, when they will not refuse to go that way to
their inheritance, which he went before though never so grievous, even through
many afflictions. So that even as a noble man will have all his servants to
wear one liverie, that they might be known: so the Lord would have all his
children known by one badge: the badge that he put upon his eldest son
Christ was the cross, therefore none of us the younger breethren must refuse
it. For as in a family, great is the privilege of the eldest brother, and
none must look to go beyond him, nay every one can not be like unto him, and
if any might come to as great an inheritance, as he by doing those things
which he did before them, they might not refuse the condition, unless they
would prefer themselves before him. So seeing it has pleased the Lord to
consecrate the prince of our peace through affliction, Hebr. cap. 2. verse. 10.
and he came unto glory no other way then this, we must think it good for us
to go the same way, that we might be like unto him, and so by our practice,
show that we acknowledge him to be the prince of our peace, and our eldest
brother. Then even as he is the chief and principal in the common wealth, in
the Church, in a private family, and in any place, that all desire to be like
unto, so when we are contented to be like unto Christ in any thing, even in
the cross, then shall we declare that we hold him to be the chief and
principal, and as it is said here, the first begotten among many breethren.
For indeed howsoever there is great difference betvveene the head and the
rest of the members, yet there is a certain conformity between the members
of the same body and the head, and all of them are inferior unto it: so
howsoever there is no comparison betwixt Christ and us, yet we must be like
him in this, that we must not be above him, and therefore not to refuse any
condition, that he has undergone before, unless we would preposterously
prefer our selves the members before him our head: which were to darken the
glory of him, that is the first borne, and to stain the honor of him that is
the prince of our peace. For what a disorder were it, if the subjects would
refuse to do that which the Prince had done before? and if the younger
breethren should think much to be brought up that way that the heir has
been before? even so when we shall refuse to bear the cross which our
Savior Christ by the appointment of his Father has borne in greater measure
then we shall or can, it is nothing else but to lift up our selves above him,
and to say that we will not be conformable unto him as to our prince or eldest
brother. And what a thing were this, that we being worse then dust and
ashes, should desire to be spared above the only Son of God, and should so
love our selves, that the estate of Christ Jesus should seem to be unmeet for
us, and when he was in all sufferings and afflictions brought unto glory, we
should dream of a more ready way, and think to come to it some other way
we know not what? Therefore let this comfort us in all trouble and
adversity, that we can never be pressed so low with it, but that Christ
Jesus has been deeper plunged in it before, so that the more trouble and
adversity we suffer, the more are we like unto him: yea, if it were possible
for us to go down into hell, and to suffer all torments of a desperate man
in soul and body, even in them we should be most like unto Christ in his
great agonies and bloody sweates, yea in his cross when he cried out with a
lovvde voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But if all this do
not satisfy us, and we further demand why the Lord should appoint so
hard a way for us unto heaven, and ordain that by the straight way and
narrow gate, we should enter into life, and should vvish that he had
appointed some easier way then this: First of all we must not prescribe the
Lord any thing in the matter of our salvation, but think our selves happy,
that we are saved any way, yea if we went to heaven by hell: and secondarily
when we are come thither, we shall find the joys so far surpass all
troubles and adversities whatsoever that we have suffered both in greatness
and continuance, that we shall never repent us of the hardness of the way, no
more then it did Joseph, that he first enduring the prison was afterward
made ruler in Egypt: or Jacob that he came to inherit his fathers blessing at
the last, by a long exile and tedious bondage: or the Israelites, that by
passing through a forlorn wilderness forty years, they came to the land of
promise in the end. Or David that he came to the kingdom of Israel by
suffering so many things under Saul as he did.

Nicholas Bownde.

A Treatise of a contented mind.
Number. 11. From the 4. verse. Moses sets down the most heinous sin of the
people, which grieved him so, that he complains of it unto the Lord, verse.
11. Who gave him this answer concerning this matter, verse. 18. the execution of
which is described, verse. 31.
THeir sin was this, that they were not contented with that most blessed
estate that the Lord had placed them in: which, howsoever it may seem to be
but a small thing, yet if we measure it by the punishment that came upon them
for it, we must needs confess it to be great. For if the justice of men does
punish men but according to the quality of the fault, the Lord doing it a
great deal more, it can not be but a great sin that pulled so great a
punishment upon them. And in deed seeing that we believe that the Lord does
govern the whole world, in wisdom and mercy, dividing unto every one that
portion which he knows to be most convenient for them, look how much we are
discontented with our estate, so much do we detract from the wise and
merciful providence of God. Now this sin of theirs was so much the more
grievous, by how much more their estate was so good as it was, and therefore
had so many causes to be contented therewith. For besides that, they were
delivered from the cruel bondage of Egypt, they had many singular testimonies
of Gods favor, both for this life and the life to come, and therefore the
Prophet David, Psalm. 78. 12. does thus set forth the indignity of their sin,
declaring how many benefits of God they did enjoy, when they begun thus to
murmr. And if we do but consider the manifold public benefits in the
Church and commonwealth, as the word of God, this long peace under so gracious
a government, with so great plenty and freedom from so many plagues, whereby
all these are so much the more comfortable unto us, besides the private
commodities which every one of us many particularly remember in dangers
escaped, in good things received upon soul and body, for this life and the
life to come in our own persons, and such as appertain unto us, we must
needs acknowledge that there is great cause why every one of us should be
contented with our estates, and that our sin in murmuring at any time should
be very great. But yet we must come unto that whereof the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in what soever estate I am therewith to be
contented.

Now that we might the better see into the sin of this people to avoid it,
we must mark by what steps they came unto the height of it. First of all
they did less esteem of that pleasant food, then they should, and did not
see it to be so excellent and convenient for them as it was: for they speak of
it very contemptuously, saying, There is nothing but this Man; when as it was
not only able to nourish them, but was as pleasant as wholesome, for it had the
taste of pure oil, and sweet honey, besides it being given them daily, they
might see in it the special providence of God toward them in feeding them
from hand to mouth as it were: so that this should have been unto them in
stead of all dainties in the world, if they could have seen it, but as though
all this were nothing, they say, There is nothing but this Man. Therefore we
must heed take least at any time we do deny or lesson the benefits of God,
but labor to see them all, and acknowledge them to be so great as they be,
that so in respect of them we may confess our estate to be so good as it is,
and therewithal to be contented. And even then, when we begin to mislike any
thing, because it is not such as we wish it were, then we must also remember
how otherwise it may be commodious unto us, and what great use we may have have
of it, and so beholding the goodness of God toward us in it, to rest with
thankfulness well contented therewith.

But they, giving place to the devil, and their own corruption in this, from
hence it came to pass, that they preferred any other food which they had not,
before that excellent meat which they had: and in deed thus Satan deals with
men, when he has brought the^ to a misliking of that which they should not,
then he will offer the^ many other things, and persuade the^ to like of any
rather then of it. And this is to be marked so much the rather because they
esteem onyons, leekes, and such like* and fish, not of the daintiest, but such
as the poorest were wont to be fed withal, before this most wholesome and
pleasant meat* and so are contented to change for the worse. And they were so
much the more wicked in all this, because they say they had the other food for
nothing, though in deed they had not, for they being used as cruelly as might
be, were no doubt constrained to pay for every thing to the uttermost, but they
mean, they had these base and common things for a small price: yet they might
have truly said of the Man, that they had that for nothing, even for the
gathering. But now in a murmuring spirit, they had rather give some thing for
the worse, then enjoy the best for nothing, and would not only change for the
worse, but also give something for the exchange: and thus had an imagination
that it should be marvelous well with the^, if they were any otherwise then
they were yea though it were much worse. Therefore we must endeavor to profit
by our present estate, and to serve God in it, never imagining that if it were
any otherwise with us, we should be very well, and we would do great matters,
when in the mean season we cannot keep a tolerable course in that condition
we be presently in. But whether God blesses us we must be tha^kful and rightly
use it: or whether he chastises us, we must be humble and profit by it: and
be assured that it is a mere illusion of the devil to be persuaded that if we
were otherwise, the^ we would be a great deal better, when as now we cannot be
as we should: forif we have no power over own will in time present, what hope
is there we should have it in time to come, unless we presently labor for
it? And if they could have served God with Man, then there had bin hope, that
if that they had bin driven to onions and leekes, they should have done there
duties then also: as he that serves God in a single life, may hope to serve
him also in marriage: he that does it in one estate, may hope to do it in an
other. But they that ignorantly dream, that if this were not their estate, let
befall then what will, they hope to do well enough, or let this cross be
removed, and let any other be laid upon them, and they will bear it, and let
their estate be but any ways changed, and they will endure it: they shall find
it far otherwise by experience, even as this people, who not using well their
own condition, when they were fed with Man, after when the Lord gave them
not common meat but quails, they were ten times worse then they were before.

The devil does not here leave them, but draws them on further, and they
following the corruption of their own hearts do not here stay, but being once
persuaded, contrary to all reason, that to be fed with onions were better
for them then with Man, do as men void of all reason, so unsatiably desire
them, like unto bruit beasts, as they will not be quieted, till they have
their greedy desires satisfied: for they say their soul is dried away, verse.
6. As indeed this is the nature of any immoderate affection, that it works
upon the body to the hurting and consuming of it, especially a lingering and
unreasonable desire. So that there fault was not only in that they desired
that which they should not, but most of all, that they had no government of
their affections to stay them, but did let them range so inordinately. But here
if we demand, whether it be simply unlawful for a man to desire any thing
that he wants, and to wish that his estate were bettered; or whether he must
always remain in one estate: I answer, it is lawful for us to desire and
pray for as many things as we want, and God has promised, but in that manner
that he has promised them. Therefore whereas he has first of all promised us
the forgiveness of our sins, his favor and everlasting life, and these be the
greatest things in the world, we may, nay we ought to desire our own
salvation, and all the means of it, both first of all, and with the greatest
desire that may be; and here we need not to fear any excess. For we must
hunger and thirst after the righteousness of Christ Jesus, Matt. 5. 6. and as
new borne babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, even so earnestly as
they do desire their mothers milk, 1. Pet. 2. 2. We must desire the public
assemblies of Gods people, even as the heart desires the water brooks, in the
heat of summer, when he is chased, Psalm. 42. 1. And we must long to be present
at Gods service, even to our fainting, which is the property of longing, Psalm.
84. 2. And it were a sin not to have these great affections in us unto them.
But all outward things as they be promised unto us, even as they shall further
us in these things, and make us more fit to glorify Gods holy name; and in the
second place, so we must desire them, but to these ends especially, and all
our affections unto them must be in a second degree, neither above nor equal
with the former. Therefore first of all, we must desire them as it is the will
of God to bestow upon us, and as he in his wisdom does better know then our
selves, what will make us most fit to serve him: which will of his is first
revealed unto us in his word, in that the things be honest and lawful in
their own nature, in so much that we may never desire any unlawful thing, for
it is not his will to give us that: Secondly in all outward things that be
lawful (for we speak of them) I shall know whether it be the will of God to
bestow this upon me or no, or whether as it is good in it own nature, so he
sees it to be good for me now by the ordinary means he gives me to bring it
to pass, and by blessing of the means: for ordinarily he works by means, in
so much that if I desire a thing, and he deny me all means to compass it, or
makes not the means to prosper with me, then I am assured it is not the will
and pleasure of almighty God to bestow it upon me, yet it is not the time,
this is not the place or means whereby he will bestow it upon me: here I must
stay my desire, but when I see the Lord both to offer and bless the means,
whereby I conclude it his will, that it should be so, or whilst I see it, and
so am in no doubt of it, I must take heed that my desire or my affection unto
it be not over great, and that I be not like the people in consuming and pining
away with the desire of it: and as Ahab and Ammon were sick of their unlawful
desires, we must take heed of these unlawful desires so much the more
carefully, because they always bring with them the abuse of the things we
desire. For as the people did inordinately desire any food save Man, so when
they had it, they glutted themselves therewith, as Psalm. 78. 29. So they did
eat, and were filled, for he gave the^ their desire, they were not turned from
their lust, but the meat was yet in their mouths, when the wrath of God came
upon them: Where he notes their behavior, that they did not only eat, but
stuffed themselves till they were full, and they satisfied their lust and like
bruit beasts, as their perswation of the things was unreasonable, so their
affection to them was intemperate, and the use of them unlawful. And this must
needs follow it, for besides that our own affections, if they be not ruled by
Gods spirit, are headie and strong, and ready to blind our understanding, it
is the just judgment of God upon us in punishing our unlawful desires, to
suffer us to fall into the abuse of the things. Therefore as we must always
desire the things here below but in that measure that we should, so we must
pray unto God that together with them he would teach us the right use of them;
and we must not imagine that if we had them, we should be happy and blessed,
but pray the Lord that we may have the^ with his favor and blessing, and that
by abusing of them we never offend his majesty. This we find to be true in
all the commodities of this life by experience; he that ambitiously seeks
honor, is proud when he has it, and knows not how to use it: the covetous
man as he cares not how he comes by his riches, so he cannot tell how to spend
them the voluptuous man, as his desire is insatiable, so in his pleasure he
observes no circumstances of time, place, person, or end, but only satisfies
his lust. Therefore though to have these outward benefits be a singular
blessing of God, yet rightly to use them is a special grace proper to his
children that ask it of him.

And the abuse of things is so much the more carefully to be looked unto,
because the Lord though he satisfied their vnsasaiable desire to the full, Number.
11. 19, 20. yet for all that, and for the abuse that followed upon it, he sent
a most grievous plague among them, v. 33. And in deed these two as they be
most usually joined together, so the Lord does many ways punish them: for as
concerning our inordinate desires, even that is the thing many times that
hinders us from obtaining the desires: for though in all heavenly things the
more earnestly we desire the^, the sooner we have the^, yet in earthly things
this only hinders us from the^, or at least wise causes the^ to be deferred,
that we have the^ not so soon as otherwise we might: whereby the Lord
corrects our desires, and teaches us more earnestly to desire heavenly
things: or else if the Lord do give us the things that we thus desire, together
with it he sends some grievous affliction, as upon this people here. And
afterward the same people, when they would needs have a King, and could not
be dissuaded to the contrary, the Lord gave them one in his wrath, but it was
a cruel Saul. And there is great reason of this in all things: for besides
that the desire it self is worthy to be punished, unreasonable desires many
times do make us to use unlawful means to have them satisfied, both which
when they be joined with the abuse of the thing, must needs provoke the Lord
so much the more grievously against us.

The chiefest cause of all this, was their incredulity, Psalm. 78. 22. they did
not believe that the Lord had a fatherly care of them, and sought in all things
to do them good, even as he knew what was commodious for them: which was so
much the greater a sin in them, by how much the Lord had so many ways
testified his great love to them, not only by his word, but by his works, v.
23. where he begins to reckon up so many benefits of his bestowed upon them.
Therefore that we might avoid all these sins, we must labor first of all to
believe the forgiveness of our sins by Christ Jesus, and that we are received
into Gods favor by the imputation of his righteousness: then we must be
persuaded of his fatherly providence watching over us for good, and that he
having given his son Christ Jesus unto us, will with him give us all things
needful for us, and that there being a kingdom provided for us in heaven,
much more are we heirs of this world: which faith that we might be
confirmed and strengthened in, we must not only barely acquaint our selves
with the promises of the word, wherein he testified and showed all these
things unto us, but also mark his fatherly dealing with us from time to time,
wherein he has confirmed the truth of these promises unto us.

Moreover, concerning this matter, this is an especial means to bring us to a
contented mind, if in worldly things we never propound too high an estate to
our selves, neither look for great matters of this life, but set a mean
condition before our eyes as Jacob did, Genesis chap. 28. 20. If God will be with
me, and keep me in this journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and clothes to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in safety,
etc. with words proceeding from the truth of his heart, not purposing to
dissemble with God, did declare a marvelous contented mind, if we consider who
it was that spoke it. First of all, the graundchilde of that mighty Abraham,
who was able to reske we his kinsman Lot with three hundred and eighteen
soldiers borne and brought up in his house, Genesis chap. 14. verse. 14. and who
was so rich, that the land in which he soiourned was not able to bear them,
cap. 13. 6. Then he was the only heir of that rich Isaak, who dwelling in
Gerar, sowed and found by estimation an hundred fold, and was exceeding rich,
cap. 26. 12, 13. and was so blessed, that the king of the land was afraid of
him, v. 28. Thirdly it was he, who was so blessed in all earthly and heavenly
things by his father in the chap. going before, and was confirmed in the same
again in this very chap. v. 1. 3. and last of all, was established in the
faith of it by the Lord himself, v. 17. After all so many and great things,
which might have made him look a loft, what a mind had he that desires (...)
meat and drink, and clothes? especially in so long a time of absence from his
friends, for he knew well the cause of his own departure, even the cruel rage
of his brother, which could not be appeased, but in a long time. And this is so
much the more worthy to be considered, if we read the text, as some of the
learned translatours do, namely when the Lord shall have been with me, and
shall have kept me in this way, by the which I am to go, and shall have given
me bread to eat, and clothes to put on: and to be short, when the Lord shall
have bin my God, then this heap of stones, which I have set up for a pillar,
shall be Gods house, etc. wherein as he does not tie Gods favor to the
abundance of these outward things, but confesses that he may be merciful
unto him, yea in a mean estate, so this mercy of God he desiring above all,
is contented that the Lord should show it unto him which way it pleases him,
if it be but in meat and drink, and clothes. So our Savior Christ has
taught us to pray for our daily bread, by which though he mean all things
needful for this life, yet in naming bread, he shows us what mean things
we should look for: whereunto agrees the prayer of the wise man Proverb. 30.
9. Give me not poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me: and
the exhortation of the Apostle, 1. Timoth. 6. 8. When we have food and
raiment, let us be contented therewith: which that we might so much the more
earnestly labor to attain unto, let us consider how God has alvvaies blessed
them, that have looked for small matters, and punished them that have had
aspiring minds, resisting the proud, and giving grace to the humble. David
when he was accused of treason against the king, truly protests of himself
Psalm 131. Lord, mine heart is not havvtie, neither are mine eyes lofty,
neither have I walked in great matters, which are to high for me. And when Saul
in policy offered his daughter unto him to be his wife, that by that means
he might be destroyed of the Philistines, he answered, What am I, that I
should be son in law to the king? 1. Sam. 18. 18. and when it was further
urged upon him, he said, Seems it a small thing unto you to be the kings son
in law? v. 23. yet afterward God made him King. But Adoniah and Absolon both
of them afterward aspiring unto the kingdom, by the punishments which God
brought upon the^, were made spectacles of so great ambition to the posterity.
Mordecai in time of the captivity having well deserved of the king, Hest. 2.
22. sought not ambitiously to prefer himself, but serving still faithfully
in his former estate was highly advanced at the last cap. 6. Contrariwise Haman
swelling with pride like a toade, as it appears in many places of that story,
was at the last brought to that great shame and confusion, which deservedly
fell upon him. And that we might in all persons consider the truth of this we
shall find that if they have no other punishment of God upon them, yet they
have this, which is no small one, restles minds and unquiet spirits. For
besides that, the mind of man is insatiable, and there is no worldly thing so
great, but man's desire is greater, and therefore when he has this and that,
still he desires more, and is not satisfied: we must remember that great things
are very rare, and hard to be attained unto* and therefore we like to miss of
them: and so the mind must needs still be unquiet. So the other, if they have
no other blessing yet they shall have this, quiet spirits, and contented minds,
which is an especial grace: For besides that, small and mean things are
especially promised of God, and are most common in the world, and therefore
most like to be attained unto, and so the desire soonest satisfied: the
blessing of God also is upon such, which quieteth their minds, and is unto
them in stead of all things which they want.

Last of all concerning this matter, when we have through the blessing of God
attained unto great things, we must make this account of them, that there is no
certentie in them, for we may loose them all in a moment. Jacob had experience
of this, Genesis 32. 7, who being commanded of God to return into his cuntry, and
was in the way confirmed in the providence of God over himself in that journey,
ver. 1. and came laden homewards with so great abundance, as is noted in that
chap. understands of the sudden, contrary to his expectation, that Esau
comes against him with 400. men, who remembering his former threatenings when
he departed from him, and now considering his great power and manner of coming
toward him, is suddenly stricken into a great fear of loosing his life and all that he had: and though it pleased the Lord to deal more mercifully with him,
yet by the providence of God he greatly feared it, by which he was taught, not
to place his chiefest co^tentation in this great abundance, but in the favor
of God, which before he most of all desired: which, as he inioyed when he had
none of all these things, so it might continue with him when all they should be
lost. Therefore we must not say, Oh if I had this or that, etc. I should be
well, and then I would be contented: for what if I had it? how soon may I
loose it again? then how quickly shall I be discontented? Therefore are they
called uncerten riches. 1. Tim. 6. which is true of all worldly commodities and
pleasures. And the whole scripture, besides daily experience teaches, how
great uncertentie there is in the inioying of husband, wife, children, parents,
friends, goods, houses, lands, liberty, life, or any thing else: only the
favor of God in Christ Jesus is certain, and his promises of the forgiveness
of sins and everlasting life are irrevocable: for as all of them be Yea and
Amen in Christ Jesus, so he is to day and yesterday, and the same for ever:
therefore if in all times and estates, we would be well contented, we must only
make a certain account of that: so that whether we enjoy any thing, we must more
account of the favor of God appearing unto us in it, then of the thing it
self: or whether the Lord deny us the thing we desire, it must be sufficient
unto us, that he has received us into his favor, or whether he takes the
thing away from us again, yet this contenteth us, that he turns not his
loving countenance from us: which if we could come unto, then no doubt many
times we should enjoy things longer then we do: for this is the next way to
keep all things still, so to hold them, as being contented to give them to the
Lord, whenever it shall please him to take them from us. Besides it makes
the mind contented whether we have them, or we have them not, when we always
esteem them but as things uncerten.

Nicholas Bownde.

FINIS.
WHOSOEVER IS DESIROVS TO LEARN AND REMEMBER THE word of God that he might
live according to it, let him consider that which is written in the Psalm 119.
part. 2.
THE TEXT.

THE PARAPHRASIS.

1 Wherewith shall a young man cleanse bis ways? In taking heed thereto
according to thy word.

2 With my whole heart have I sought thee, let me not wander from thy
commandments.

3 I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.

4 Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

5 With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

6 I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches.

7 I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.

8 I will delight in thy statutes; and I will not forget thy word.

1 First of all be persuaded, that the word of God is only that rule, whereby
the whole life of every man, and that in every thing must be ordered, even the
life of a young man, who has most reasons for him self, why he should be
excused, as he is most disordered.

2 Then upon this persuasion give your self unfainedly to the reading and
hearing of Gods word, as to the means which God has appointed to teach you:
and pray to God in the careful use of those means for his holy spirit, that
thereby you might come to the true understanding of his word.

3 That which you have thus learned, let it not swim aloft in your brain, but
let it be deeply settled and hidden in your heart as a treasure, laboring to
frame al your affections unto it, that so you may have it in a readiness,
whenever you shall occupy it, otherwise though you know never so much it
will not keep you from sinning against God.

4 You thus profiting give thanks unto god always for that which you learn,
because be it never so little, it is more then many in the world do know, yet
content not your self with it, as though you had sufficient, but pray unto him
to be further enlightened, because it is less then many others do, and you
your self should know.

5 But above all be careful to talk of that unto others, which you do daily
learn your self, and out of the abundance of your heart let your mouth
speak, for by teaching others you shall learn your self.

6 That you might do all these things, labor to have joy in the word, and in
all the exercises of it, more then in any worldly thing, and be occupied about
those things with greatest delight: for in whatsoever we take greatest
pleasure, that will stick fastest by us.

7 Last of all, meditate and consider of that with your self, which you have
learned, and muse upon it alone, not contenting your self with the general
rules, but laboring in your conscience to make the use of them profitable to
your own self in the particular practice thereof.

8 Thus doing all these things carefully, you shall be sure never to forget that
which you learn: though you do not remember every thing, yet God will by his
spirit call so much into your remembrance as is needful for you to know, and
then especially when you have most need of it, as in the hour of your death,
and the day of temptation: but as you fail in all, or any one of these, so may
you fear to fail in the truth of this promise.



A good help for an ill memory. N. B.


