Orders made and set down by the Justices of peace, at the general Sessions
of the peace, holden at Oxford the xith of January 1613. and in the xith year
of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James of England etc.
1 IT is ordered that no Badger shall buy any Corn in any Market without
showing his License first to the chief officer of the same town, and none to
buy but in open market nor any greater proportion then such officer shall allow
of, or a Justice of peace of the devision next adjoining.

2 That they buy no manner of grain but with their own stocks, and that they
do afford of the same Corn weekly to the use of the poor of the same town
such a proportion as the said officer shall appoint vjd in a bushel better
cheap then the said Badger bona fide paid for the same.

3 That the Justices of peace of every devision do cause a view to be taken of
every man's store of Corn and Grain, both Justices as others as well in their
barnes as elsewhere, and upon such view taken to apportion weekly so much
thereof, as shall be carried to the Markets to be sold, and where, and no more
Barley to be converted into Malt then shall be likewise by them appointed.

4 That all Licenses shall be revoked at the pleasure of any two Justices of
peace of the said County.

5 That none shall make any Malt but a householder and that in his own house,
and in one house only, and that none until the next general Sessions do make
Malt, but such as have no other trade or means to live by, saving for the
provision of himself and his family only.

6 That no Alsehouse keeper sell Ale or Beer above a penie the Ale quart the
best, and two quarts a penie the smallest.

7 That all Constables of hundreds, and all under constables within this
County shall give a true note of the names of all Alehouse keepers, as well
licensed as unlicensed, within their several hundreds and liberties at the
next quarter Sessions, that the Justices of peace may then take order for
allowance of such as shall be thought fit, and for suppressing of others.

8 That warning be given to all the vnderconst: that every one within his
several parish, or limit, do take heed that no Cottage be newly builded, but
that every Constable when he shall see any stuff, as stone, claye, or timber,
provided by any inhabiting within his parish, minded to build a Cottage, shall
speedily give notice thereof unto the Justices of peace for that limit, that
the said Justice of peace may take present order for the suppressing thereof.
And because the penalties of Inmates by the law are due unto the Lord of every
Leet, it is therefore ordered that every Lord of such leete that shall suffer
any Inmate to come into his Manor there to inhabit contrary to the law,
shall free and discharge the parish of any charge that may happen unto it by
reason of such Inmates.

9 That a sufficient watch as well by day as by night, be duly kept through
this whole County for the apprehension of Rogues and Vagabonds, and that the
high Constables do within their several hundreds, not only give order for the
observation hereof to the petty Constables within the same, but also that they
the said high Constables do with all care and diligence inform themselves of
all such persons as they shall find remiss herein, and to make presentment
monthly unto us his Highness Justices of the peace, as well of all such officers
as shall neglect the punishment of such Rogues and Vagabonds, as of such as
shall give alms unto any of them, assuring them that as well the one as the
other found faltie herein, shall truly pay the several penalties in the late
Statute mentioned concerning the same. And further, we the said Justices do
agree to take information of these things within our several divisions once in
every month,

10 That every Towneship or Village through which any Rogue shall pass
unpunished shall be charged with keeping the said Rogue, until they can
provide for the keeping of such a Rogue at the place of his or her birth or
last dwelling for the space of one whole year.

11 That the Constable of every hundred shall appoint a watch to be kept at
such place and places within their hundreds, where any Feast or Wake is to be
kept in manner following, viz. the night before the Feast or Wake day, the
whole Wake day and the next night following, as well for the keeping forth of
such disordred people as shall come to the said Wake, as for the apprehension of
them when they be there, and bringing them to the Justice of peace next
adjoining, and to see there be no gaming used there, and that the Constables
do present at whose houses such disordered persons do resort.

12 That in every hundred within this County there shall be overseers
appointed by the Justices of peace within their several divisions, to have due
regard to see these orders to be put in execution accordingly, and for their
pains, they shall have the third part of all the penalties which shall arise
by the breaking of any these orders, and the other two parts to be to the poor
of the several parishes where any such offenses are committed.

13 Provided always that the Justices of peace in their several divisions or
the mayor part of them shall have power to alter or change any of these
Articles as they shall see cause.


