THE MAGISTRATES CHARTER EXAMINED, OR His Duty and Dignity opened. IN A Sermon
Preached at an Assizes, held at Sarum in the County of Wiltes, on the ninth day
of March, last past, 1614.

By BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS Batchelour in Divinity, and Vicar of Collingborne
Kingstone in the Diocese of Sarum.

JOHN. 10.35. He called them Gods unto whom the Word of God came, and the
Scripture cannot be broken.

Et veniam pro laud peto, laudatus abunde,
Non fastiditus si tibi lector ero.
For praise thy pardon, Reader, I do crave,
Praised enough, if no disdain I have.
LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Fox. 1616.

TO THE HONORABLE AND REVEREND IVDGES, Sir HENRY HOBART, Knight Baronet, Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; And Sir LAVRENCE TANFIELD Knight, Lord
chief Baron of the Exchequer.
Honorable and chief Fathers,
WHEN the Gentiles besought, that those words of Exhortation, which Paul had
spoken on a Sabbath day, in the Synagogue of the Jews, at Antiochia in
Pisidia, might be also Preached to them the next Sabbath Act. 13.41.42
, that voice of the people of God (in whom Christ Jesus was now beginning to
be formed) seemed to him and Barnabas, to be (as it was indeed) the voice of
God himself; and they gathered assuredly thereby (as Paul elsewhere, by the
vision of the man of Macedonia appearing to him, and praying him to come and
help them Acts 16.10.
that the Lord had called them to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles also, and
that they (...) to them. In like sort having according to my to take measure,
and in much infirmity of the flesh, Preached by voice, this silly Sermon at an
Assizes, where your Honors were present and President: The frequent motions,
and vehement persuasions of many, both of my brethren in the work of the
Ministry, and of the household of faith, are to me a sufficient warrant, yea a
divine Calling, to Preach it again by Writing, and thereby to help forward
the building of the Body of Christ. For Ambo praedicant, hic quidem scripto
ille voce Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. Stromat.
, both of them Preach, one by Writing, the other by Voice: And again there,
praedicandi scientia, etc. the skill of Preaching helps either way, whether
it work by the hand, or by the tongue.

Since then I have resolved, not to let it perish in the Air, and Hour,
wherein it was uttered, but to give it a little longer life by the Press, and
to thrust it abroad naked and unfeathered, as it is, into the world; it being
imboldened in the general, by the undoubted soundness in Religion, fervent
zeal to the truth, resolute detestation of Popery, and gracious respect both
of the causes and persons of Ministers in this unhappy age, wherein the Tribe
of Leui is so little respected: and in special, by your diligent attention
when it was spoken, and favorable approbation afterward, presumes to press
once again into your presence, and become a Petitioner in forma pauperis, for
your honorable protection. And because it would not seem, sine ratione one
(...) the Realm, to plead for it self, (...) in this case, that, seeing it
was first prameditated and uttered especially to you, and for you (as being the
highest Scholars in that Form, whereof it was bold in the Lord to be an
Instructor) it should be protected by you, being yours in the first publication
by speaking, it should not be made any others in the second, and more solemn
diuulgation by writing. In the soundness of which plea it is so confident,
that it assures it self, that if a Jury were called in the cause, it would
bring in a verdict for it. Now although it speak not with authority Math. 7.29.
, in such sort as never any man spoke John 7.46.
, (that is the glory of a Master, and cannot be given to the servant) nay,
although coming from him that is minimus Apostolorum, the least of the
Apostles, it be not with Apollos, eloquent, mighty in the Scriptures, fervent
in the Spirit Act. 18.25.
, with James and John, a Boanerges, a son of Thunder Mar. 3.16.17
, to terrify the adversaries, and to cast down strong Holds, with Barnabas a
son of consolation Acts 2.36.
, to minister a word to the afflicted in due season, nor can with the Wise Men,
present great gifts to Christ Math. 2.11.
, with Paul speak wisdom amongst the perfect 1. Cor. 2.6
: but rather with Moses is of a slow tongue and speech Exodus 4.10.
, with Jeremy, unable to speak Ier. 1.6.
in the Language of Canaan, through ignorance of heavenly things, with Paul,
not only rude in speech 2. Cor. 11.6.
, (as he in a modest persuasion and profession, acknowledges himself) but
also in knowledge; with Zachaeus, scarcely of stature to see Jesus (...) Mary,
must lay him in a Maunger for want of better room Luke 2.7.
; yet it rests in hope that the earthly Gods before whom it stands, will
be followers of the most High God possessor of heaven and earth, be merciful
as he is merciful, in accepting according to that a man has, and not
according to that a man has not 2. Cor. 8.12.
. Which acceptance, if it may find, like a bold beggar, that is gnauiter
impudens, lustily impudent, it has one suite more to tender unto your
Lordships, which is this; It is totus in hoc, spends its best strength and
meditations to give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, to show and set
out, both the dignity and duty of Caesar, and of them that are sent of him: And
it humbly beseeches your Honors, in visceribus Jesus Christi, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, for a retaliation, even to give unto God those things that are
Gods. Now Saint Austin expounding those words says, Caesari census, Decimae
Deo August. Tom. 10. Homil. 48.
, Tribute to Caesar, Tithes to GOD. And the suites of Churchmen before the
Tribunals, are as crying voices, to tell you how Gods Coin is not only
clipped round by injurious Prescriptions and Customs, (of which we may justly
say, Ecclesiae Dei non debent habere talem consuerudinem, the Churches of God
should have no such custom) but also false stamped by the counterfeiting Mint
of Impropriations, and given from him, and them, to whom he has given it, the
sons of Leui, to such Tobiahs as from the beginning had no right to be
chambered in the Courts of the house of God Neh. 13.5.
: And the tooth of this sacrilege has bitten so deep, that we are worse
dealt withal in the division of Church goods, then the false mother would have
done in dividing of the child between her and the true mother 1. King. 3.26.
; for she would have been content with one half for her pretended right: but
our Impropriators being insatiable as the grave, have devoured like the
Caterpillars of Egypt, every green thing Exodus, 10.15.
, and like Saul, have gotten to themselves the best of the Sheep, and of the
Oxen, and of the Fatlings, and of the Lambs, and all whatsoever is good 1.
Sam. 15.9.
, and have left unto us nothing but that which is torn and lame, and sick,
not worth the taking up in the streets Mal. 1.13.
, and as in the shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three berries in the top of
the uppermost boughs Esaias 17.6.
. Yea in many places is to be found nothing so good allowance, as Michaes
wages to the Leuite, that should be a Father and Priest to him, ten shekels of
silver, double apparel, and victuals Judge. 17.10.
; nothing so much of our own, as the Shunamite, out of her liberality,
provided for the Prophet Elisha, a Chamber, a Bed, a Table, a Stool, and a
Candlestick 2. King. 4.10.
. Thus has the Church fallen into the hands of ill advised Phytisians, who by
letting her blood, as though she had been too plethoricke and full, have
brought her into the other extreme, even into a Consumption. Howbeit this
evil, though pernicious, is not so deadly, but that a Kings touch might cure
it, and good Nehemiahs under him, might restituere in quem nos collocauit Deus,
locum, (...) original right, might both contend and (...) the tithes should
be paid to the proper owners, and not to the improper Alienators Nehem. 13.
: There is Balm enough in Gilead yet, to cure this disease Ier. 8.22.
; And for our part, we are not like to Babylon that would not be healed when
it might Ier. 51.9.
, we would be healed if we might; And Prima pars sanitatis est, velle
sanari, says Seneca, it is the first point in healing, to be willing to be
healed. Do then ( Honorable Judges) your service to Sion, if not in taking
away these yoakes from her shoulders presently, yet, at least in making her
burden as light as may be, and stopping the stream of these violent
Customs, till God arise to have mercy upon her, and to restore her as at the
first: And with good Nehemiah Nehem. 2.3.
, use that authority and grace, which the good hand of our God being upon you,
has given you with our Artaxerxes, to procure and obtain, letters and
decrees, for the repairing of the ruins of the house of God: And assuredly,
that God, before whom a cup of cold water, given to a Prophet, in the name of a
Prophet, shall not pass unregarded, or unrewarded; will not wipe out the good
deeds that you do for the house of God, and the offices thereof Neh. 13.14.
, but remember you for your good, send you help out of his Sanctuary, bless
you out of Sion, and visit you with the felicity of his chosen. But a
indicious Father has said, Negotiosissimum in republica virum non debemus --
occupare proaemio August. Epist. 54.
, we ought not to hold men of greatest employments in the commonwealth with
too long prefaces. I end therefore humbly craving pardon of your Honors for my
boldness, and heartily praying the father of lights, from whom every good gift
comes, to give his judgments and his righteousness unto you, that you may
so judge his people with righteousness, and his poor with judgment, that
after you have served the will of God in judging these small and inferior
things, you may sit with Christ in his throne, to judge the wicked world, and
the evil Angels, in that day wherein all must appear before his tribunal, to
receive according to that which they have done.

Your Honors in all Christian service, BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS.

The Magistrates Charter examined.
PSALM. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods.


WHEN Paul and Barnabas, not by their own power and holiness, but in the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth Act. 3.6.12.
, (as Beter and John profess in a case of the same nature) had cured a man at
Lystra, that was so creeple from his mothers womb, the common multitude seeing
the works of God (for so our Savior calls his Miracles, the works of his
Father Ioh. ^^.57.
, and even the Magi^ians of Pharaoh could find the finger of God Exodus 18.19.
, in the miracles that Moses wrought) done by those that were found in the
shape of men, cried out in the error of their judgment, that Gods were come
down to them in the likeness of men Acts 14.11.
, and were ready to have given Gods glory to them, if their temeritie had not
been stopped by the others piety. But when God the judge of the whole earth
Genesis 18.25
speaks the word to the sons of men to exercise his judgments, (for the
judgment is not man's but Gods, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
not for man, but for the Lord 2. Chro. 19.6.
) by his own voice in this Scripture, which cannot be broken, (for his honor
is in particular given to this text Ioh. 10.35.
) as by an vnreuocable Patent, he which calls those things which be not, as
though they were Romans 4.17.
, (for quaedam in scripturis dicuntur, and non sunt) Greg. Naz. lib 5. de
Theologia.
styles them which must do his work, and be his vicarij administrando,
Vicars in governing Iunius in versum 1. huius Psalmi.
, by his own name, Gods, that they bearing his image and superscription (as it
were) might be answerable to their Prototypon, be found followers of God in
judging uprightly; and that all al at are subject to their tribunals, might
both acknowledge and reverence that Divine (...), by which they are set in
their sears.

Now these words, howsoever in the course of, and coherence of the Psalm, they
are uttered and used not only (...) by way of grant, but also and much more
(...), by way of reproof Iunius lib. 1* (...)
, opprobande gratia for to vpbraid them Mus^utus in (...)
, and to prepare the way for the following commination, Ye shall die like men,
yet (to speak in the usual language of this present time) they are in
themselves a Patent, a Charter for the giving and granting of an high honor
and office, wherein are obuious to our consideration,

1. The Granter, (I) speaking in his Patent, as a Iacobus dei gratia, etc.
sc^atis nos, etc.

Secondly, the Grantees (Ye.)

Thirdly, the honor and office given and granted (are Gods.)

Fourthly, the confirmation and testification hereof (I have said) being as a
test meipso: or an In cuius rei testimonium has literas fieri fecimus
patentes. If any will seek a knot in a rush, and plead that there is no
consideration here expressed. Why, on the Grantees part it cannot. Who has
first given unto God Romans 11.35.
? On the Granters part, it is ex speciali gratia, what has any man that he
has not received 1. Cor. 4.7.
? received by way of gift, not purchased by way of bargain and sale. Secondly,
that there is no time limited; why, it is altogether ad voluntatem domini, he
puts down the mighty from their seat Luke 1.52.
, he remoueth kings and sets up kings Dan. 2.21.
, he takes their glory from them Dan. 5.20.
, and none can say unto him, what do thou Dan. 4.35.
? Behold then, the highest honor, the weightiest office one of them that flesh
and blond can be capable of passed here in a brief, yet a full; in a short,
yet a substantial Charter, I have said ye are Gods. Let us then scan these in
their order, and see what cases may be argued out of them, what consectaries
may be deduced from them.

To begin first with the Granter, with whom every well drawn Charter first
begins: The Psalmist speaking in the name of God, in matorem rei fidem and
certitudinem, brings in the person of God to speak his own words, I have.]
For this (I) is that God that stands in the congregation of the mighty, that
judges amongst the Gods Verse 1.
, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords 1. Tim. 6.15.
. The granter then is the most high, who rules in the Kingdoms of men, and
gives them to whomsoever he will Dan. 4.25.
by whom Kings reign, Princes rule, and nobles and all the judges of the earth
Pro. 8.15.16.
, and who establishes Kings in the throne for ever Job. 36.7.
. This first clause then will afford us this ruled case in the law of God,
That all Magistracy and civil power on earth has his original and authority
immediately from the most high, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and
whose kingdom is from generation to generation Dan. 4.34.
: there is no power but of God Romans 13.1.
, no power, whether we distinguish them with Paul into Kings, the supreme
Magistrates, and them that are in authority, their substitutes and deputies 1.
Tim. 2.2.
: or with Peter, into Kings as supreme, and governors as them that are sent by
them 1. Pet. 2.13.
; but their tenure is in Capite, from the most high, God possessor of beauen
and earth Genesis 14.19.
. And that the wisdom of the spirit of God might the better meet with the
folly of the phanaticall spirit of an Anabaptist, which says, Potestates sic a
deo, etc Pareus in Romans 13.
that powers are so of God, as plagues, diseases and punishments are of God: it
explaineth it self, and expresses further how powers are of God, not as his
rods and judgments, but as his sacred ordinance: and the powers that be are
ordained of God Romans 13.1.
, wherein explicat quomodo dixerit, etc. Pareus ibidem
he declaclareth how he has said, that all powers are of God, not certainly
as plagues, diseases, wars, and other mischiefs are sent of God, but as a
wholesome order, which ordinarily may supply the stead, and represent the
person of God in governing of all men good and evil; whereupon the powers are
not only called by God the ministers of God, but also Gods, which by no means
can be spoken of Gods scourges. Neither does the spirit of truth, which led the
Apostles into all truth, loqui pugnantia speak contrarieties in the mouth of
Peter, when it calls the Magistrate an humane ordinance or creature 1. Pet.
2.13.
, for it is not in regard of the Author, as if it were devised by man, humanam
ordinationem seu creationem vocat Apostolus Magistratu^ non causaliter, etc.
Pareus in Romans 13.
The Apostle calls the magistracy an humane ordinance or creature, not in
regard of the cause, as though it were devised by men; but in regard of the
subject, because it is borne by men, and in regard of the object, because it
respects the government of humane society: and in regard of the end, because
it is ordained of God for man's good. And the naming of it (...) there,
creature, or creation, shows that Magistracy is Gods work, ordinance, who
can only create. Impossible est quod alicui creaturae conueniat creare, says
Thomas Aquinas in another case. Thomas part. 1. quaest. 45. artic. 3.
It is impossible that power to create should be given to any creature.
Therefore Antiquity makes them to reign only by him, by whom they live.
Cuius iussu homines nascuntur, eius and iussu reges constituuntur Irenaeus lib.
5. aduersus haeres.
, says Irenaeus, by whose appointment men are borne, by his appointment kings
are ordained. Inde illis potestas, vnde spiritus, Ter tul. in Aologet.
says Tertullian o, thence have they their power whence they have their
breath. And although corrupt intruding into the Magistracy be not of God, (as
of Ieroboams getting the kingdom of Israel by his own and the peoples
rebellion against their lawful king Rehoboam, God himself says, They have
set up kings, but not by me Hos. 8 4.
) Although the wicked administration of rulers and governors, who turn
judgment into worme-wood, oppress the innocent, defile their streets with
innocent blood 2 King. 21.16
, and deliver the holy and just to be put to death (as Pilate did our Savior
Acts. 3.14.
) come not down from the father of lights, (for what fellowship shall the
throne of iniquity which frames mischief by a law, have with him Psalm. 94.20.
?) but is of the corrupt will of man, and of the Devil, from whom all
committing of finne is 1. Ioh. 3.8.
, (as our Savior calls the coming of the high priests, the captains of the
Temple, and the Elders to apprehend him, the power of darkness Luke 22.53.
) yet the office and power it self, distinguished and set apart from the abuse
of the persons, is given from above, as in the same case our Savior tells
Pilate, that he could have no power at all against him, except it were given
him from above Ioh. 19.10.
. Deus ille foelicitatis author and dator, etc. (says Saint Augustine August.
lib. 4. de ciuit* dei. cap. 33.
) God that is both the author and giver of happiness, because he is the only
true God, gives earthly kingdoms both to good and evil men. Potestas super
omnes homines dominorum meorum pietati coelitus data est, says Gregory Greg.
lib. 2. cap. 100. indict. 11.
writing to Mauritius the Emperor, and Augusta the Empress, Power over all
men is given from heaven to my good Lord and Lady. And these Magistrates with
whom God has to deal here, abused their office in an high degree, as their
sharp reprehension shows; How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the
persons of the wicked Verse. 2.
. yet their power was from him, who has all power in heaven and earth, their
Tenure by his Charter upon his own confession here, I have said. Videmus hic
(says Musculus Muscul. in Psalm. 82.
) etc. We see here that there is no Magistrate which is not of the will and
word of God, neither can they that are wicked be excepted: for first of all he
speaks here not of godly, but of ungodly Magistrates. Again, when he says,
all you, he manifestly includes them all, that none can be exempted. If any
one shall ask me here, Quis negat? Who denies this? as he that praised
Hercules was asked, quis vituperauit? I could wish from my heart that there
were no such root of bitterness to be found, no tongue heard to speak against
the Gods of the earth in this their right. But as Paul said in another case,
There are many adversaries 1. Cor. 16.9.
. Cardinal Bellarmine so minceth the matter, that a man may easily see it is
his meaning to bring the Magistrates neck under the Popes, or the peoples
girdle, to make their crowns at the command of either, or both. Politica
potestas (says he Bellar. de Laicis cap. 6.
) the civil power being considered in the general without descending in
particular to Monarchy, Aristocracie, etc. is immediately from God only.
Secondly, this power is immediately in the whole multitude, as in the subject.
Thirdly, every particular kind of government is of the law of Nations, for it
depends on the consent of the multitude to set a king over them. Again, his
distinction between Kingdoms and the Popedom is, Regna non sunt, etc.
kingdoms are not of the law of God, but of the law of nations, and therefore
are changeable; but the Popedom is of the law of God, and cannot be changed
Bellar. de Clericis, cap. 28.
. All which positions put together, open the door for other doctrines of the
same Cardinal, which make civil Magistrates, even Kings the supreme 1. Pet.
2.13.
Homagers both to people and Pope, and give them both power to pull off their
crowns, and cast them out of their Thrones, which yet are not theirs, but
Gods, held from him, as Solomon is said to sit on the Lords Throne 1. Chr.
29.23.
. For the peoples power herein, Non licet (says he Bellar. lib. 5. de sum.
Pontif. cap. 7.
) it is not lawful for Christians to tolerate a king that is an Infidel.
Again, Christians are not bound, nay they ought not to tolerate an infidel
King with evident danger of religion. We see then, that the civil power, which
is immediately in the people, and but in the Magistrate precario, by courtesy
from them, may, nay must be taken from Kings by the people in case of
infidelity and heresy. For the Popes power herein, Papa potest, etc. The Pope
may change kingdoms, and take them from one, and bestow them upon another, as
the chief spiritual Prince, if it be needful for souls health Bellarm. lib.
5. de sum. Pontif. cap. 6.
. Which power at least if it may stand but current, it shall be hard if this
great Physician of their souls do not find some distemper in them, for which
the blood royal must be let out: But spectate importunitatem beluae, see the
unreasonableness of the beast, because the Cardinal denied this power to the
Pope ordinarily and directly as Pope, and gave it him per obliquum ductum,
extraordinarily and directly, in ordine ad spirituale bonum, in order to the
spiritual good, as he is the chief spiritual Prince: Sixtus Quintus the Pope
that then reigned, was so little pleased therewith, that Parum abfuit, he
missed but a little of abolishing all his works by his Papal censure (says
Barclaius Barclaius de potest. Papae.
) as the Jesuits told me in good earnest: For that Pope in his Bull against
Henry the third of France, roared out, Barcl. ibidem.
Se supremam, etc. that he had supreme authority over all Kings and Princes
of the whole earth, and all people and nations, delivered unto him, not by
man's, but by Gods ordinance, and was tam animosus, so courageous, or rather
outrageous in showing this power, that there was a thunderbolt of
excommunication made ready upon the string, and should have been shot off
against the most Catholic King, Philip of Spain (who was haeresis in suo
populo, in sua prole vltor Prefat. ad Lector. in Barclaio.
, a punisher of heresy in his own people, in his own offspring, and in
whose soul he could hardly find any sickness of heresy) if Sixtus had not
been subita febre sublatus, taken out of the way with a sudden fever, which
how it came about, they that know the policies and poysonings of that
generation, can easily imagine. And before him Gregory the seventh in his
execration against the Emperor Henry the fourth, chalengeth unto himself
absolute power on earth, imperia, regna, etc. to take away, and give Empires,
Kingdoms, Soueraignties, and whatsoever mortal men can have Platina in vita
Henric. 7.
. And being advised to use more mildness in his proceedings, not so to throw
down Henry from all Imperial and Royal administration, he cried out, When
Christ committed his Church to Peter, and said, Feed my sheep, (excepitne
reges?) did he except Kings? for depriving and deposing are high points of
feeding with them. And the Canon law makes the Pope Regem, etc. King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords Extrauag. Job 22. titul. 14. de verb. sig. c. cum inter in
glossa.
, which is Gods own style. In it Popes contend, that Imperium subest
sacerdotio, the Empery must be subject to the Priesthood Innocent. 3. decret.
1. tit. 33. de Maiorit.
that Romanus Pontifex, etc. the Pope has both swords, and judges all men
Bonifac. 8. extrau. de maiorit. cap. vnam sanctam.
, and reason for their direct superiority, in temporalibus, in all Temporal
matters, not only over the Christian, but also over the whole world, and the
Gods thereof; Here are two swords, therefore the Pope has both swords: I have
set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, etc. Ier.
1.10.
therefore, the Pope is over Kingdoms, to pull them down, translate and give
them to whom he will. Christ has all power in heaven and in earth Math. 28.18.
, therefore, the Pope his Vicar bath the like. And Antoninus applies that of
the Psalm, Thou have put all things under his feet Psalm. 8.6.
, to the Pope, interpreting Sheep, to be Christians both Kings and Subjects;
Scriptures scarcely so fitly alleged, and expounded, as the devil did the
Text against our Savior. And one of them is bold to say, Non videretur, etc.
Our Lord should not seem to have been discreet (that I may speak with
reverence of him) Petr. Bertram in suis adddit. ad glassam extraua. vnam
sanctam.
unless he had left one such behind that could do all these things: Not much
unlike to that of Bellarmines, that if the Church had not this power to dispose
of temporal things, and Kings, in ordine ad spiritualia, In order to
spiritual things, it were not perfect and sufficient for it self in order to
its own good Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. cap. 7.
. And for practice of this super-eminent power, Henry the sixth, and his
Emperesse were crowned by the Pope, Holding the Crown between his feet, and
so setting it on their heads, and having thus Crowned the Emperor, he stroke
it off again with his foot, to show that he had power to depose him Houeden
Annals, page 689.
Which if it be so, what validity is there in Gods Charter here, How do Kings
and Magistrates hold immediately from him, reign by him, have their power from
him, if it may be given and taken away by the Pope? And must there not be an
Index ex purgatorius, to wipe out the sentences of Antiquity that sound to the
contrary, maintain that earthly Gods hold of none but the heavenly, are
inferior to none but him, to be judged by none but him? Colimus Imperatorem
(says Tertullian Tertul. ad Scapulam lib. 2.
) We honor the Emperor as a man next unto God, and receiving from God
whatsoever he has: Super imperatorem (says Optatus Optatus lib. 3. contra
Parmenianum.
) Above the Emperor there is none but God only, who has made the Emperor.
And how shall, Tibi soli pecc^ui, Against thee only have I sinned Psalm. 50.4.
, escape the Index, if the Magistrate stand at the Popes judgment seat, and
must there be judged? Soli Reges, etc. Kings alone, Otto Frisingens. in Epist.
ad Frederic. Oenobarb.
being reserved for Gods examination, are not brideled by any worldly Laws:
whence comes that saying as well of a King, as a Prophet; Against thee only
have I sinned; that is, as Euthymius expounds it, Rex sum, etc. I am a King,
Lord of all other, and have thee only for a Judge of the faults that I commit.
But as for this transcendent power which the Pope assumeth over all Kings and
Princes, which hold their Crown and Scepter, Authority and Power, only from
God, whether he challenge it directly, or indirectly (the difference between
which, is, in via and modo, non in vi and efficacia Barclaius 236
, in the way and manner, not in the force and efficacy.) Let all that fear
God, and honor their Kings, pray that it may prove (that which one of his own
side fears) A Seiani equus qui proprios Dominos peruertit Barclaius in Epist.
dedicat. ad Clement. 8.
: A Seianus horse which overthrew his own Masters; and that it may stir up
the Kings of the earth to hate the whore of Babylon, to make her desolate and
naked, and to pull her flesh Reu. 17.17.
.

I said before, that there were many adversaries which infringer this Charter:
The Magistrates immediate power from God is crucified between thieves on the
other side also: Those factious Statists, who very unnaturally divide this
power between God and the people, as the child between the two mothers; and
teach, that a King is instituted of God, constituted of the people; The
Kingdom is given him of God, delivered him of the people; That he reigns
from God, but by, and for the people; Is chosen of God, confirmed of the people
Vindicie contra tyrannos.
: For these Distinctions speak half in the Language of the Jews, half in
the Language of Ashdod Neb. 13.23.
; Half soundly, half seditiously; For, The most High appoints whomsoever
he will over the Kingdoms of men Dan. 5.21.
: Christianus scit (says Tertullian Tertul. ad Scapulam.
) The Christian knows that the Emperor is constituted of God, there is his
constitution from God, as well as his institution, and the deliverance and
seisin, is from God, as well as the gift, Trado, I deliver all these Countries
into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar my servant Ier. 27.6.
, Their reigning is as well by God as from God: By me, says the Text Prou.
8.15.
, their confirmation from him, as well as their election: God did not only
choose, but also make David King: 1. Chr. 28 4.
He annointeth him with his holy oil Psalm. 89.20.
, and sets a Crown of pure gold on his head Psalm. 21.3.
. These distinctions then are but perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds,
and destitute of the truth: There is no copercener with God the Grantor here;
It is not I, and the Pope; nor, I, and the people; but, I have said, only the
powers that be, are of God, and of him only. That I have been so long in
pleading this immediate power from God out of this clause of the Charter, I may
say to these times that both teach and do against this, as Paul to the
Corinthians in another case, Ye have compelled me 2. Cor. 12.11.


The next clause to be scanned in this Charter here, is the Grantees; for
these two are correlates, and depend one upon the other; one of the^ cannot be
without the other, no Grantor, but with reference to a Grantee, Ye are.] Now
these, [Yee] are not only Principalities Titus 3.1.
, the highest Magistrates, the supreme 1. Pet. 2.13.
, but also subordinate Powers, Titus 3.1.
, those that are sent of them 1. Pet. 2.13.
: For Princes must have many eyes to see withal, many hands to work withal
Xenophon in Cyropadia.
, they being not able to bear their whole people alone Number. 11.14.
, nor their cumbrance and strife Deuteronomy. 1.12.
, must have subordinate Rulers, that must bear the burden with them; For so
God orders the matter for Moses ease, and the peoples necessity Number. 11.17.
; So he commands that Iudgee and Officers should be made in all their
gates, which the Lord their God should give them throughout all their Tribes
Deuteronomy. 16.18.
; And so accordingly Iehoshaphat practiced, Setting Judges in the Land, through
all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City 2. Chro. 19.5.
. And as they are called, In partem sollicitudinis, to part of the burden and
care; so God vouchsafes them here, Partem honoris, part of the honor, and
joins them Patentees here together, giving to these subordinate Rulers and
Judges (for to them particularly does this word of God here come John 10.35.
) his Name, his Office, his Seat, the execution of judgment in his stead
Deuteronomy. 1.17.
: For as that precious ointment, powered on Aarons head, ran down to his beard,
and thence to the skirts of his garment Psalm. 133.2.
: So that sacred anointing unto Soueraignety and Government, which is by God
himself powered on the highest Magistrate (who is the head not only of the
people Psalm. 18.43.
, but also of all eiuill power) is derived, and runs down from him upon
them that are his eyes and hands, for the executing of judgment and justice
within all his Coasts: And now we know in a word, who these Grantees are, let
us hasten to the next clause, as being most material, most pertinent to this
time and occasion, which is the grant it self, the Honor and Office here
given and granted, Ye are Gods.]

But how Gods, if but one God 1. Tim. 2.5.
? If He be alone; and none other beside him Deuteronomy. 32.12.
? How Gods in our estimation, if to us there must be but one God 1. Cor. 8.6.
? Assuredly, these are not (...), such things as cannot well stand together;
for they may well stand together, and God loose none of his honor. Moses that
taught the Israelites to acknowledge one God Deuteronomy. 6.4.
, against the (...), the many Gods of the Heathen, bids them that in all
matters of trespass, both parties come before the Elohim, the Gods, the
Magistrates Exodus 22.9.
. They are Gods then, not by nature, but by name; Dij tit^lares, called Gods:
They are, as Musculus says, Non natura Dij, etc. Musculus in Psalm. 82.
Not Gods by Nature, but for their authority to rule and judge, the Majesty
and dignity whereof has verily some Divine thing in it: Gods, because they
are Dei Vicarij and Officiarij, etc. Gods Vicars and Officers Molerus in Psalm.
82.
, that in his name they might administer judgment amongst men; or as Calvin
morefully and fi^ly, because they do, Omnino Dei personam sustinere, cuius
vices quodammodo agunt Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 4.
; Altogether represent the person of God, whose Vicegerents after a sort they
are: And not only so neither, but there is a further matter in it; Gods,
because God puts his spirit upon them, as upon the seventy Elders that were
Moses assistants Number. 11.17.
, gives them another heart, as he did Saul 1. Sam. 10.9.
, and furnishes them with worthy and pec^^^ar gifts of Regiment and
Government, that so as they are (...) Gods Ministers Romans 13.4.
, So they might strive also to be (...) lively images of God Platarch.
, In ipso iudicandi munere (as Musculus speaks Musc. vbi supra.
) in the very office of judging; -- For their singular wisdom, justice,
equity and power. Here then is both an Honor and an Office conveyed to them
in this grant, both Honos and Onus, both praeesse and prodesse, both Dignity
and Duty. Their Honor to be Gods Lieutenants, represent his Person, sit in
his Seat, judge in his Name; Their Office to be Gods Images, answerable to
their Prototypon, excuting his judgment, as he himself would do; and so
Iustine Martyr glosseth the words, (...), etc. I have given you mine Honor and
mine Office, and my Name, therefore judge the people, as if I my self did
judge. To speak briefly both of this Honor and Office wherewith God does
inuest them:

First, the Honor that God here gives them, to carry his Name, to represent
his Person, to be his (...) Officers, is like a Memento, as the voice of a
Crier, to sound out wholesome admonitions and instructions, either to
themselves, or to others: To themselves, aurem vellit and admonet, it pulls
them by the ear and admonishes them, that being Gods Lieutenants,
Vicegerents, they must one day come to their Red Rationem, give an account
Luke 16.4
; That the great King of Heaven will in his due time come, and take an account
of these his servants Mat. 18.23. and 25.19.
, and will judge them over again, and their judgment also, either to ratify,
or disanull, that which they have done; yea, and that being Gods Stewards, the
more freely that they may work their will here, the more sharply shall they
make their account there: E^ erit horribilius, quo prae caeteris peccare
possunt liberius (says one Otto Frisi^gens. in Epist. ad Frederic. Oenebarb.
:) It shall be so much the more terrible for them, by how much they may sin
more freely then other men: Asharpe judgment shall be to them that are in
high places, a sore trial shall come upon the mighty Wisd. 6.5.8.
.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium est Dei Horat.
lib. 3. Ode 1.
. Of Princes their own Subjects stand in fear,
But over them it is God that rule does bear.
To others, either to all, at all times; or to some, at some special times and
occasions: To all at all times, here is an instruction of subjection: For it
is a plain inference of the Apostle, that since he is the minister of God,
representing his Person in judgment, ministering judgment in his name and
place, therefore of necessity ye must be subject Romans 13.4.5.
ye, every soul, as in the first verse there; not only Seculars, but etiam
si Apostolus, etc. Chrysostom. in Romans 13.
: Although thou be an Apostle, if an Enangelist, if a Prophet, or whosoever
thou art. Si omnis animae, etc. (says Bern. epist. 42.
Bernard) if every soul, then yours also; who has excepted you from this
vniuersaliry? if any labor to except you, he does endeavor to deceive you. And
as every soul, so to every ordinance of man, must this subjection be for the
Lords sake, not only to Kings the highest, but to Governors and Rulers also
that are sent of them, 1. Pet. 2.13.14
yea, every soul, to every power, at all times: when they command good, by
suffering their will to be done by us: when they command evil, by suffering
their will to be done on us, in bearing their scourges patiently, for that
which we cannot do lawfully; even as servants must be subject, not only to
good and gentle Masters, but also to froward for conscience toward God
suffering wrongfully 1. Pet. 2.18.19
. For that this was the subjection of Antiquity: take one instance for all:
Julian was infidelis Imperator, etc. (says Austen Aug. in Psalm. 124.
) an infidel Emperor, an Apostata, wicked, an idolater: yet the Christian
soldiers served the infidel Emperor. When they came to Christ's cause they
acknowledged none but him that was in heaven: when he would have them to
worship Idols, burn incense, they preferred God before him. But when he said,
bring forth the Army, go against such a nation, presently they obeyed: They did
distinguish their eternal Lord from their temporal Lord, and yet for their
eternal Lords sake, they were subject also to their temporal Lord. Whereby we
may see what to judge of Bellarmines divinity when he says, Quod si
Christiani olim, etc. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 7.
But if Christians heretofore did not depose Nero, and Dioclesian, and Julian
the Apostata, etc. it was because they lacked temporal strength: the one
says, they were subject for their eternal Lords sake: the other, they were
subject, did not depose for want of temporal strength. Again, here is
admonition for some special persons, at such special times as these are, for
actors that commence suits, for Advocates and Lawyers that plead and prosecute
matters, for witnesses that are to testify and give in evidence, and for
Iuries that are to bring in verdicts, to carry themselves as in the presence of
God, to do nothing before Gods Lieuetenants, which they would not do before
God himself, whose the judgment is, and who stands amongst the Magistrates,
and judges amongst them, as in the first verse. Art thou then an Actor, one
that has business against thy brother? bring not a frivolous suit not worthy
of Gods cognizance, to his judgment seat. Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse
Ioui: Jupiter is not at leisure to attend on small matters, is a good rule
here, it is not fit the Magistrate should be pestered with such petty matters,
and it were well if Judges would take Gallioes course Acts 18.16.
, drive such Actors and actions from the judgment seat. And if not a
frivolous, much less an injurious suit. For would thou have him a patron of
thine iniquity, the habitation of whose seat is equity an justice Psalm. 89.14.
, the scepter of whose kingdom is a scepter of righteousness Heb. 1.8.
? Would thou have the judge of the whole earth deal unrighteously in thy
particular? Art thou an Advocate to plead and prosecute matters? consider that
thou stand before the God of truth, and should do nothing against the
truth 2. Cor. ^^.
, that thou should not nimium altereando, by too much wrangling with thine
opposite, endeavor as the old Greek Sophisters were wont, (...), to make the
worse side the better; not be like that Rhetoritian that could Mirifice res
exiguas verbis amplify are Eras. Apotheg. in Agesilao.
, wonderfully amplify small matters with his words, whom Agesilaus thought no
more commendable for it, then the Shoe maker that made great shoes for little
feet; but rather that thou should with Job in the gate be an eye to the
blind, that cannot see their right, a mouth to the dumb, that cannot tell
their own tale, and feet to the lame, that want actiuitie to follow their
own causes. Take not then a known, manifest cuill cause in hand, Iustus
aduocatus a nullo iniustas cause as accipit Greg in Ezekiel.
A just Advocate will not retain unjust causes of any one. Be not as those
Advocates of the Romish Court, of whom Bernard complained Bern. de considerat.
lib. cap. 9.
, Hi sunt etc. These are they that have taught their tongues to speak lies,
glib-tongued against righteousness, skillful to defend falsehood, wise to do
evil, eloquent to oppugn the truth. Art thou a witness to testify a. truth,
to give in evidence? remember that the judgment is his whose ways are truth,
who is God that cannot lie Tit. 1.2.
, who hates a false witness that speaks lies Pro. 6.19.
, and that if thou lie herein, thou lie to God, not to man. Acts 5.4.
. Let not Satan then be a lying, a false spirit in thy mouth 1. King. 22.22.
; wrest no man's words from his meaning, as the false witnesses did our Saviors
Math. 26.60.
, much less rise not up a false witness to lay to any man's charge things that
he never did Psalm. 35.11.
. Serve not any Iesabels turn, to betray the life or liuelyhood of any Naboth
1. King. 21.10
. An heathen man Pericles apud Gellium, lib. 1. cap. 3.
being entreated to swear falsely for his friend, could answer that his
friendship held but vsque ad aras, unto the Altars. Bind not three sins,
perjury, false testimony, and injury together: for testis falsiaicus est
tribus personis obnoxious (faith Isidore Isidorus de summo bono. lib. 3.
) A false witness is faulty against three persons: first God, whom by
forswearing he contemns; next, the Judge, whom by lying he deceives;
lastly, the Innocent, whom by false witnessing he hurts. If thou do, God
will come as a swift witness (and a Judge too) against thee Mal. 3.5.
, and thou shall not escape his punishment. A false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape Prou. 19.5.
.

Is thy service used at this time as a Iuror? Let it be thy care then, and thy
conscience too, to do it, not only with eye-seruice, as a man-pleaser, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God Coloss. 2.23.
, to do it heartily, not unto men, but unto the Lord, before whose judgment
seat thou stand, in in whose prefence this work, this employment is put
upon thee. On thee hangs the making and marring of other men's causes, the
punishing or acquitting of Felons, Mutherers, and such capital offenders. And
that thou should be faithful and sincere herein, thou have an oath to bind
thee, evidence to inform thee, a charge to warn thee, and a Judge above thee
to correct thine errors. Call not then evil good, nor good evil, little
great, nor great little. Know that a verdict comes of verum dicere, speaking
the truth, it is a falsedict if thou do falsum dicere, speak that which is
false. Strain not out gnats then, neither swallow down Camels, bind not
heavy burdens, but proportion thy verdicts according to the equity of Gods
law, which is, That the stripes be according to the fault Deuteronomy. 25.2.
: that as a man has done and deserved, so it should be done to him, like for
like Leuit. 24.19.
. Give not occasion that it should be a byword in our Israel, that by two
wicked, and ten weak persons in a Jury, many a good cause has the foil. And
especially, let not foolish pity prevail with thee for the acquitting of
wilful and wicked murderers, that now-a-dayes spill men's precious blood like
water on every side. For if it were not commendable in the Mid-wiues of Egypt
to lie for the saving of innocent infants Exodus 1.
, it is abominable in thee to bring in a lying verdict (if it could be a
verdict) for the freeing of bloody miscreants. Homicidas punire, no^ est
effusio sanguinis, sed legu^ ministerium Hieron. in Ezekiel. lib. 4.
: to punish murderers, is no shedding of blood, but an executing of the laws.
Non est crudelis, qui crudeles iugulat Hieron. in Isai. 13.
. He is not cruel which slays the cruel. Search diligently therefore into
such weighty causes, and be not rash with thy mouth to say Sibboleth for
Shibboleth Judge. 12.6.
, manslaughter for wilful murder, which defiles a land, so that it cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it
Number. 35.33.
. For although our Laws be so favorable, to distinguish between hot blood
and cold blood, between sudden rage and forethought malice; yet Gods law
only pardons that which is casually and ignorantly done Deuteronomy. 19.4. Number.
35.22. etc.
, and ever punishes with death that which is wittingly and willingly done,
whether upon sudden passion, or longer premeditation Number. 35.16.22.
, and commands that such be fetched out of the City of refuge Deuteronomy. 19 12.
, yea, that they be pulled from Gods Altar, that they may die Exodus 21.14.
. And sure I am, that Pittacus, and heathen Lawgiver Arist. lib. 2. polit.
cap. vltimo.
, ordained, that if a drunken man (which has less use of reason then one in a
sudden rage) should smite another, he should suffer double as much
punishment as if he had done the same being sober. Let not thine eye spare
therefore, neither have pity of such; and for thy full charge and direction in
all matters that come to thine handling and hammering, remember, that he that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord Prou. 17.15.
.

But as beneficium postulat officium: so their honos brings an onus with it,
their dignity a duty; the honor that God here gives them to be his
vicegerents, to carry his name, and to represent his person, claims a
correspondent duty on their parts, to be his Antitypa, fashioning themselves
like to him their type and samplar, to be his (...), Images, imitating and
expressing in their several orbs and jurisdictions, the wisdom, justice,
elemency, and power, wherewith he being the Judge of the whole world, governs
and judges the universal. And here were a large field, but adumbrata, non
expressa dabo Hieron in epitaphio Nepot.
, I will give thee but little mappes of the whole.

First then, the high God their samplar for government and judgment, is
infinite in wisdom Psalm. 147.5.
: wisdom is his, whereby he reuealeth the deep and secret things, and
knows what is in the darkness Dan, 2.20.22.
, no man's ways can be hid from him, because his understanding is past
searching Esaias 40.27.28.
: None can hide himself in secret places, that he should not find him out Ier.
23.24.
. And the petty Gods of the earth must be wise in discerning between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, between stroke and stroke, between all
controversies in the gate; they must be as Angels of God to discern between
good and evil 2. Sam. 14.17
. It is a geneall rule holding in all professions, that Quam quisque norit
artem, exerceat: Every one must only exercise that trade wherein he has
skill. Therefore Solomon at his first coming to sit on the throne of Israel,
prays for an understanding heart, to judge the people, to discern between
good and bad 1. King. 3.9.
. The ignorance of the Judge is the misery of the innocent: Ignorantia indicis,
calamitas innocentis (says Austine August. li. 29. de ciuit. Dei.
.) Pergin istuc prius dijuidicare Terent. in Hea^tont.
quam scis quid very sit, could the Comic say, Go thou about to judge this
matter before thou know what the truth is? And for helps and props of their
wisdom herein, they must first hear every cause (for does our law judge any
man before it hear him, and know what he does Ioh. 7.51.
? (says Nicodemus) and that not dormitabunde, half a sleep, as Philip of
Macedon, (who by that means gave wrong sentence, so that the party wronged was
compelled to appeal from Philip sleeping, to Philip waking) Plutarch. in
Apotheg. reg.
but thoroughly, exactly, as Alexander the great, who stopped one ear to the
Plaintiff, saying, he kept it for the Defendant Plutarch.
, (...), says the Poet.

See that thou judge no cause in hand,
Before boths talk thou understand.
Otherwise,

Qui statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequis fuerit Seneca in Medea.
.
Leaving one side unheard, who does decree,
Is sure unjust though just has judgment be.
It is not the manner of the Romans (says Festus Act. 25.15.
) to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers
face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime
laid against him. Secondly, they must use all good means to be informed
aright, Enquire, make search, and ask diligently Deuteronomy. 13.14.
: the Judges shall make diligent inquisition Deuteronomy. 19.18.
.

Another property of the high God, which the Gods and Judges of the earth must
imitate, is his Justice: He, the Judge of the whole earth, will do right Genesis
18.25.
, his judgment is (...), a righteous judgment Romans 2.5.
and he himself is: (...) that righteour Judge 2. Tim. 4.8.
. This is their pattern, and their profession must be with David, When I shall
receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly Psalm. 75.2.
: Their prayer as his, for his son, Give the King thy judgments o God, and
thy righteousness unto the King son Psalm. 72.1.
: Moses the high Magistrate in Israel, charge the under Magistrates, to do
none unrighteousness in judgment Leu. 19.15.
, to judge righteously between a man and his brother: Deuteronomy. 1.16.
: And without this, Princes and Judges are companions of Thieves Esaias 1.23.
; Remota iustitia, quid sunt Regna, nisi magna latrocinia Augu stin. l. 4 de
ci. Dei. cap. 4
, take away justice, and what are kingdoms but great Robberies. Of this, the
Scepter, the Mase that is carried before them, is an Hieroglyphicke,(...)(says
Basil Basilius in Psalm. 45.
) The Scepter carries a kind of instruction with it; the straight rod putting
them in mind to shun all crooked, and perverse judgment. And that they may
keep themselves far from all injustice Exodus 23.7.
, they must avoid the by-pathes either of bribes, or of affections. Of bribes,
not only not taking gifts Exodus 23.8.
, and so cleansing their hands (for which cause Antiquity painted Judges
withouthands Stob^us sermon. 44.
) but also hating covetousness Exodus 18.23.
, and so purging their hearts. And which some happily would think tolerable,
Qui recte iudicat, etc. (says Isidore Isidor. lib. 3. summo bone.
) He that judges rightly, and for that looks for a reward of recompense is
a trespasser against God, because for money received he sells righteousness,
which he ought to bestow freely. Of affections, doing nothing for respect of
persons (for which cause in old time, obducto velo iudicabant, they judged
having a veyle over them Muscul. in Psalm. 82.
, and the bare causes were judged without any mention of the persons ^^em in
Psalm. 45.
) putting of all affections of fear, which will make them loath to displease;
of love, which will make them ready to please; of hatred, which will make them
ready to revenge: For Perit omne iudicium, cum res transit in affectum Senec.
: Judgment is quite undone, when the matter is carried by affection. Exuit
personam, etc. He puts off the person of a Judge, that puts on the person
of a friend, says Tully, or of an enemy, say I.

A third property to be imitated, expressed, is his Clemency and Mercy: The
Lords is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy Psalm.
103.8.
: The Mountains, the strong foundations of the earth (that is the Magistrates)
must so do justly, that they must withal love mercy Mich. 6.2.8.
: And a Kings Throne is as well vpholden by Mercy, as by Justice Prou. 20.28.
: For, as Chrysostom says, Justice without mercy, is not justice but cruelty;
as on the other side, Mercy without justice, is not mercy, but foolish pity.
There is a time to spare, as well as to smite Eccles. 3.
when not summum ius, extreme right, but (...), the moderation of right must
take place. The Wise man forbids to be too severe Eccles. 7.14.
: Acerbis iudicijs, magis vastatur qua^ corrigitur ciuitas; says Salust: A
City is rather ruinated then reformed, by sharp Judgments. And when this
relaxation of the extremity of Law must be used, the peculiar circumstances of
times, places, persons, and occasions, will show.

A fourth judiciary property, is, Power and Courage in execution: Might is
Gods, as well as wisdom Dan. 2.20.
, None can resist his will Romans 9.19.
. Babylons judgment will assuredly light upon her, because the Lord is strong
that judges her Reu. 18.8.
: And the earthly Gods must be men of courage Ex. 18.21.25.
, strong, and show themselves like men 1. King. 2.2.
; Not like Rehoboam, tenderhearted, and not able to resist the sons of Belial
2. Chr. 13.7.
; nor like David at his beginning, so weak that any sons of Zeruiah should be
too bard for him 2. Sam. 3.39.
; not bearing the sword in vain against any, even the great Ones, nor
suffering wholesome Laws to be like spider webs, which do infirmiora animalia
retinere valentiora transmittere (as Anacharsis said Valerius maximi. de
memorabil.
) Hold the weaker creatures, but let the stronger pass through; but even
taking an order for bloody Ioabs, cursing Shemies, treacherous Absoloms,
aspiring Adoniahs, and punishing sin as well in the neck and shoulders, as
in the legs and feet, of the body politic.

Now in all these properties, I may say with Paul, I have nothing to accuse my
nation of Acts 28.19.
, I have nothing to lay to the charge of our reverend Judges here present Sir
Henry Hobart Knight Baronet, L. chief Justice of the Common pleas, and Sir
Laurence Tanfield Knight L. chief Baron of the Exchequer.
: I cannot (God be thanked) vpbraid you, as Paul did the Corinthians; with
going to Law (...) before unbelieving Magistrates, infidels for their faith, or
(...) unjust for their practice and conversation 1. Cor. 6.62.
. Nay, if vox populi, be vox Dei, the voice of the people, be the voice of
God herein; the ear that hears them blesses them, and the eye that sees
them, gives witness to them Job 29.11.
, and of them, that they are with Joseph of Arimathea, good and just men Luke
23.50.
, that with Moses, they sit to hear matters from morning to even ^^od. 18.14.
: that with Job, Where they know not the cause, they search it out diligently,
are fathers to the poor, break the jaws of the wicked, pluck the prey out
of their teeth, put on righteousness as a garment, and judgment as a robe and
diadem Job. 20.12.14.16.17.
, that, their moderation is known to all men Phis. 4.5.
; that, they hear and judge the small as well as the great Deuteronomy. 1.17.
; yea, and the great as well as the small; Not sparing with Moses, to hang up
the Heads of the people Number. 25.4.
, even to punish the great ones after their desert. Therefore I have no
reprehension, but only an admonition, vt faciant quod iam faciunt, That they
do still that which they do at this present: I have no rod to come to them
with nouae, but an enge, well done good and faithful Stewards of the high God:
as you have begun so continue, that the great Master when he comes, may
find you so doing Math. 24.46.
: as you run well, so finish your course, that the Lord Jesus, that righteous
Judge, who has honored you here with his name and Throne, may honor you
hereafter with a Crown in corruptible, and a Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
To him with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, be given
blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

