

SVVETHLAND and Poland VVarres.

A Soldiers return out of Sweden, and his News from the Wars: OR, Sweden
and Poland up in Arms. And the entertainment of English Soldiers there: with
the fortunes and success of those 1200. men that lately went thither.



At London printed for Nathaniell Butter. 1610.

To the Reader.
COuntrymen, I have for your sakes drawn a Picture, both of my own, and other
Englishmens miseries: You may in half an hour run over these afflictions,
which I and the rest (that smarted by them) were many months enduring. I know
it shall be a pleasure to you, to read what we have selt; and as great a
happiness to me (who have published this:) if the Story of a poor Soldiers
travels, can bring you any contentment, let me find at your hands (I entreat
you) the self same love which Sicke-men receive from their friends, when they
begin to recover; And that is a kind visitation and rejoicing, to see a crazed
and weak body reduced to his former strength: Mine (I thank God) is now so,
and shall grow more and more into health, by how much the more you pity my
misfortunes: you cannot pity them, unless you know them, you cannot know
them unless you read this over which I send you; and I would not willingly
have you read, unless you buy, because you should pay for the Wars somewhat
as well as I: not doubting therefore of the one, because I hope you desire the
other: I wish your own wishes to you: and so farewell.



A Soldiers Return out of Sweden, and his News from the Wars.
THe Olive Tree of Peace (upon which grows the happiness, wealth and
prosperity of every Kingdom) has flourished (even up to his full height) so
long in England, that other Countries and Kingdoms neighboring by her,
beholding the blessings, benefits and contentation which England has gathered
by tasting the fruits of Peace, have gotten some branches of that Tree, and
(by our example) planted the same in their own Dominions. In doing of which,
the French have filled their Coffers with Treasures, which before were opened
by violence, empried by seditious Leagues, and wasted to nothing by the
miseries of a tedious and intestine war: the Spanish have likewise with the
same stream safely returned from the Mines of both Indies, and richly vnladed
their Argozies of Indian gold, upon their own shoares, of which gold (before
Peace inhabited amongst them) they were ever least save when they approached
nearest home, as the bringers of it from thence hither, and the loosers of it
there, did in those times (the one with joy, the other with madness and sorrow)
openly testify.

So that these fires (whether of Ambition, of Zeal, or of Rage, I know not)
which for many late years have named in the Low Countries, had not bin kindled
there, I think the very name of War had bin almost forgotten, and the right
pronunciation of it unknown to these parts of christendom. The violent heat
of which Belgicke fires was so lasting, and burned so high, that it served as a
Beacon on the top of a hill, to call unto their help other foreign nations (who
before were but lookers on) and enticed them (through the thirst of glory,
honor and fame which are gotten in the fires) to become partners and sharers
in the variable fortunes of those Battelles of the Dutch and Spanish. Insomuch
that the Drum being unbraced here, and hung up by the walls (as having no
use of such thunder amongst us, unless it were for pleasure,) and most of our
men of Action and of the Sword hearing the sound of theirs, and being drawn
thither, I think it was then, and is now still possible to call together 20000.
of our english nation into one place, and amongst them all not to find or pick
out one Soldier, when in other foreign realms (vexed continually with vproares)
it has hin, and to this day is hard to call together 100000. and to cull out
of them any other person but a Soldier.

The School of War decaying, and being thrown down in one kingdom, has
from time to time bin exected in another. And as men who profess other Arts
and Sciences, will (if they love them truly) travel over the world to enrich
their bosoms with the perfect knowledge of those things with which their souls
are inflamed: So the military Scholar (whose best learning is Practice,)
accounts every Land his own country where this profession of Arms is held
in honor: and no love of parents, wife, children, kindred or friends has power
to keep him from those glorious paths of danger.

By this means, many Englishmen that were borne obscurely, and might
(otherwise) have died forgotten, have by their noble adventures and services in
foreign realms (far hence remoted) not only won eternal honors to their
own names, but also crowned their nation and native country with never dying
glories: And in despite of Envy and Oblivion (sworn enemies to virtue) who
would beat down the memory of such high spirits, by throwing them into base
and unknown graves, Fame does evermore build up tombs for them in her immortal
chronicles.

Whilst all men here at home sat playing with the Sunbeams of Quietness, and
that all the low Country storms began likewise to be laid down calm, so that
the English soldier had no place to retire to, but to come and lie idly on
the bosom of his own country; behold, a fresh Allarum awakes and calls him
from hence into Sweden. In the wars of which kingdom what has bin done
lately, I mean only, for so much as I, who was a seruitor in them, and am now
the trumpet to proclaim mine own fortunes there, have had trial, you shall
now (dear countrymen) receive afaithfull and honest relation.

Wherein I vow by the honor of a soldier, and by the love, obedience and
loyalty which I owe to no other than my own native country, I will set down
nothing but that of which (for the most part) I have bin Oculatus testis (an
eie-witnes.) And albeit in this relation the truth must compel me to deliver
such matter, as happily may terrify those that never bare Arms, nor followed
the fortunes of a Soldier, from ever going into Sweden and to serve in those
wars: far are my thoughts (God bears record of them) from any such
disswasion, sithence all men that know what belongs to the field, can tell,
that he who undertakes the life and condition of a Soldier, must endure worse
and greater miseries, than I or any Englishman sent thither can undergo in
Sweden. Omitting therefore the ground of their quarrel, and not so much as once
touching the fire that has now so sately kindled wars between the kings of
Sweden and Poland, because the hearthurnings of kingdoms one against an other
are diseases of State, and not fit to be meddled with by me, being beyond my
cure, I will write a Story of my own fortunes there only, which begins as
follows.

About a fortnight before Midsomer, which was 1609. a company of Voluntaries to
the number of 1200. soldiers, were at several times shipped from England to
pass into Sweden, to aid the King of that Country in his wars against the
king of Poland. To which aid diverse other nations did likewise resort, as
Frenill, High Dutch, etc of all whom (as occasion ministers) mention shable
made in their due places. Of the English companies that went thither, the first
was commanded by one Calvin a Scot; who by appointment was made lieutenant
Colonel and chief of the other Captains over the footmen. The names of which
Captains are in this following Discourse set down.

After the first company was gone, a second number of 300. men (of which I the
relater of this, was one) were put into one ship belonging to Swoden, and
came from thence for us. We being thus aboard, sails were presently hoisted,
anchors weighed, and by the assistance of God, wherewith the dexterity of the
mariners was furthered, in a short time had we gotten into the maine sea and
with a prosperous gale went forward on our voyage. But man's security oft-times
changes Gods favors into sudden indignation; for when every one at the
parting from his own country had a merry and fearelesse heart to run to the
certain dangers that stood ready to meet him in another foreign region: Behold
(to put us all in mind, that God was the God of Hosts, and that whether we
went forth to fight, or laid us down to sleep, whether we were on the seas,
or on the land, our safeties and dangers lay all in his disposing) behold, I
say, in the height of all our iolity, seeing so proud a sail swelling with the
winds to carry us) the heavens on a sudden altered their looks, storines fell
upon the waters, the waters threatened destruction to our ship, and we that were
in her, stood wavering between the hopes of an uncertain life, and the
dreadful terrors of a most iminent death. In this horror of the seas, were we
lossed so long, that all our victualles wers almost spent: the misery of which,
threw us into more desperate fears: now were we assaulted by double deaths
(Famine or Shipwreck) what course to take for our relief no man presently
knew. Continue without food it was impossible, and as impossible was it for us
to recover the land in any short time, without the assured destruction of us
all. At this season, our commanders were these. viz Lieutenant Benson.
Lieutenant Walton, who was Provost Martial of the field. And an Ancient of the
Colonels company.


These our Commanders were by our rashness drove into worss fears than those
were that laid hold upon our selves; for whereas they were resolved (blow the
winds how they could) to continue still at sea, and not to land, till they set
footing at their appointed shores, the cemmon Soldiers had on the contrary
part vowed and resolved to compel the mariners (seeing the present miseries.
and no hopes promising better) to set us all on shore upon the first land that
could be discovered. Our Commanders did what they could by disswasion to alter
this general resolution, because they feared it would be the loss of the
greatest part of our Companies, if they came once to be scattered: and besides,
they knew that it would redound to their dishonor and shame, if they should
not discharge the trust imposed upon them by our Captains, which trust was to
conduct us and land us before, whilst our Chieftaines remained a while behind
in England, to take up the rest of our Companies. Yet all this notwithstanding,
Land being discouerd, there was no eloquence in the world able to keep us
aboard our ship, but every man swore if the master of the ship would not set us
on the shore, the sails should be taken into our own hands, and what was
resolved upon (touching present landing) should in despite of danger be
effected. Upon this, the master of the ship and the mariners told us, that if
we put to land in that place, we should all either perish for want of
victualles, which were not to be had in that country or else should have our
throats cut by the people. But the dangers in which we were, and which we
felt, being more certain (as we imagined) than any other could be, of which we
had yet no sense or feeling, and our hopes persuading us that we could not fall
into worse, than those we tasted already: besides, all of us construing the
words of the mariners, as not spoken by them, but as if they had bin set on to
do so by our commanders in the ship, who by all means favored to keep us all
aboorde: At the last we resolved rather to try our bad fortunes on the land,
and to famish there (if that kind of death must needs attend upon us) than to
perish on the seas, which we knew could afford us no such mercy as the land
was likely to lend us. So that in the end, we got so near the shore side, as
the sails durst venture without danger to the ship: and there casting anchor,
our small boat was hoisted out, and on shore we went, as fast as possibly we
could. When our Officers saw, that there was no remedy, nor force to detain
us aboard, they then disheartened us no longer, but to our great comforts told
it, that the master of the ship (which thing he himself likewise openly
confessed) knew both the Land and the Gonernour thereof (as indeed we proved
afterward he did:) and therefore desired they all our companies not to
missebehaue themselves toward the people, for that it was an Island called
Iuthland, under the dominion of the king of Denmark, but subtect to the
command of a Lord, who under the king (as his substitute) was the governor.

And that we might be the better drawn to a civil behavior toward
thinhabitants, our officers further told us, that they would repair to the
Lord Governor of the country, and acquaint him with the cause of our
unexpected landing there; upon which we all promised to offer no violence to
the people; neither was that promise violated, because we found the inhabitants
tractable, and as quiet toward us, as we to them: yet the greater numbers of
them ran away with fear, at the first sight of us, because (as afterward they
reported) it could not be remembered by any of them, that they ever either
beheld themselves, or ever heard any of their ancestorsreport, that any strange
people had landed in those places and parts of the Island: for they thought it
impossible (as they told us) ye any ship should ride so near the shore, as
ours did, by reason of the dangerous Sands.

Our officers so soon as they were at land, went to the governor of the Island,
whilst the soldiers (who staid behind them) ran to the houses of the Ilanders,
of purpose to talk with the people, and at their hands to buy victuals for a
present relief: but when we came among them, they could neither understand us,
nor we them; so that the market was spoiled, and we could get nothing for our
money: yet by such signs as we could make, they understood our wants, pitied
them, and bestowed upon us (freely) a little of such things as they had. Yet in
the end, a happy means of our relief was found out by a soldier amongst us,
who was a Dane by birth, but his educatio^ having bin in Engl. no man knew him
to be other than an englishma^.

This Dane made use of his own native language, to the good both of himself,
and us, certifying the people (who the rather believed him because he spoke in
their known tongue) of the cause that compelld us to land upon their ceast,
and that we intended no mischief, violence, or money: to which report of his
they giving credit, stood in less fear of us than before, and thereupon
furnished us with all such necessaries, as the country affoorded to sustain
our wants. The food which we bought of them was only fish, and a kind of course
bread, exceeding cheap. Of which food there was such plenty, that for the
value of ^. d. we had as much fish as xx. men could eat at a meal, and yet
none of the worst sorts of fish, but even of the very best and daintiest, as
Mackrels and Lobsters, and such like. In which our trading with the poor
simple people, we found them so ignorant, that many, yea most of them regarded
not whether you gave them a counter, or a shilling; for the bigger the piece
was, the more fish they would give for it: but besides fish we could get no
other sustenance from them, or at least, could not understand that they had any
other. But observe what happened in the mean time that we were thus in
traffic with the Ilanders for victuals, our Officers as before is said)
being gone to the lord Governor, who lay about xij. english miles from the sea
side, the master of our ship on a sudden hoised up sails, and away he went,
leaving one of his own men at shore, who accompanied our Officers as their
guide, through the Island. The cause of the ships departure, did so much the
more amaze us, by reason it was so unexpected, and the reason thereof unknown
to us: But we imagind the master of the ship and mariners feared to receive us
into the vessel again, because some of our men at their being at sea, threatened
the sailers, and offered the^ abuses before they could be brought to set us on
land.

On the next day following the Lord Governor of the Island came to us, bringing
our Officers along with him, yet not being so confident of us, but that (for
avoiding of any dangers that might happen) he came strongly guarded with a
troop of Horsemen well armed. And (upon his first approach) demanding where
our Ship was, it was fold him in what strange manner it stole away and
forsook us: he then asked what we intended to do, to which we all answered
that we would be ruled by our Officers: hereupon he inquired of them what
they would have him to do in their behalfes, they requested nothing else at
his hands, but only his favorable Pass through the Country, and a Ship to
carry us forward into Sweden: to which request he made answer, that he could
grant no such license until he had made the king of Denmark acquainted with
our being there, for the Island belongd to the King he said, and he was no more
but an Officer or Substitute under him. Yet in consideration that our Ship had
so left us in a strange land, he promised to do all that lay in his power to
effect our good: but withal told us that the people had inward fears and were
possess with suspicions, that our intents of landing upon such a coast (were
not as we our selves affirmed, only to get food, but rather to make spoil
of the poor inhabitants. And therefore to remove all such fears and Ielosies
out of the peoples hearts, he held it most convenient for the general safeties
of both parties, to seperat our numbers, and to spread us abroad in the
Country, one and one in a house, where it was agreede that we should receive
both a lodging, and meat, and drink, until he had sent to the King of
Denmark, some of his own men with our Officers, to understand his Majesty's
pleasure and what should become of us.

To this we all agreed, and accordingly for that purpose, were by the Lord
Governor, safely by this Armed horsemen which were his guard, conducted to his
own house. To that place were all the people of the Island summond together,
they came at the appointed day to the number of five or six hundred, circling
us rownd with Bills Holberds two-hand swords and diverse other weapous: And at
the first sight of us grew into such rage, that presently they would have cut
all our throats, and hewed us to pieces but that the Authority, of the
governor kept them from offering violence, yet was he feign so use the fairest
means of perswation to allay their fury. For they would not believe but that
our ariuall there was to destroy them, their wives and children and make a
conquest at last of their Island, Yet the Governor showed unto them all our
number, which was but 300. men, and those all unweaponed, and so consequently,
neither likely, nor able to undertake any mischiese against them.

Then stood up some bolder than the rest, and teaching the rest to be more
cruel by swearing to have our bloods ere they stirred from thence, because (as
they alleged) our yielding to be disarmed, was done but in policy to beguile
them, with securenesse, whereas they rather doubted that some second supplies
were not far behind us, that would likewise land on their coasts, and join
in the same conquest. But the Governor looking upon the condition of men so
miserable as we appeared, with an ete of clearer judgment and pity, than the
common people could, who were even blinded with their own fury, insslence and
madness, showed the true nature of a wise magistrate, by mingling threats with
mild speeches, charging the unruly multitude, upon pain of death, not to
touch the least fluger of us, but to divide us equally into several villages,
as it thould seem best unto them, and to bestow kind and loving entertainment
upon us til they heard farther from him, which command of his they accordingly
performed.

Inimediatly upon this settling of them and us in quietness, one of our
officers with two of the Governors men, were sent away to the king of Denmark,
to understand his Highness pleasure, which Menengers were no sooner dispatched
about the business, but the Ilanders growing more and more suspicious, came
again to the Governor and never would cease or give over troubling him, until
they had gotten him to make proclamation (in hearing of us all) That if any of
us would freely discover the true cause of our landing upon that coast, and
reveal the plots of any dangerous enterprise intended against them, he should
not only be rewarded with great store of money, and have new apparel to his
back, but also should without tortures, imprisonment, or death be set free,
and sent back again into his owns country This proclamation struck us all
with fear and astonishment. because albeit we to our selves were not guilty
of any plot, or villainy intended to the place or people, yet we knew this
might be a means to endanger all our lives, how innocent soever. Our suspicion
of danger fell out according to our fears, for one Thomas Griffyn a Welsh
man, one of our own company, but a person as it appeared, of a base and
devilish condition, being tempted with the bait of gold, resolved to enrich
himself, albeit it were by the sheding of innocent blood: And thereupon like a
false traitor to all the rest of his fellows, he went and kneeled before the
Governor, and with a face counterfeiting a guiltines and fearful destruction,
told him, that if he might be forgiven for his part, and have his life
warranted, he would discover such a secret, that the opening of the same should
be good to all the Country, and the concealing thereof the Islands utter ruin,
with the confusion of the people. The Governor being glad of this discovery so
promised, assured Griffyn both of his life, and of the reward, willing him not
to fear any danger, but boldly, and with a constant bosom to lay open what he
knew: upon which words, the traitorous Judas told him for certain, that we
came thither only and for no other purpose than to surprise the Island, kill
the inhabitants, make spoil of their wives and goods and having set fire of
their towns and villages to fly to sea again. Yet for all this would not the
Governor believe him, celling him it was a matter very unlikely, that so small
a number, so distressed for want of food, so weather-heaten and so disarmed,
should venture upon an enterprise so full of dangerous events, but the villain
replied, that all these complaints of want, were but songs to beguile the
people, for that upon the least Allarum given, other ships that lay houering
at sea, and furnished both with men and armor, would on the sudden, and that
very shortly land for the same desire of spoil, as these their fellows had
done, and therefore councelled the Governor to prevent such imminent mischiefs
betimes.

The Governor being thus far urged, presently called before him lieutenant
Walton, whose lodging was appointed in his house, and having related to him all
that Griffin had discovered, and withal, demanding of lieutenant Walton what
he could say to this matter of treason and conspiracy: the lieutenant at the
first stood amazed, and utterly denied any such intended villainy, protesting by
the faith of a Soldier, that this report of the Welsh man proceeded fom the
rancour of a vile traitors heart, and therefore on his knees entreated the
Governor, not to give credit to so base a villain (who for the greediness of
alittle money, went about to sell all their lives) and to make all
thinhabitants of the Island become murderers:) adding further, that if the
Governor would but give him leave, he would make the treacherous slave before
his face there presently confess that he had belyed his fellows, and that
there was no such Conspiracy amongst them. The Governor gave him authority to
use his best means to try a traitor, because it was not he said, his desire
to have the blood of any Christians, shead wrongfully: but if he should find
the Welsh man's words to be true, he could do no otherwise than apprehend us as
traitors to his King and the Country and to lay such punishment upon us, as
should be sound due by their laws. But lieutenant Walton earnestly entreating
the Governor, that if he had any such ill thought of us, he would be pleased to
hold him in setters as prisoner for us all, till the truth might be found out:
And that traitorous villain Thomas Griffyn being opposed face to face with the
lieutenant still continuing in his first resolution, and most boldly
perseuering in his accusations against his poor countrymen that lay scattred
in several houses about the Island, not hearing of any such matters: Behold how
all that Griffyn had discovered, were by a strange accident strongly confirmed
to pass for current, and whatsoever lieutenant Walton had uttered in
opposition of Griffyns slanders, were held as untruths, and traps to betray
the Country. For, just as the traitor had told the Governor, that more ships
were not far off, but were ready to second us upon our arrival, it chanced
that in the very heat of this business, and their fears of danger where none
was, two other ships full of armed soldiers came to the same place of the
Island where our ship put in: These two ships had brought soldiers out of the
low Countries (a cessation of wars being there) and were going into
Swethland, as we were, but by cross winds and foul weather, lay so long at
sea, that wanting victuals, they were driven in hither for succor. Whose
sudden approach and ariuall being signified to the L. Governor, the welsh man's
words were then thought true; all the fland was presently up in Arms to resist
the strength and fucie of a most dangerous supposed enemy: and so secretly did
the Inhabitants put on Annes that we who were kept like prisoners amongst them
knew nothing of these vproares. But night approaching, the General gave
special charge that secret watch should be set and kept over every soldier
that lodged in any man's house which by the common people was as narrowly
performed, for they did not only watch us as the Governor commanded, but
amongst themselves a secret Conspiracy was made, that in the dead of night,
when we should be fast asleep they should come and take us in our beds, and
there to bind us with cords: it being an easy thing to do so, when our
company were divided one from another over the whole Island. At the hour agreed
upon, the plot was put in force, for they entered our Chambers, and bound every
Soldier as he lay, making them all ready like so many sheep, marked out for
the slaughter. For mine own part, I had five men and three women to bind me,
who so cunningly tied me fast with cords, whilst I slept, and felt nothing,
nor dreamt of any such matter, that with a twitch only I was plucked stark
naked out of my bed, and laid upon the cold earth underneath a Table, with my
arms bound behind me, so extremely hard, as four men could draw them
together, my feet tied to the foot of the Table, and my neck bound to the
upper part or board of the Table.

In these miserable tortures lay I, and all the rest (in several houses) all
that night, and the most part of the next day, our arms and legs being
pinched and wrung together in such pitiless manner, that the very blood
gushed out at the singers ends of many.

The enduring of which torments was so much the more grieuons, because none
knew what we had done that could incense them to this so strange and spiteful
cruelty, neither could we, albeit we inquired, learn of our tormentors the
cause, because we understood not their language. But to me whilst I stood thus
upon the rack, the old woman mine Hostess came often running in and cried in
her language to me Traue up Jesus, which was as much to say, Pray to Jesus: by
which words of her I perceived they meant to kill me: And still she mumbled
out a story, which I could not interpret, of one William, who lay at the next
house I knew, so that I guessed her meaning was, that William, and all the rest
of our company were in fetters too, like my self. Yet my private thoughts
freed all the rest, because I was persuaded they had dove nothing to deserve
such tyrannous handling: Mary of my self, and my neighbor William I stood
somewhat in a perilous doubt, that they punished us for a knauerie committed
the very self same evening, after which we were entangled in the net, and
could by no struggling get out. And that was this

I happened that night, when this coniuring was to bind us like wicked
spirits in such damnable circles, to suppe with the said William at his
lodging: and whilst we sat merrily at our meat, not mistrusting what Spiders
were weauing over our heads, to catch us like flies in their cob-webs, and
then to kill us, into our rowme comes stumbling a pedlar, with a pack and a
box at his back: We having so fit an Anuile to break ieasts upon, forgot our
selves where we were, and brganne to grow merry in English with Seignior
Mountebanke our Medlar, but he gabling in his language to us, as fast as we did
in ours to him, both laughed at one another, yet knew not for what. At last
down throws he his pack and box on the Table, and being a merry lad, and a
customer to the house, went out of our rowme to visit the household. In the
mean time my pew fellow William spying his opportunity. opened the Pedlars
box, which he thought had bin crammed with sweet meats, but in stead of Sugar
plummes he sonnd nothing there but Soap, the purchase of which scowring booty,
make Williams heart leap for joy, for (quoth he) my linen thou see is
foul, and this Soap shall make me to morrow a clean gentleman. And thereupon
like a conscionable Chaundler took out some half a pound and gave great
weight: the one half of which prize I shared in, because I had as much need
as he to be washed, yet none of us both had need of the shauing which we met
withal an one afterward. But note how justly I was plagued: The self same
Peolar was one of the men that helped to bind me; the knave was less
merciful in tying his knottes than a Beadle or Hangman, and more nimble to
bind my hands behind me, than to bind up his pack. I seeing what ware the
Pedlar made of my body, and how villainously the rest of his Consort played
upon these hempen strings, that were wownd up about my arms, legs, and
neck, thought verily that he and his crew had found me guilty for his Soap,
and so conuemning me behind my back, came likewise to punish me both behind
my back, and to my face.

But crying out to them, because I saw they ieasted not with me, that the Soape
was in my pecket, all the pitiful signs I could devise were made, to show I
had thrust it there, but they for all the noise I made, plied their trussing me
up in halters worse than five hangings, neither regarding the cries of the
poor, imitating therein many worldly rich men, nor understanding whether I
cursed them to the pit of Well, for so hard binding me, or whether I prayed
them to unloose me, neither did Monsieur Pedlar miss his half pound of Soap,
so that I was worried by a sort of curres, I knew how, and where, but I knew
not why.

Whilst thus the whole Island was full of the cries of wretched men, and that
every house seemed a shambles, ready to have Innocents there butchered the next
day, and that every Ilander had the office of a common cuttethroate or
executioner, Gods wonderful working turued the stream of all their cruelty:
For the two ships that came out of the Low Countries, and whose arrival
drove so many miserable souls almost upon the rocks of destruction, having in
that doleful and ruinous night, gotten some provision aboard, weighed Anchor,
and departed toward Swethland.

Which happy News being served up at breakefnst to the Lord Governor betimes
in the morning, and that the Ships had offered no violence to the Country, but
had paid for what they took: About eleauen of the clock the very same day at
noone, we were all like unto so many dead men cut down, and bidden to stand
upon our legs, although very few had scarce legs that could stand.

Of one accident more that befell, I think it not amiss to take note, which
began merrily, but ended tragically, and in blood; and that was this: Four of
our company being lodged in one village, and they being bound to the peace, as
you may perceive the rest were; it happened that an honst where one of them
lay, had tippled hard, and gotten a horses disease, called the Staggers: In
comes he stumbling to the room where the poor Englishman was bound to the
table, hand and foot: which thing the drunken Sot beholding, drew his Hatchet,
which he wore at his girdle, according to the fashion of the country, and
because he would be sure his prisoner should not escape; with his hatchet he
cleft his head And thinking in that drunken murderous humor, he had done a
glorious act, away he reeles out of his own house to that house where the
other three Soldiers lay bound, where beating at the doors and windows, and
the host asking what he meant to make such a damnable noise, he told him so
well as he could stammer it out, that the Lord Governor had sent him thither
to put the three English men to death. Upon this the devil and he (hand in
hand) were let in, the one standing so close at the others elbow, that he never
left him till he had cleft two of their heads, that lay bound: and being then
weary (it should seem) with playing the butcher, he never ceased swearing and
staring, and flourishing with his bloody axe about their heads, till the people
of the house had hung the third man upon a beam in ye room. But they having
less cunning in ye Hang-mans trade, then will to practice it, tied not ye
halter so fast about his neck, as to strangle him: so that after he had hung an
hour, he was cut down, revived, again, was well, and afterward was slain
in Russia.

This bloody feast being thus ended, and all storms as we well hoped, being
now blown over to our freedom, and sitting at liberty from our tormentors; on
the neck of these former miseries fell a mischief more dangerous to us then
all the rest: for tidings were brought to the Governor, that our Ancient, who
travailed with the Governors two men to the King, had traitorously murdered
those his guides, and then ran away himself: upon this rumor, nothing but
thundering and lightening flew from the common peoples mouths: there was no way
now with us but one, and that one was, to have all our throats cut, or our
heads cleft with their axes. But the governor pitying our misfortunes,
labored both by his authority, and by fair speeches, to keep that
many-headed dog (the multitude) from barking. And in the end, when he saw
nothing but the blood of us poor Engishmen would satisfy their thirst,
because they still held us in suspicion and fear, he most nobly, and like a
virtuous Magistrate, pawned to the inhumane Rascals, (to my knowledge) his
honor, all that ever he was worth, yea his very life unto them, that within
three days the messengers sent to the King, should return home, and that
during those three days we should be of good behavior to the Islanders: and
besides that they did not return in such a time, that then he would deliver us
up into their hands, to be used (or rather misse-vsed) in what manner they best
desired.

But God (whose help is most ready, when wretched man has most need of him)
put forth a hand of mercy, and preserved us: for our Ancient with the
Governors two men, came home upon the third day, to the Governors house, and
brought from the King of Denmark his license, to carry us not only through
the country, but commanding that we should be allowed shipping also, at
connenient place, to carry us to Sweueland, whither we were to go: And
according to this license the Governor caused us to be called all together the
very next day; at which time, Thomas Griffin the Welsh Judas, who had all this
while lain feasting in the house of the Lord Governor, began to tremble and to
repent him of his villanny, begging most base forgiveness on his knees, both
from the Governor, and us his countrymen and fellow Soldiers, protesting that
what he did came out of his fear to save his own life. But our Officers (upon
hearing him speak thus) had much ado to keep the companies from pulling
down the house whore Griffin lay, because they would in that rage have hewed
the villain in pieces.

But leaving him and all such betrayers of men's blood to the hell of their own
consciences, let us set forward out of this unfortunate Island, and not stay in
any place else, till in small boats we come by water to Elzinore in Denmark,
where we joyfully got aboard once more; and are hoysing up sails for
Sweueland. Yet even in this sunshine day a storm falls upon us too: for our
Officers not having sufficient money to furnish us with victuals, we were
enforced to pawn our Ancient and Lieftenant Walton, for the safe return of
the ship, with condition that they should not be released until a sufficient
sum of money was sent to defray all charges. So that we left our Officers
behind us; but the King of Sweueland did afterward release them, and then
they came to us. But before their coming, we having a good wind, landed at a
place called Newleas in Sweue: and from thence were carried to Stockholme, (the
Kings seat) and there was the King at the same time: between which two places
it was a days march on horseback.

Upon this our arrival at Stockholme, we met with the rest that had gone
before us, and with diverse others of our countrymen, that came out of the
Low Countries, as before is related. In this place we lay so long, and had such
poor means, that wanting money to buy soode, we wanted food to maintain
life, and so a number of us were ready to sterue: till in the end, our miseries
making us desperate, we fell together by the ears with the Burgers of the
town: in which scambling confusion and mutiny, every man got one thing or
other, of which he made present money to relieve his body withal: yet lay we
at the walls of the city, crying out continually for money, money, till our
throats grew hoarse with balling, but the stones of the walls gave more
comfort to us, then the inhabitants. One day (above all the rest) we heard,
that the King was to ride a hunting; and we imagining that all the abuses,
wrongs, and miseries, which we endured, proceeded from some underhand hard
dealing, and packing of our Captains and Officers, resolved to gather about
the King at his coming forth, and to cry out for money: but the King being
angry (as we supposed) came riding amongst us, drawing his pistol from the
saddle bow, as if he purposed to have shot some of us: but seeing none of us to
shrink from him, nor to be dismayed, he rode back again, we following him,
and desiring; he would either give us money, or else to kill us outright; one
amongst the rest (whose name was William Attane) spoke to the King aloud, thus:
I hold it honor to dye by the hands of a King, but basely to sterue to death, I
will never suffer it. Upon these our clamors, the King looking better upon our
necessities, sent money the next day, and immediately after gave us a months
means in money, and two moan ths means in cloth, to make us apparel.

Of the cloth we received some part, but the money being paid, was by our
Captains sent into England, to their wives; no part of it ever comning to the
poor common Soldiers hands: for presently upon this, we were commanded aboard
the ships, with promise that when we were aboard we should have our money. But
being in ye ships under hatches, away were we carried with provision only of
one months victuals, when by reason of the weather we were forced to lie eight
weeks at sea: in all which time we had nothing but pickelled herrings, and
salt stremlings, with some small quantity of hard dried meats: by which ill
diet, many of our men fell sick and dyed. In the ship wherein I was, we lived
fourteen days without bread, all our best food being salt herrings, which
we were glad to eat raw; the best of us all having no better sustenance.

At the last it pleased God to send us to a place called Vfrasound in Fynland,
where we landed, ( Fynland being subject to the King of Sweueland.) From
Vfrasound we were to go to Weyborough, a chief town in the country of
Fynland: where we no sooner arrriued, but our Soldiers ran some one way, and
some another, so long that the Captains were left alone with the ships. This
running away of them, being done only to seek food, so great was their
hunger.

By this careless dispersing themselves, they lost the command of the whole
country, which they might easily have had, if they had been united together:
and not only were deprived of that benefit, but of horses also which were
allowed by the King for them to ride upon.

So that, what by the reason of the tedious journey, (which we were to travel,
being fourscore leagues) and what by reason of the extreme cold, being a
month before Christmas, at which time the snow fell, and never went off the
ground until Whitsontide following, but all the rain and all the the snow
that fell, freezing continually, diverse of our men were sterued to death with
the frost.



Some lost their fingers, some their toes, some their noses, many their lives:
insomuch that when we all met at Weyborough, we could make no make no more but
1400. able men; and yet when we were landed at Vfrasound we were 2000. strong,
the extremity of the cold country having killed so many of our Soldiers in so
little time.

At our landing at Weyborough we had good hopes to receive better comforts,
both of money and victuals: for the inhabitants told us, the King had allowed
it us, and in that report they spoke truth: yet contrary to our expectation, we
lay there about 14. days, and had nothing but a little Rice, of which we made
bread, and a little butter, which was our best relief. Drink had we none, nor
money: our Captains gave us certain letherne pelches only made of sheeps
skins, to keep us from the cold.

At this place we received Arms to defend us against the enemy, and six
companies that were allowed by the King for horsemen, received horses there.
From thence we were to march into Russia, where our enemies continued. But the
journey was long and uncomfortable: for we marched from Newyeares day until
Whitsontide, continually in snow, having no rest, but only a little in the
nights. So that the miseries and misfortunes which we endured upon the borders
of Fynland, were almost iusufferable, by reason the number of them seemed
infinite. For all the people had forsaken their houses long before we came,
because they were evermore oppressed by Soldiers: by which means we could
get neither meat nor drink, but were glad to hunt cats, and to kill them, or
any beast we could lay hold on, and this we baked, and made them serve for
daily sustenance.

The greatest calamity of all was, we could get no water to drink, it had been
so long frozen up, and the snow so deep, that it was hard to say, whether we
marched over water, or upon land. So that we were compelled to dig up snow,
and with stones red hot, to melt in tubs. and then to drink it.

This affliction continued about 12. or 14. days, till we came into Russia.
Upon our very first entrance into which kingdom, we marched over an Arm of
the Sea, that was 8. leagues over, many of us steruing to death in that
passage, by the cold freezing winds that blew the same day. In which frosty
journey, I saw so much bread as a man might buy for twelve pence, sold away in
little bits for the value of forty shillings.

But this misery ended the next day, at our setting foot into Russia, where we
found plenty both of corn and cattle; only the people of the country ran
away, leaving all their goods behind them, but so cunningly hidden, that the
best policy of ours could hardly find them out.

By this means of the peoples running away, we were glad to play the Millers,
and to grind all our corn our selves, to bake our bread, and to dress our
own victuals. Then marched we up to Nouegrade, (a chief city in Russia)
where we were to receive all our means ye rested behind unpaid: but our
Captains beguiled us, and kept it for themselves: yet to st op our mouths,
they told us we should go into Muscouy, and there all reckonings should be made
even.

We had scarce marched above three days toward Muscouy, but that news came,
how a certain number of our enemies lay in a sconce by the way; the strength
of them was not perfectly known, but it was thought they were not above 700.
And ye we must use some strat agem to expel them fro thence: upon which
relation, our Captains drew forth to the number of 300. English horsemen, and
200. French horsemen: so that in all we were about 500. that were appointed to
set upon the supposed 700. Polanders (our enemies) that so lay insconced: upon
whom we went. Our chief Commander in that service was Monsieur La Veil, a
French man, who so valiantly led us on, that the enemy hearing of our coming,
fled over a water that was by the seonce; yet not with such speed, but that we
slew to the number of 400. of their side, and lost only three men of our own:
but we took the sconce.

About the sconce stood a fair town called Arioua, with a river called the
Volga, running through the middle, but no bridge over it: only a few boats
and sloates, (made and cut out of trees) were there, to carry the people over
from the one half of the town to the other.

This sconce furmshed us not only with great store of riches, but also with a
number of Polish horses: and as many arms as served to arm 500. men, our want
of that commodity being as much as of any thing besides: for of those five
hundred men that went upon the service, there were not 300. fixed arms; yet
through the hand of him that deals victories, or ouerthrows, as it pleases
hun best, the day was ours.

Over this riner Volga the enemies were never driven before, either by the
Emperor of Russia, or by the King of Sweueland: for which cause (as afterward
we heard) the next day when they departed from the other side of the river,
they burnt that half of the town on which side they were themselves, and in
most bloody, barbarous, and cruel manner, made hauock both of men, women, and
children, albeit (not above half a year before, ye inhabitants on that side
had revolted from their own Emperor, and turned to the^. In which tyrannical
uproar, their custom was, to fill a house full of people, and then (the doors
being locked upon them, that none might issue forth) the house was fired about
their ears: and oftentimes were young children taken by the heels, and cast
into the midst of ye slames. This inhumane tyrranny being practiced not
only, by the Poles, that were our enemies, but even by those Russes that were
traitors to their own Empeperour, and served under the Poles, and were called
Cassakes, whose cruelty far exceeded the Polish.

The town being thus burnt to ye earth, all the 6000. (which as I said before,
fled over ye river, out of ye sconce, and were by us supposed to be but 700.)
came down in full battalion to ye rivers side with such fierceness, as if
presently they and their horses would have swom over, to fight with us, which
being perceived, our poor 500. stood ready to resist them. But whether they
feared our numbers to be greater then they were, and ye we had some other
secret forces, I know not: but away they marched, ye self same day in which
they came down in that bravery not doing any thing; of which we for our parts,
were not much sorry; because if the battles had joined, we knew our selves
far unable to withstand them. And this was the service of the most note that
we went upon.

Two or three other sconces and towns we took from our enemies, they not once
daring to resist us, because they knew nothing of our numbers and force. But
the dishonest dealings of our Captains, made the whole army discontent;
insomuch ye our Soldiers would often times deny to go forth upon service,
because they had been almost a year in the land, and had received no more but
one Rubble, (amounting to the value of 10. s^. English.) So that upon these
discontents, 50. of our men ran away to the enemy at one time, and discovered
to them our strength. After which we durst not be so bold as before we had
been.

The fire of a new conspiracy was likewise kindling, but it was perceived, and
quenched with the blood of ye conspirators, of which the chief were hanged. On
theretherefore we went: when we came within 40. leagues of Muscouy, news was
brought that the enemy had beleaguerd 7000. Russes that were our friends, and
that unless we forced the siege to break up, the 7000. Russes would every man
be sterued where they lay. This sad report, (albeit we had resolved never to
go upon any more service, until we had our pay) so wrought in our hearts,
that we much pittyed the miseries of others, because we our selves had tasted
of the like.

Our General (whose name was Euerhorne) was a Fynlander, and with a company of
Fynland blades (as they term them,) well appointed on horseback, was by the
King of Sweueland, sent after us, as our Conuoy, until we should come to Pontus
le Guard, who was chief General over the whole army of strangers that came
into the land: so that according as he was sent and charged by the King, he
ouertooke us before we came to Arioua. By the entreaty therefore of this
Fynlander, and the flattering promises of our own Captains, we were contented
to go upon this service, and to deliver the Russes, or to dye our selves in the
action. Yet with condition, that (as they promised to us) we should by the
way, meet our chief General (Pontus le Guard) who with certain numbers of
English, French, and Dutch, (which the year before were come into the land)
was upon a march out of Muscouy, not only to meet us, but to join with us,
and pay us all our money which remained good to us; provided likewise, that so
soon as ever we should release the 7000. Russes, our money should be paid
down. On these conditions (I say) we yielded to to go upon the business.

At length Pontus le Guard met us (according to the promise:) and with him was
money brought to pay us, and his word given that presently we should receive
it. But the lamentable estate, in which the poor besieged Russes were (within
the sconce) being at the point of death for want of food, required rather
speedy execution, then deliberation: so that the necessities of their hard
fortunes craving haste, on we went, having about 19. or 20000. Russes, that
were people of the same country, joined to our army, to aid them in this
enterprise. But as we all were upon a march, the enemy having received
intelligence of our approaching, set forward to the number of 8000. Lanciers
and more, to intercept us by the way: and being within one days march of the
place to which we were likewise going, they set fire upon three or four
villages hard by the place where we lay at gcasse with our horses, for a token
that they were coming. And this was done upon Midsommer day last in the
morning, by break of day. Then came they thundering with shouts and cries to
set upon us: but no sooner was the Alarm given, when the greatest part of
those 19. or 20000. Russes, that were joined to us as our aid, fled most
basely, before any blow was ginen. This sudden cowardice of theirs, somewhat
amazed us: but the hour being now come, wherein we were not to talk of
dangers, but to go meet dangers, with our six companies of English horse, we
bravely resisted the Holanders, and with great hurt to them, but with little
loss upon our part, charged them three several times.

At last Pontus le Guard (our chief General) took his heels and fled too,
leaving us utterly destitute of all direction: which much astonished us, as not
well understanding what to do: for our greatest strength (being by their
flight) taken from us, none but we strangers were left in the field, and of us
there was not in all, above two thousand, and of that number there were above
six hundred French horsemen, who seeing both the General gone, and the Russes
fled, turned their backs upon us, and ran away too most valiantly, yet not out
of the field, but to the enemy.

Then were we not above twelve or roureteene hundred at the most left to resist
eight thousand at the least: upon whom notwithstanding, our six companies of
English horsemen, charged three several times, without any great loss, but
with much honor: And at the fourth time, for want of powers to second them
(which the French should have done) all our six companies were scattered and
overthrown with the loss of few of our colors. The captains over these six
companies of horse, were these.

Viz. Captain Crale, of whose company I was. Captain Kendricke. Captain
Benson. Captain Carre. Captain Colbron. Captain Creyton.


Which six Captains had not in all their companies, above 500. men.

In this battle, Captain Creyton was slain in the field; Captain Crale was
shot in the knee, and within a short time after, dyed of that wound; not above
twelve of his company escaping. Captain Kendricke was wounded in diverse places
of the head, and dyed. Captain Benson was shot in the hand, and wounded in the
head, and yet escaped, and lived: only Captain Carre and his Cornet escaped,
but all his company scattered and lost. Diverse other Officers were slain,
whose names I cannot remember.

Thus were all our English horsemen dispersed and overthrown, to the number of
500. and upwards: Our General Euerhorne with his companies of Fynland, or
Fynsco blades, were also put to retraite: so that there was not left in the
field, above 6. or 700. which were footmen. And of these, one half was
English, one half Dutch, who kept only a certain place by a wood side,
barricadoed about with Wagons, having with them four field pieces, with which
they did great spoil to the enemy. But their number being but few, neither
durst they venture on the enemy, nor durst the enemy enter upon them, but kept
them still (as it were besieged) in that place only, because they could no
ways escape. The inconvenience of which cooping up in so narrow a room, being
looked into, and the dangers on every side well considered, it was held fittest
for safety, to summon the enemy to a parlee. In which parley, the enemy
offered, that if they would yield, and fall to their sides, they should have
good quarter kept. And if any man had desire to go for his own country, he
should have liberty to go with a pasport, from the King of Poland. Or if any
would serve the King of Poland, he should have the allowance of very good
means duly paid him. Upon thiese compositions they all yielded, and went to
the enemy; only Captain York and his Officers, with some few of their
Soldiers, went back into the country, and came not to the enemy; as the rest
had done: who from thence marched up to ye Polish Leaguer, being ten miles
distant from the place, and there they continued. But such as desired to
travail to their own ceuntries, were sent to the King of of Polands Leaguer,
which lay at that time, at a place called Smolensco, and there accordingly had
their Pass, to the number of 100. of which number I my self was one. What
became of the rest, I know not: but I with five more, held together in
travail, until we came to Dantzicke, a great town in Prussia, being distant
from Smolensco, one hundred leagues.

FINIS.

