THE LATE PROCEEDINGS IN ALL TROVBLED PARTS OF CHRISTENDOM THIS 25 OF JUNE
1622.

With the besidgeing and taking in of the City of Mayneuelte by the
Protestants in Switzerland, which was under the Arch Duke Leopoldus custody.

The weekly news from Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Bohemia, the Palatinate, and
the Low Countries.

Printed this 25. of June.

LONDON Printed by William Jones for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are
to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

NEVVES From Italy, Germany, etc.
From Rome, the 21 May. 1622.
THE commander Mounsour De Sellery the new French Ambassador did arrive here
last thursday, and was with great state and Pomp entertained.

From Naples we hear that 60. persons are taken prisoners, of them that would
throw stones at the Viceroy, when he did ride in his Coach with Count Montery,
and the Viceroy before said has confined upon the Galleys three Bakers, having
baked brown and small loaves. And their were dispacht five posts, with
command to gather in the old coins by waighte, and the leavening off men was
differed.

From hence is sent a post unto Don Pedro Aldobrandino in Germany, with charge
to license the soulders as yet entertained, being made over at Collen 30.
thowsands crowns for their pay. The Pope is resolved to assist the Emperor
and the Catholics with aid, to maintain the warlike forces, having Don Pedro
aforesaid gotten a new Commission in the Bishopprick of Elsas.

From Venice the 27. May.
This Sigenourie causes a new, certain Galleys to be set forth, to accompany
the new Gallion called Terre di Mare toward the Fleet; in Candia it is
commanded to keep the galleys ready, and out of the store house is the Iseland
Lepanto provided with great store of warlike provision.

At Mylane they advise daily by what means possible they may bring again to
obedience the Ten confederated Grisons; sending daily forces unto them, the
treaty betwixt Sauoy and Mantua is broke off without any hope of good success.

They advise from Turine that the Duke of Sauoy was come back from Riuely and
had dispacht diverse posts to France, Venice, and Mounsier la Diguiere, to what
effect is not yet known, the said La Diguiere, has ready in the Delphinate
12. thousand foot and 8000. horse.

Letters from Constantinople relate, that the great Turk made great
preperation for war, and that the forces are kept in readiness, the like was
commanded unto the garrisons in Hungaria, having the Bassa charge to assist the
Lord Budiani with all his power; the Navy is gone to Sea, but whether is not
yet known.

From Langen Salth the 16. dito.
Two days ago the Duke of Saxoney Elector, with certain hundredth of Horse,
and one company on foot, with ten pieces of Ordnance did arrive here, the next
day after, certain companies of foot with a strong convoy of horse came by
here, and went toward the Land VVeeringen at Mulhawsen, and daily more horse
and foot follow them, and their are also a thousand Cuirassiers marching being
sent by the gentry, part of them are already here about arrived, so that the
aforesaid Elector prouides for his frontiers, and putts good garrisons therein.
At the last Diet of the Bishopprickes of Meisen, Mersenburgh and Naumburgh, are
three of the aforesaid Dukes sons chosen to be Administrators of them
severally, so that these Bishopprickes are provided with Lords in time of
necessities.

Certaynes days ago, their arrived in these parts Ambassadors from Denmark,
Braudenburgh, Pomeron, Culembach and Dysenach, and were with his Highness. This
morning the said Duke went toward the Frontiers toward Erfirt, to provide
their for all manner of necessity, sending Attillarie and soldiers thither to
lie in garrison, and there came 12. Wagons with munition, and certain pieces
of Ordnance hither from Lypsich.

From Vienna the 1. of Iunne.
Concerning the Diet in Hungary, we

We have advice that his Imperial Majesty did stay in Odenburgh, and the 26.
of May he caused the States there present to meet, making his proposition in
the Latin tongue unto them, and caused them greatly to rejoice, and delivered
the same afterward in writing unto them: the Bishop of Gran promised in the
name of the States, that they would consult upon the same. And is concluded
already, half Germany and half Hungarian garrisons to lay in the fortes and
strong holds; The diet prospers so well, that we hope his Majesty will be
here ere long.

Bethlem Gabor is not at Odenburgh, having been called back from his journey,
his Lady being deceassed: But the Lord Budeani was to meet there. The
Hungarians likewise have further consented to let go 100000. cattle out of
their Country, upon condition that they shall be paid with good money as in
former time.

This day is arrived here an Ambassador from the King of Denmark, but his
Majesty being departed, went from Odenburgh, where he had audience by his
Majesty; and being come back, related that his Imperial Majesty would devise
means to bring the Empire to peace, because that those that were quiet might
not be disturbed. The success Time will reveal.

From Prague the second day.
Here are daily celebrated in great state and pomp the Processions, being
followed by diverse Orders.

From Glatts we hear, that they have surprised Niourat, climing over the
walls by night, and slew the garrison, amongst whom was a company of horse and
their Commander and having pillaged it, and set it on fire

Glats should be besieged, but they go slowly on that lie thereabout, and
stand in great doubt. Klingenbergh is besi^ged, but will not surrender, make
many sailies, and do great hurt: the garrisons of Tabor and Brid wis are sent
thither already.

From Lausnits the third day.
They have written yesterday from the city of Zitta, that it had rained there
brimstone, which did give, not only an evil smell, but it kindled and burned
likewise as other brimstone. We understand also, that diverse times in the
night, did come two fiery horsemen before the city, at whose approach all
the Gates opened, being followed by a whole Army of horse and foot, and
coming upon the market place, vanished quite away.

From Wirtzburgh the eight day.
Monday last we hear marched through this city 12000. foot and 1000. horse of
the Emperors forces, being conducted by the General Verdugo, they have a great
train after them, and many horse take their way toward Meningen, against them
of Haluerstat, who march toward Rottenburgh: to morrow should follow them yet
certain thousands, and are joined with them also certain thousands of our
traind men, with 9. pieces of ordnance, and beside these we keep yet certain
thousands of trained men in the country.

From great Geraw the tenth day.
The Landgraue Lodowicke of Darmstat is with the Marquess of Dourlach at
Darmstat, where are both the Armies of Mansfelt, which lie here about,
following in his Coach the Camp, accompanied with his son.

From Frankfort the twlfth day.
The army of Mansfelt is Thurseday last departed from great Geraw, and marched
toward Manheim, to what intent is not known. The Landgraue is still in the
army. Tilley in the mean time makes himself very strong, a great number of
his forces being arrived about Darmstat, have had many skirmishes with
Mansfelts forces. The Duke Christian of Brunswicke did arrive last night at
Nidda, belonging unto the Landgraue of Hessen, and is but four Dutch miles
from hence, and came this night near this city, being seen already diverse
of his forces; and it is likely some stratagems will be set on foot ere long,
but in the mean time the countries hereabout are indifferently mightily
spoiled and ruinated. We have likewise now certain news, that the Baron of
Anbolt is joined with Monsieur Tilley, and is about Zumgenbergh.

From Collen the 14. day.
Yesterday was reported here, that in the dominion of the Landgraue of
Darmstat; had been diverse and great skirmishes betwixt Mansfelts and the
Spanish forces, and that Mansfelt had gotten a great overthrow. But this day
we are advertised from Ments and thereabouts, that there have been great
knockes given, but that Mansfelt had obtained the victory; and after the lame
transported his forces over the Rheine, which caused no small fear to those of
Ments. We do understand likewise, that the Duke Christian of Brunswicke is to
join with Mansfelt. The offects will be known hereafter.

From Mastright we understand, that the Spanish forces have their rendevous
there and at Die, and we appointed there likewise the forces in Flanders, as
amongst them those that lay before Sluice, being the Forts and Skonces beset
with Country people, and should daily more be leuyed of them for the defense
of the country. But whither the Spanish forces are to march, is not yet
known. They would feign have put in Sherwghenbosch an hundred men more, but
that the Citizens would not receive them.

From Wesel the 15. day.
Count Henry of the Bergh, is with his forces yet here about, and looks for
more aid. Count Henry Frederick of Nassau, is arrived at Emricke, and do
likewise daily there, and at Rees diverse horse and foot come, to what intent is
unknown to us.

In Zealand are certain ships landed, coming from England with soldiers to
be dispersed amongst the English Regiments in those Provinces.

There is brought in a good prize here, and other also at Amsterdam and
Duchuysen, and we are likely to have daily more and more, in regard of the
ships abroad.

The two Pirates of Dunkerk have saved themselves in a Port of Scotland, but our
men of war lay in wait for them.

From Venice the third of June 1622.
Is written from Naples, that those that have caused lately the Commotion, are
daily clapped up, and that the Marquess de Terrico did leuy a Regiment for
Milaine.

Letters the 16. of May from Constantinople do declare, that the great Turk,
under color to visit the sepulcher or tomb of Mahomet, intends to make a
notable attempt against the Christians, being his navy four score sail
strong, bound unto Archipelago, to join with the Galleys of Rhodes; likewise
were diverse other Galleys sent toward the Black Sea, against the Gosacks,
seeing that notwithstanding the peace concluded with Polonia, they did rob in
the aforesaid Sea, which likely will cause the war to be renewed against the
said Kingdom.

From Milaine we understand, that the governor has published a proclamation
whereby all those that have borne any office since the year 1592. are commanded
(upon life) to give notice of their goods, and rents, and to show how they have
gotten the same.

We are advised from Bundten, that the confederated have recouerd Mayeuelt,
and besieged Chur, and that there is made preparation to rescue the same; at
the other side, those of Zurich, Basil and Barn have sent aid unto the
confederated aforesaid.

The 13. Cantons of Swisserland have also sent an Ambassador to the Archduke
Leopoldus, to know his resolution, whether he will surrender the Veltolines
and other places taken; and in case of denial they will assist them.

From Breslaw in Silecia the second day.
The country of Oppelen a general assembly there being made to inuest the
brother of Bethlem Gabor, was invaded by five thousand Cosacks, which have done
great hurt by pillaging, robbing and burning, and 5000 more are coming,
resolved to travel to Glats through Silecia.

Two days ago are sent from hence toward Glats certain Wagons with
munition, and two pieces of Ordinance, every one of them drawn by an 100.
Horse, which being not strong enough, they were enforced to send for more. The
Bishop of Ments will be at the siege himself, and will be inquartered with his
Forces at Franckensteyn. Here is News likewise, that the old Count of Thurn is
marching with 6000. Wallaches, and 30000. Turks and Tartars to rescue the
City of Glats.

From Vienna the 8. of June. His Imperial Majesty is yet at Odenburgh, and
the States of Hioigary consult daily about his Propositions. The Lord Stensell
Thurso is elected and sworn Palatine of Hungaria.

The States of Hungaria will not suffer by any means that the Jesuits shall
possess any goods in the Kingdom.

Bethlem Gabor has sent his Ambassador to the Dyete, but consults not with
the States, and has sent a fair Turkey Horse, with rich furniture unto the
Emperor for a present.

The Lord Budiani has likewise sent his Ambassador, but he stands very firm
to his Propositions. But nevertheless they hope, that the Dyete will soon
come to take a happy end.

The Ambassador of Denmark it seems has no other charge but to exhort the
Emperor, that he will be pleased to appease the Empire; it is thought that he
shall be soon disparcht.

From Prague the 9. of June. From Glats we hear, that their Garrison has
slain diverse Companies of horse of the Count of Lightenstein in a Sallie,
whereupon are sent from hence certain Wagons with Munition, and 6. Pieces of
Ordinance, to take effectually the siege in hand.

In the mean time, have those of Glats joined with their Forces the 6000.
revolted Moors, and having armed the same, have taken lately a Town, called
Winschellurgh, beset with five Companies, which were almost all slain or
taken. And the old Count of Thurn is marching with great Forces to rescue Glats
aforesaid.

Those of Klingenbergh stand yet bravely out, and lately assaulting their
enemies, have killed many in their Sconses, and pulled them down, returning
with one of their Colors.

Sunday last is here Proclaimed and published, that all the debtors of those
that have left the Country, as of the executed and arrested persons, shall make
known upon great penalty unto the Commissioners, thereunto appointed, what
they owe them, and pay afterward at a certain time the same.

This next Sunday are the Catholics to take the Church of the Sussits in the
little Town for their own use.

From Leipsich the 12. of June. The Duke of Saxon Elector is as yet at
Langensaltz. The General Wolf of Mansfelt, marches up to morrow with the red
and yellow regiment, and 500. horse, toward Duringen; whereupon the Country
people shall return home again.

From Franckford the 16. of June. In the last Skirmish betwixt the Spanish
forces, and them of Mansfelt, are on both sides slain about 1000. men. The
Counts horses being not seconded in time by his foot, did retreat without
disorder. On the Spanish side, besides the Baron of Bussy, are diverse great
officers killed. But they have taken prisoner the young Palsgraue of Birkenvelt
with certain officers.

Hereupon are the Spanish marched on with resolution, to lay a bridge over the
Main, betwixt Hannaw and Steinheim, to cut off the passage of the Duke of
Brunswicke, but understanding how strong he was, and not far from thence,
have taken up their bridge, being almost half finished, and inquarterd
themselves about Eberstadt, and there about in the dominions of the Landtgraue
of Darmstadt.

This last night about ten a Clock are some of the Forces of Brunswicke
arrived at Henst (belonging unto the Bishop of Ments) being conducted by
Kniphowsen, discharging presently their Ordinance against it; they lie yet
there: and near the Town is seen a great fire, to what purpose we know not
yet. Many of his Commanders are in this City, being all the Inns most taken
up, we are likewise to hear shortly of some notable attempt.

From Cullen, the 18. of June, we have but little or no news to write at this
present, the news of Ments, is not so good as we did write at first, being a
great number of eminent Officers sent thither and buried.

From Westphalia, we hear that the Spanish forces, were marched toward
Lapsstadt, and demanded great sums of money of the Town besides 7. men.
Other say that they have besieged Ravenspurgh, the certainty you shall have by
the next.

From Franckfort, the 19. of June, Thursday last, being the 16. of this month,
are certain hundredth men come out of the chief quarter of the Duke of
Brunswick, to summon the Town of Henst, but they have defended themselves
bravely, doing great hurt with their shot, but being summoned the third time,
and denying to surrender the Town, there were sent great forces to take it,
which the besieged espying, and that there was no succor at hand, they have
abandoned the Town and Castle, flying all that could over the River of Maine:
whereupon the forces of Brunswicke taking it, slew all the Soldiers they could
meet withal. And the said Duke is at this present upon the Castle.

The same Evening, about 9. of the clock, are the Chief Lieuetenant Paep, the
Captain of a troop of horse called Coert, and the Lieuetenant of Ercklens
with 120. horse of the Duke aforesaid, passed the Maine at Tunneckheim, and
met on Friday, about 4. a clock in the Morning, a Company of foot of their
Enenemies, which they have assaulted and defeated, taking 70. prisoners,

Yesterday, is the whole Bavarian Army seen near this City, and did lie
all this night about the same, the vantguard, is of 30. Cornet of horse,
amounting to 1500. and 3000. foot. Mansfeild comes here with his Army
likewise, so that it is likely, that shortly some blows will be given.

There is come an English Ambassador to the Duke of Branswicke, to deal with
him about a cessation of Arms, and they say that Monseur Tilley, has
consented unto the same.

The Landgraue Lodovic, of Darmstadt is sent to Mainheim, and his Son the
young Landgraue is here.

We understand from France, that the King went on with his resolution,
notwithstanding that many did go about to agree the matter. Those of Rochell
strengthen themselves daily and fortify the City. We hear that the Count of
Soissons, is near unto them, with ten thousand men, but the Rochellers do
their best endeavor to keep the Command of of the Sea. They have received
lately some English Soldiers but disarmed, some say 400. some but 180.

Here is certain news that 5. Ships, arrived from the East Indies, of which
two are English, one for Sea-land, and two for Texell, being very richly laden.
And bring news that the affairs and traffickes of the Indies were in good a
estate, And that 5. Ships the last year being departed from hence, were
arrived at Iucatra, within the space of four months and three days, the like
was never done by any of our Ships.

FINIS

