A SHORT Discourse:

Expressing the substance of all the late pretended Treasons against the
Queens Majesty, and Estates of this Realm, by sundry Traitors: who were
executed for the same on the 20. and 21. days of September last past. 1586.

Whereunto is adjoined a Godly Prayer for the safety of her Highness person,
her honorable Counsel, and all other her obedient Subjects.

Seen and Allowed.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Edward White, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the sign of the Gun.

To the right Worshipful Sir Owen Hopton: her Majesty's Lieutenaunt in her
Highness Tower of London.
RIght Worshipful, the due consideration of the innumerable Treasons practiced
and intended against the Queens most excellent Majesty since the time of her
Highness most happy and prosperous reign, together with the success of them
and all other Traitors whatsoever, as well in the Reign of other Kings and
Princes of this Land (from whom she is royally decended) as also in her own,
might sufficiently have terrified those late executed Traitors to have been
warned from their wicked entents and dangers depending thereon, not only to
their lives, their souls, their goods and Lands, but also of the infamy
ensuing there by to their posterity for ever: in respect of their horrible
practices, against our most gracious and dread sovereign (whose Highness God
long preserve in all health and happiness) for whom all her loving and
duetifull Subjects are bound (even in our Souls) to give God continual
thanks for preserving her Majesty and us all, from so apparent dangers as
was pretended, and had ensued thereby, to the ruenating of this whole Realm,
had it not most graciously been prevented by the finger of God. The substance
of which their intended Treasons, I have rudely handled in a few verses here
ensuing, and have boldly dedicated them to your Worship, humbly beseeching you
to accept them at his hands, who stands bound to your Worship (in respect of
the undeserved courtesy he lately received by your good means) to pray for
you and yours during his life.

Your Worships in all bounden duty, Thomas Nelson.

A Godly Prayer given to her Majesty.
O Gracious God bow down thine ear, to me that prostrate stand,
And grant my prayer may be perfourmde with thy most mighty hand.
Grant Lord that our most gracious Queen Elizabeth by name,
May flourish still in happy state and everlasting fame.
Grant that her Highness live and reign in health and perfect peace:
Grant that her foes may be cut of, her friends O Lord increase.
Grant that her Counsel still may live, to do that which is right,
For safety of her person and, this Realm both day and night.
Grant that the Nobles of Estate, and Lords of high renown,
May live in duty to their Prince, and true still to the Crown.
Grant Lord that Pastors see dischargde, their duties in this Land,
To beat down Sin and wickedness, which has the upper hand.
Grant Justices may have a care, to do that which is right,
That Widows nor the fatherless, be not oppressed by might.
Grant Lord that they may still defend, the stranger and the poor,
Who sundry times by violence, is thrust clean out of door.
Grant Lord that each man's Conscience, may prick him to do well,
To fly deceit, to banish fraud, least that they hang in Hell.
Grant Lord that truth may still take place, though some would blind the
same,
And grant that time may try the truth, to their rebuke and shame.
Grant love may reign twixt man and man, so may contentions cease:
Grant Lord that each man have his own, thy blessings to increase.
Grant Lord that Pride and Covetousness, may banished be for aye,
Or else the poor shall quickly be, thereby brought to decay.
Grant Lord that every kind of vise, may straight be trodden down,
And every man reform himself, in City and in Town.
From wicked Lawyers us defend, consume the Usurers Hall,
They scratch and scrape the poor man's purse, they get the Devil and all.
They hourd up wealth in wondrous store, they do incroach for Lands,
They rack their Rents they poule the poor, yet give naught with their hands.
Grant Charity may come again, who went to seek S. Eedie,
That rich men's ears and pursses might, stand open to the needy.
God grant all quarrelles now may cease, among both great and small,
That bowget Lawyers may not lurk, about Westminster Hall.
God grant that Children now may grow, obedient as they ought,
And that their Parents have a care, they may be duly taught:
Their duty to the God of heaven, their Parents and their Peers,
So shall they better teach their own, when that they come of years.
God grant that servant may have care, to do their duty still,
First to please God, to live in fear, and do their Masters will.
God grant we may forgive our foes, reuengement for to shunn:
For God a just revenger is, of wrongs that has been donn.
Thus of my Prayer I make an end, God grant our ends be good,
That we may rest with Christ himself, who bought us with his blood.
T. N.

FINIS.
Verses written upon the Alphabet of the Queens Majesty's name, and given to
her Highness.
Eternal God who guides still your Grace,
Lengthen your life in health and happy state:
Inspier your Subjects hearts in every place,
Zealous in love, and free from secret hate,
And shorten life in those that breed debate.
Behold her Lord who is our only stay,
Even she it is, by whom we hold our own:
Turn not thy face from her in any way,
Hew down her foes and let them all be known.
Renowned Queen, your highness Subjects joy,
Even for to see the fall of all your foes:
God of his mercy shield you from anoye,
Intended Treasons still for to disclose.
None of all but will most duly pray,
Almighty God preserve you night and day.
The substance of all the late intended Treasons.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen, her Counsel long maintain:
Confound her foes and grant her grace in health to rule and reign.
WHen first the gracious God of heaven, by means did bring to light,
The Treasons lately practiced, by many a wicked wight,
Against their Prince whose life they sought, and many a noble Peer:
The substance of whose Treasons strange, you shall most truly hear.
Their Treasons once discovered, then were the Traitors sought:
Some of them fled into a Wood, where after they were caught,
And being brought unto the Tower, for joy the Belles did ring,
And throughout London Bonfiers made, where people Psalms did sing.
And set their Tables in the streates, with meats of every kind,
Where was preparde all signs of joy, that could be had in mind:
And praisde the Lord most heartily, that with his mighty hand,
He had preserved our gracious Queen, and people of this Land.
Which thing was taken in good part, by our renowned Queen,
Who by her Letters gave them thanks, as plainly may be seen:
Assuring them that all her care was for their safety still,
And that thereby she would deserve their love and great good will.
The Traitors well examined, (whom God himself bewrayed)
Their Treasons known, then were they straight to Westminster conuayed,
Whereas they all indicted were of many a vilde pretense,
Seven pleaded guilty at the Bar before they went from thence.
The manner how they did begin, herein will plain appear,
Their purposes in each respect, you shall most truly hear:
Herein unto you will be seen, if they had not been foylde,
Our Queen, our Realm, yea rich and poor together had been spoylde.
One Sauidge lurking long in France, at Rheames did there remain,
Whom Doctor Gifford did persuade, great honor he should gain:
If that he would go take in hand (these matters very strange,)
First to deprive our gracious Queen, Religion for to change.
And then for to enuade the Realm, by trowpes of foreign power,
To overthrow the government, and kill her in her Bower:
Or forceably to dispossess, the Queen of Englands Grace,
And to proclaim the Scottish Queen, and set her in her place.
Which matter Sauidge promised, his full performance too,
So that he might see warrant with, safe Conscience so to do:
The Doctor vowed by his Soul, and bad him understand,
It was an honorable thing, to take the same in hand.
When Sauidge heard that merits were, to him thereby so rife,
He vowed for to do the same, or else to lose his life.
And shorthy into England hyed, and did imparte the same,
To Babington of Darby shire, a man sure void of shame.
And told him how that he had vowed, to do it or to dye,
Desiring him of help and aid, and that immediately:
A Jesuit Priest whom Ballard hight, came over to that end,
He came also to Babington, and daily did attend.
Still to persuade him that he would, attempt and take in hand,
This vilde and wicked enterprise, and stoutly to it stand:
And told him that he should have aid, of sixty thousand men,
That secretly should landed be, and told him how and when.
And in respect of all his pains, he truly might depend,
That it was lawful so to do, Renown should be the end:
But let all Traitors now perceive, what honor he has won,
Whose traiterous head and wicked heart, has many one undone.
This proud and haughty Babington, in hope to gain renown,
Did stir up many wilful men, in many a Shire and Town:
To aid him in this deuilish act, and for to take in hand,
The spoil of our renowned Prince, and people of this Land.
Who did conclude with bloody blade, a slaughter to commit,
Upon her Counsel as they should, within Star Chamber sit:
Which is a place whereas the Lords, and those of that degree,
Yeeldes Justice unto every man, that craves it on their knee.
Yea famous London they did mean, for to have sack beside,
Both Mayor and Magistrates therein, have murdered at that tide:
Each rich man's goods had been their own, no favor then had serude,
Naught but our wealth was their desire, though we and ours had starude.
Besides these wicked practices, they had concluded more,
The burning of the Navy and, the cheifest Ships in store:
With fire and sword they vowed, to kill and to displace,
Each Lord Knight and Magistrate, true Subjects to her Grace.
They had determinde to have cloyde, and poisoned out of hand,
The chief and greatest Ordinance, that is within this Land:
And did entend by violence, on rich men for to fall,
To have their money and their Place, and to have spoyld them all.
The Common wealth of England soon, should thereby have been spoylde,
Our goods for which our Parents and, our selves long time had toylde,
Had all been taken from us: besides what had ensued,
The substance proves plainly, to soon we all had rewed.
Those were the Treasons they conspirde, our good Queen to displace,
To spoil the States of all this Land, such was their want of grace:
But God that does protect her still, offended at the same,
Even in their young and tender years, did cut them of with shame.
These Traitors executed were, on Stage full strongly wrought,
Even in the place where wickedly, they had their Treasons sought:
There they were hangde and quartered, there they acknowledgd why,
Who like as Traitors they had liude, even so they seemde to dye.
O wicked Impes, O Traitors vilde, that could these deeds devise,
Why did the fear of God and Prince, depart so from your eyes:
No Rebels power can her displace, God will defend her still,
True Subjects all will lose their lives, ere Traitors have their will.
How many mischiefs are deuisde: how many ways are wrought:
How many vilde Conspiracies, against her Grace is sought:
Yet God that does protect her still, her Grace does well preserve,
And works a shame unto her foes, as they do best deserve.
O heavenly God preserve our Queen, in plenty health and peace,
Confound her foes, maintain her right, her joys O Lord increase:
Lord bless her Counsel evermore, and Nobles of this Land,
Preserve her Subjects, and this Realm, with thy most mighty hand.
FINIS.
The names of those Traitors that were executed for the Treasons before
mentioned on the first day.
John Ballard, a Priest. Anthony Babington of Deticke in the County of Darbie
Esquier. John Sauidge Gentleman. Robert Barnwell Gentleman. Chidiacke Tichborne
of Porchester in the County of South Esquier. Charles Tylney Esquier and a
Pentioner. Edward Abington of Hinlop in the County of Worcester Esquier.
The names of those which were executed on the second day.

Thomas Salisburie of Denbigh in the County of Denbigh Esquier. Henry Dunn
Gentleman. Edward Iohnes of Denbigh in the County of Denbigh Esquier. John
Trauers of Prescot in the County of Lancaster Gentleman. John Charnock of
Lincolnes Inn Gentleman. Robert Gage of Croydon in the County of Surrey
Gentleman. Jerome Bellamie of Harrow in the County of Middlesex Gentleman.

