A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Worshipful, GILBERT DAVIES Esquire,
at Christow in Deuon.

By W. MILLER, Minister, and Preacher of Gods Word at Runington. April 15. Anno
Dom. 1620.

Reu. 13.14. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, etc. SAPIENTIA PACEM.
PAX OPVLENTIAM.

F K

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY, VIRTUOUS, AND religious Gentlewoman, Mistrisse GARTHRVDE
DAVIES, W. M. wishes all terrestrial happiness here on earth, and all
celestial blessedness in Heaven.
Worshipful, being fully assured of the sincere love and affection which you
bare unto him, whose memorial these lines desire still to revive: I am bold to
present them (though rude and unpolished) unto your favorable Patronage and
protection. First, because of that singular love and liking which you have unto
Religion, and religious men, especially such as are faithful Ministers and
Preachers of Gods Word: Secondly, because I thought it would be unto you no
unacceptable service, if I endeavored by dead letters to preserve his virtues
and perfections in living name, whom cruel death has too soon taken from you
and us, and untimely laid in dust: and lastly, to manifest unto you the
thankfulness of my heart, for those many good and undeserved favors and
encouragements in my calling heretofore, from himself, and since his death
received from you. These are the reasons which have induced me to publish this
my simple Weakling, unto every vulgar hand and eye under your Worships name,
nothing doubting, but that your favorable patronizing of it, will be a
principal means to cover the many wants, and innumerable weaknesses thereof,
which men of gifts will soon espy. Now the God of heaven bless you, together
with that hopeful Branch that God has sent you, from his loins who is now
with God, as a token of Gods love and favor to you both; with long life beer
on earth, and eternal in the heavens.

Your Worships in all good service to be commanded, W. Miller.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Worshipful GILBERT DAVIES, Esquire.
Romans 14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die
unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or dye, we are the Lords.
THe wise King Solomon, in the Book of his sacred Retractations, if I may so
call them, I mean his Book of Ecclesiastes, having once fully described the
deceivable vanities of this deceiving and unconstant world, and plainly showed
that all worldly prosperity is but vanity, and that all which the world
promises, are but a few flashes of deceivable comforts, begins at last to
deride the profane, sensual, and unsanctified affections of those men, that
set their only hopes in the things of this life, as if there were not a God
above, that would one day call them to a strict account. Wherefore considering
that there are no contentments in this life, though never so many in number,
though never so potent, and never so much exempted from a mixture of
discomforts in our own persuasion, that can bring us any farther in the way to
heaven, then to our deathbeds or our graves; yea, considering, Luke 16.15.
as the Holy Ghost teaches us, Luke 16.15. that Those things which are highly
esteemed among men, Esaias 55.8.
are abomination in the sight of God: and that as the Prophet Esaias witnesses,
Esaias 55.8. that His thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are his ways our
ways: therefore forsaking, renouncing, disallowing, and disclayming the joys
of men, and all trust in worldly comforts, that have their furthest expiration
at our departure from this world: let us not suffer our selves to be flattered
with security, nor our eyes to be blinded with false delusions; but let us be
careful to regard, and have respect above all things, as true servants of our
Master Christ, to live in his fear, that we may dye in his love: for, as the
Apostle says in the verse going immediately before the Text, None of us lives
to himself, and no man dies to himself. That is as much to say, both in the
life of nature, and in the life of grace, men live not unto themselves, but
unto God; that is, as Dionysius Carth. comments upon that place. Non ad gloriam
propriam, sed ad gloriam and laudem Dei, tanquam ad vltimum finem: that is, Men
live both in nature and in grace, not to or for their own proper and peculiar
glory, but unto the praise and glory of God, as to the chiefest end of living.
And again, as touching death, there he says: No man dies to himself, that
is, to his own praise, but to the glory of God, in as much as the souls of
Gods servants being once separated from the body, do praise and glorify the
name of God without ceasing, in the heavenly Kingdom, world without end.

The reason of this Assertion the Apostle adds in the next verse, which are
the words of my Text, saying, For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and
whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or dye, we are
the Lords. Which words of the Apostle are as much to say; Among the societies
of men, no servant is so much his masters, as we that are Christians are
servants unto Christ, who has bought us with a price, neither of gold nor
silver, but with the precious price of his own blood. Now therefore as a
servant, if he live, he lives not for his own, or other men's advantage, but
for the profit of his Master: Or if he dye, the gain or loss is not to
himself or others, but to his Master only. So all we that are the servants of
our Lord and Master Christ, if we live, we live unto his praise; or if we dye,
we dye unto his glory: so that Christ only, and none but Christ, has power
upon us while we live, and power over us also when we are dead; as one that
has not only created us out of nothing, still governed by his providence, but
also for our salvation has given both his life and death.

To proceed to some division of these words; after that the Apostle, in the
beginning of this Chapter, having first made a distribution of the Roman
Church, which in those days was not Antichristian, as now it is, into two
sorts of men; the one firm, the other weak, disputing of the nature of things
indifferent; he gives commandment concerning such things, how those that are
stronger, shall behave themselves against the weaker brethren: where by the
stronger Christians, he means such, as well understanding the Christian
liberty, were firmly persuaded, that in good conscience they might omit the
ceremonial observance of Moses Law. By the weaker sort of brethren, he
understands those, that although they believed in Christ as their only
Savior, yet were ignorant of this, that by his coming all ceremonies were
done away, and that so themselves were freed from the observance any more of
the ceremonial law; and therefore observed still among them an observation of
the difference of days and meats: or if at any time they neglected or omitted
them, they did it with a weak consent, and a doubting conscience. Hereupon,
those that well understood the Christian liberty, despised those others, and
used the liberty of certain meats, whereby they were an offense unto those
weaker ones. And of the other side, the weaker sort condemned the rest as
profane men, and contemners of the Law of God. S. Paul therefore, a servant of
Christ, by his condition, and an Apostle called of God, by dignity, as he
witnesses of him, Romans 1.1. Romans 1.1.
se commendando, says one, non ad ostensionem, sed ad reprimendam Romanorum
superbiam and arrogantiam: Commending himself thus, not in vaunting or vain
bragging sort, to show thereby vain glory, but to repress the arrogancy and
pride of the Romans, to whom he then wrote as contemning his office and
Apostleship. This Apostle, I say, to both these forenamed evils, adds wisely
a sufficient remedy; first, by exhorting those that were stronger, to entreat
those with brotherly love that were more weak, lest they should by contemning
them, discomfort and discourage them in, or withdraw and turn them from the
profession of the Gospel. Secondly, he gives commandment unto both, how
they should behave themselves one toward another: neither of them contemning
or condemning the other, but to use a good conscience one toward another,
concerning the use of those indifferent things, as the difference of meats,
and observing of days.

In the next place, he adds a new reason, drawn from the end, which both of
them proposed unto themselves, which was, to the honor of Christ, which
appears, as he proves by this, that both of them, the one in regarding, the
other in not regarding a day, did it unto the Lord; and the one in eating, the
other in not eating, did it likewise unto the Lord; that is, as if it had been
said, Vtrique Christo gratias agunt: both of them give thanks to God: and
therefore he concludes that argument; seeing the end of both is one, therefore
for these indifferent things, neither of them should contemn or condemn the
other. Lastly, to come home to our Text, he confirms that his reason, thus
drawn from the end of both their actions, by another argument, drawn from the
common and general end of the life of Christians, which is wholly appointed
and consecrated for the manifestation of Gods glory: and this he amplifies
again by an even conferring or comparing of two contraries: as when he says,
None of us lives nor dies to himself; but living, we live; and dying, we
dye unto the Lord. Last of all, he amplifies again that comparison of those
contraries, by an addition; wherein he concludes, that all, both great and
small, both high and low, both rich and poor, both weak and strong, both in
our life, and in our death, are in the power of God; and therefore says,
Whether we live, or die, we are the Lords. And thus of the Analysis.

Now, before I proceed to the deduction of Doctrines from these particulars;
give me leave (I beseech you) to stay a little in the explication of two things
in this my Text, most necessary to be known: the one, what it is to live unto
the Lord; the other, what it is to die unto the Lord, and wherein both of these
consist: To live unto the Lord (says learned Aurelius) is, Non propter
nosmetipsos nostraque commoda, sed Christo viuere: that is, Not for our selves,
nor for our advantage, but to Christ: and to live thus unto the Lord,
consists in four things; the first is, to recognize and acknowledge this our
Lord Christ in our life; namely, that we are not at our own liberty and
freedom, but servants unto Christ, and in subjection unto the Lord: in so
much, that the end of our vocation and Redemption, is, to serve the living God,
as the Apostle witnesses, 1. These. 1.9. 1. These. 1.9.
where he says unto them, Ye have turned to God from Idols, to serve the
living and true God: and in 1. Cor. 6.19, 20. 1. Cor. 6.19, 20.
the same Apostle says, Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.
Secondly, to live unto the Lord, is, to order and submit all our life and
actions unto his only beck. For because he only, out of the bottomless
depth of his own bounty, reaches unto us whatsoever gifts we have, whether
of the body, or the mind, whether of nature, or of grace: for all things (as
the Apostle witnesses, Romans 11.36.) are of God, through God, Romans 11.36.
and for God: which place of the Apostle, is worthy a little to be stood upon,
because in these words is noted unto us the Trinity of persons, and their
distinctiue property of causing. First, he shows here, that God is the cause
of all things, in a threefold kind of causing. Secondly, he shows how.
First, that God is the efficient cause, in respect of his power, by which he
created all things: secondly, that he is the forming cause of all things, in
respect of his wisdom, whereby he disposed and distinguished all things:
thirdly, he is the final cause of all things, in respect of his goodness,
whereby he reconciled all things unto himself, and does still preserve and
conserve them, directing them unto their proper ends: therefore when he says,
All things are of God, he understands the Father, to whom power belongs:
when he says, All things are through God, he understands the Son, that is,
the wisdom of the Father: when he says, All things are for God, he
understands the holy Ghost, who in respect of clemency, is said to be the
conseruer, preserver, and directer of all things to the best. Thirdly, to live
unto the Lord, is to refer the whole course of our life to the extolling of
Gods glory, as to the chiefest mark whereunto we aim: he therefore that is
of God, ought to walk as Christ walked, 1. Ioh. 2.6.
1. Ioh. 2.6. that is, he must walk in the steps of Christ, follow his
virtues, and observe his Laws; for he that does otherwise, does vainly take
his name of Christ; and is called a Christian, to his greater condemnation.
Hence is that of Christ in the Gospel, saying, Why call ye me Master, Master,
and do not the things that I speak? and in another place, If I be a Father,
where is my honor? if I be a Master, where is my fear? Fourthly and lastly,
to live unto the Lord, is, in all painful labors, and heaviness of mind, in
our miseries and careful infelicities, to trust in the Lord, as one that
cares sufficiently for them that are his people, as you may plainly see in
Leuit. 26. from verse. 3. to verse. 13. Leu. 26.3. to 13.
saying, If ye trust in me, and keep my Commandments, I will give you rain
in due season, I will give you peace, I will chase your enemies, I will have
respect unto you, and I will walk among you, and I will be your God, and you
shall be my people. And this it is to live unto the Lord. Now, to die unto the
Lord, says the learned Pareus, Pareus.
Idipsum est quod viuere: it is the same as to live unto the Lord; and
consists in these three things: Even in death to acknowledge himself to be
the Lords; and therefore even in death to pray to bless, and to rehearse the
gracious benefits of God toward him, as Jacob did, Genesis 48. Secondly, to dye
unto the Lord, is, patiently to undergo the punishment of diseases, yea and
death it self, from the hand of God, undergoing those crosses with comfort,
which the Lord shall lay upon him, which may be as Looking-glasses, wherein God
may behold our faith and dependence upon his providence, the world may see our
patience, and our constancy; so that hereby God may be glorified, others
edified and instructed; and our selves humbled under those his crosses, and so
seek with speed to cover the spots of our sinful souls with unfeigned
repentance. Thirdly and lastly, to die unto the Lord, is, even in death it
self not to cast aside the hope of life, through sure trust in God; but
considering that God (as the Scripture teaches) delights not in the death of
his children: rather to have sure confidence in God, that he will restore such
as are dead, from death, to life again, according to that of the Apostle, 1.
These. 4.13, 14. 1. These. 4.13, 14.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not as others which have no hope; for if we believe that Jesus
dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him: and this it is to live, and this it is to dye unto the Lord. O terque
quaterque beati nos, si sic viuamus Domino, vt eidem moriamur; quoniam sic
Domino morientes, Domino solummodo viuent: O three and fourfold happy and
blessed were we, if we could so live unto the Lord, that we might dye unto the
Lord, because those that so dye unto the Lord, shall live alone unto the Lord.
And again, ter contra miseri, etc. Of the contrary side, they are three times
miserable, that live not thus unto the Lord. For as many as in their lives live
not unto God, they shall all pass away like a shadow, as a Post that passes
by and tarryeth not, or as a Ship that rides upon the waves of the waters,
which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found, nor his path on
the floods is to be seen: or as a bird that flies in the air, and no man can
see any token of her passage, but hear only the noise of her wings, beating
the wind, and parting the air, where no token of her way can afterward be
found.

But to come now to the observation of the doctrines contained in my Text:
consider, that it contains two principal points of Doctrine: the first is,
that none of the faithful do live or die unto themselves, but unto God. The
second, that all and every one of us, both in our lives, and in our deaths, are
ever, and always in the power of God. First, I say, that none of the faithful
do live or die unto themselves, that is, to their own glory and praise, but
unto the glory and praise of God. For better illustration of which first point,
give me leave to show, that as there are three kinds of life, so there is a
threefold death. Of life, I say, there are three kinds: the first natural,
the second spiritual, the third eternal.

The first, which is natural, is, of the body, in the union of the body and
the soul: which must first be borne of man, before he can enjoy the
spiritual, 1. Cor. 15.46.
according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.46. That is not first, which is
spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual: for
albeit, man was made to live through the benefit of the soul, yet the soul is
so bound, as it were to the gross body, that it should do nothing, but by
bodily instruments, or at the least by some material means: and this is
called our natural life, which we here enjoy, while we here bear about us our
natural bodies.

The second kind of life is spiritual, and has respect unto the soul, in
regard of the union of it with God and Christ, whereby Christ is said to live
in us, Gal. 2.20.
according to that of the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.20 I live, says he, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: which is
as much, as if he should say; I live not grossly and carnally, as once I did,
subject to all worldly desires: or rather, I live not my self, which of my
self am nothing but carnal: but Christ lives in me, who by his holy Spirit,
at his heavenly will and pleasure, guides and governs all my actions.

The third kind of life, is eternal, having respect both to the body and the
soul; which is that life everlasting, whereby the Elect of God do live and
reign for evermore in the Kingdom of heaven, through the grace of God,
according to that of our Apostle Titus 3.7. Titus 3.7.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that
being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life.

Now of these three kinds of life: the first, that is, the natural life, is
common with the Elect unto the very reprobates themselves: the other two, the
one spiritual, the other eternal, are proper and peculiar unto the Elect. And
now as there is a threefold life, so there is also a threefold death: the one
natural; the second spiritual; and the third eternal. The first, which is
called natural, is properly the death of the body, when it is separated from
the soul; and it is called a natural death, not for that it properly
proceeds from nature, in as much as we know that it is an effect of sin:
but it is called natural, because by the justice of God it is, according to
the nature of man, corrupted; for, by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin. The second sort of death, is called spiritual, which is a
separation of the soul from God; sin living and reigning still in the hearts
of such wicked men, who are hereof said to be dead in sin. The third sort of
death, is called eternal death, which is an everlasting separation from God
and Christ, to live with the devil in eternal torments: which kind of life I
call a death, because it were better many thousand times not to live at all, in
respect of themselves, then to be cast headlong into such endless and
remediless miseries, unto which, all the miseries and torments, which we can
any ways devise to be inflicted upon man in this world, being compared, are
nothing to those flames and torments, which the damned dying this eternal
death, shall endure in hell world without end.

Now, as of the three sorts of life, the natural is common unto the godly and
the reprobate, but the spiritual and eternal life, are only proper and
peculiar to the Elect of God: So of the other side, among those three sorts of
death, the two last come not to the faithful ones: but the first only, which
is the natural death, is common to all both good and bad: in so much, that it
is a true and noted lesson, long since learned of every man, that It is
appointed unto all men, that they shall once dye; as well the just as the
unjust; as well the believer as the Infidel. This the Apostle Paul does
plainly prove, in Romans 5.14. Romans 5.14.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned, after
the similitude of Adams transgression. In which place the Apostle divides
mankind into two sorts: that is, into those that sinned after the similitude
of Adams transgression, and those that sinned not after his similitude;
affirming, that death reigned not only over those, but also over them. Here
let me stand and show you this difference which will make the point most
clear. Some there are that hold Adams transgression to be the violating of
that express Commandment, Thou shall not eat of it: and so affirm, that
they do sin after the similitude of Adams transgression, that do
transgress only against the express Law of God, and not those that sin
without the written Law: which opinion answers not to the meaning of the
Apostle, whose purpose in these words is to teach, that even before the Law
death reigned not only over those, which by their proper actual sins did
voluntarily stir up against themselves the wrath of God, as Adam did, when he
transgressed the Law of God by his actual disobedience, but that it reigned
also over those which actually could commit no sin, which, as the best
expositors expound, is to be understood of Infants, that have no actual sins
in them: Hence is that saying, Ab Adamo, mors est tyrannus omnibus ex aequo
imperans: Even from the time of Adam (which must not be understood of Adam in
his integrity, but in the state of corruption; for, Ante peccatum solus
regnabat Deus: Before sin was, God did only reign) death is a tyrant that
reigns over all: but now there are two principal reigns, the one of life,
the other of death: and yet in both these, both in life and death, we live and
dye not to our selves, but unto God; who both can, and will preserve them that
live, and restore to life them that are dead: he can (I say) because he is God
omnipotent, the supremest Lord, and general Judge, to whom every knee does
bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth: he will also, because he has
chosen us, and purchased us with a price, not of pure gold, but of precious
blood, to be his own Inheritance. Hence is that of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 1. He
that believes in me, though he dye, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives
and believes in me, shall never dye.

And thus much be spoken of the first general point of doctrine, expressed in
the first part of my Text, where the Apostle says, Whether we live, we live
unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord. Now the second.

The second follows, which is this, that all and every one of us, both in our
lives, and in our deaths, are ever and always in the power of God. 1. Sam. 2.9.
It is the Lord (says the holy Ghost, 1. Sam. 2.9.) that keeps the feet of
his Saints: the feet, that is, all their actions, all their counsels, all their
studies and endeavors: all which, if God do but once withdraw his favor and
his goodness from them, they by and by fail and perish; as we see it often
comes to pass by daily practice in natural things: for as long as God does
vouchsafe to communicate of his power unto them, so long they do continue and
live; but that being taken away, they forthwith dye and perish. True it is (I
must notwithstanding confess) that God sometimes suffers even those that are
his Saints on earth, to fall and slip into many sins; teaching them thereby
truly to understand what their own power is, and what, and how great is the
corruption and deprauation of the humane nature; to the intent that they should
not attribute any thing unto their own power and strength. Neither does God
always preserve and defend even those that are his, from every outward trouble
and danger whereunto man is subject, but often he is pleased to try them with
many and sundry crosses and afflictions; howbeit yet so, that he still auerteth
and turns from those that are his, all such noxious and hurtful crosses, as
might abolish or destroy in them the hope of salvation, and life everlasting;
therefore is it that the Prophet David cries, saying, Psalm. 66.8, 9. Blessed
be the Lord, Psalm. 66.8, 9.
that holds our souls in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved. Where
the Prophet says, that God holds our souls in life: the meaning is, as if
he had said, It is God alone, who by his power in all our life time keeps us
safe as under the shadow of his wings, that we might not faint and perish under
the great burden of affliction. For many and great are the dangerous evils
that hang over our heads continually, whereby we may soon be brought to death,
and perish, except the Lord defend us from them. Again, where he says, It is
the Lord that suffers not our feet to be moved: it is as much as if he had
said, God so comfort and confirms those that are his, with his holy
Spirit, that while they live, they can with patience endure adversities, and
are not so overcome with sorrows and impatience, as once so much to murmurer
against God, or to forsake God, and seek for remedy in distress, by any other
power or means, than by the grace and power of God. Thus (I say) the life of
Gods Saints on earth is ever and always in the power of God; and not their
lives only, but their deaths also: for (as my Text says, Whether, we live
therefore, or dye, we are the Lords: for God is and still will be Omega, as
well as Alpha, Revel. 1.8.
Revel. 1.8. And having once begun his good work in those that are his Saints,
he will perform it (says the Apostle, Philip. 1.6.
Phil. 1.6.) even till the Day of Jesus Christ. Upon which place Bullinger
gives this comfortable Comment, If the beginnings and progress be good,
happy, and blessed, we may without wavering, in absolute perseverance, build at
last upon a blessed end: as namely, that at the Day of Christ, by which the
Apostle means the hour of death, Christus fidelibus and dexter, and
propitius apparet, says learned Sarcerius, in his Comment upon the place: that
is, Christ will then show himself both merciful and favorable unto his
faithful Ones: and not only so, but by the Day of Christ, is likewise
understood the general Day of Judgment; unto which Day also, even from the
day of death, the faithful are in the power and government of God, Marl. in
Phil.
to whom he vouchsafes then also a progress and increase unto the Day of the
resurrection of the flesh: for though the faithful Ones be by death delivered
from their bodies, and war not any more with the concupiscence of the flesh;
yet I hold it no absurdity to affirm, that they yet increase and go forward,
because they have not yet attained to that height of felicity, and excellency
of glory, to which they still hope to be advanced; and therefore through hope
do steadfastly set their eyes toward the Day of the last Resurrection, as to
their only mark; wherein they shall receive of God the fullness of their
hoped glory, and so reign with him in bliss for ever. And thus (I say) both
in life and death the faithful are always in the power of God. And what
should the meditation and consideration of this great benefit and grace, but
move us all with one accord to cry with the Apostle, Romans 8. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, distress, persecution and such
like? No: but be persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And thus be it spoken of the two general points observed in the Text: first,
that none of the faithful does live or dye unto themselves, but unto God.
Secondly, that all and every one of them, both in life and death, are in the
power of God. Now let me pass to my application, to show, according as I know
it is expected at my hands of all you that are present, how both the life and
death of this my honored friend, concerning whom I cannot but with grief of
heart confess, that I count it one of the greatest parts of my unhappiness,
to see the period and complement of his days expired; to show (I say again)
how both the life and death of this worshipful, worshipfully descended and
religious Gentleman, was still and always not unto himself, but unto God, and
how both in life and death he submitted himself unto the power of God: which
may best be done, by speaking somewhat unto you concerning the sanctified life,
and blessed death of this worthy Saint; whom, because the world was unworthy
of, God has taken to his mercy, and translated by death from a life of misery,
unto a Kingdom as full of happiness and glory, as the Sun is full of light,
and the Sea of waters: where he is now sanctified in the presence of his God,
with the fullness of joy and pleasures at his right hand for evermore. O te
felicem, si tibi mortuo talis esset Praeco, qualis Homerus Achilli! O noble
Wight, happy should I deem thee now to be, if as Achilles had, thou have such
a Trumpeter of thy praise as Homer was! As for my self, the meanest of ten
thousand, upon whom this task is laid at this time by thine own command; O
how do I desire that my sufficiency were answerable to my willingness! O how do
I wish with the Prophet David, Psalm. 45 1.
Psalm. 45.1. that I had a tongue as the pen of a ready writer, that I might
set out the praises of thy virtues, thy holy and thy honorable life, that thy
righteousness might be had in an everlasting remembrance, and so shine in the
Church of God, as a pattern to them that live, and an example for them to
imitate! But how insufficient do I feel my self for this great business!

Vouchsafe therefore, I beseech you all, to accept and give attention to this
small ensuing testimony of my great desire: And by Gods assistance I will
proceed, Happy, life blessed death.
beginning with his happy birth, and ending with his blessed death.

First, concerning his Birth, as I have once already testified, he was
worshipfully borne; the Son and heir of a right worthy and judicious
Counselor, and the fruit of a virtuous Gentlewomans womb, who was as a
fruitful Vine upon the walls of her husbands house: by whom, as blessings from
God, in token of his love, he has had an household of many sweet and beautiful
sons and daughters to fit round about his table, amongst whom, this right
worthy Wight that now here lies before our eyes, ready to be interred, was
the first that God did send her as blessings of her womb, of full nineteen
that were borne unto her.

From his birth, I will descend unto his education, he being a child endued by
God with the best of natures gifts (which are necessary to a progress and
proceeding on in virtue by instruction:) for as Plutarch testifies, without
natures gifts, virtue cannot but have her manifold defects: for doctrine and
teaching, without the gifts of nature, is defectuous; and nature without
doctrine, is altogether blind: but this man, endued, as I said, with the best
of natures gifts, as reason, understanding and such like, being, by the
careful industry and painful diligence of his learned Master yet living,
taught and instructed in the rules and rudiments of the Latin and Greek
tongues, by his own diligent exercise and practice (a virtue, worthy of high
commendation, especially in young Gentlemen) to the comfort of his parents, to
the good of himself, and the admiration of others, he soon attained unto a
large measure of understanding in those beginnings of Arts and learning.

And being, by the care of his tender and loving parents, translated at length
from the Country, unto the most famous of Englands Universities, Broad-gates
Hall in Oxford.
and placed in that ancient of houses from which have sprung most famous
members both of the Church and Commonwealth, in many places now living in our
Kingdom: being entered there by the careful diligence of his parents, in whom
there was, as there ought to be in all, an especial care under whom they set
their children to be trained up, he was committed unto the charge and
government of a learned, a discreet and religious Tutor, a man well given, and
of right good nature, who was held amongst them of that society, to be as a
second Phoenix, that had the breeding and education of Achilles; under whose
government, and by whose instruction in the space of little more then three
full years, he was not only excellently enriched with the singular pregnancy
of all the faculties, and well stored with the variety of the choysest and
profoundest learning: such as Logic, Rethorick, Natural Philosophy, Ethics,
Oeconomicks, Politics, Mathematics, Metaphisicks, and Divinity: in all which,
to my knowledge, he was singularly and admirably well grounded, and that in a
high degree of excellency and perfection: But in his life also, which he led in
accompanying there young Gentlemen, now men of note and fame in England, he
expressed in his actions, not only an absolute pourtraiture of Aristotle's
moral virtues, but also in his life did shine as a pattern to others of his
society, in the Divine graces of faith, love, zeal, sincerity, spiritual
wisdom; and all kind of duties making toward God and godliness, the
continuance whereof all the days of his life after (first, in his conversation
at the Court, where he lived in love and favor, with many of great dignity,
and honor in this Realm, and afterward here in the Country amongst us) have
fitted him for a blessed association with God, with the holy Angels and the
blessed Saints, and have now put him into the possession of everlasting
Happiness. And this of his education.

Now of his life; of which I may truly say, after these seven years inward
familiarity with him, which he vouchsafed unto me above ordinary measure, he
was so loving, so sweet, so comfortable, and so peaceable a natured man, so
sound, so zealous, and so religious a Professor of Christianity; and withal,
so sure and faithful a friend unto his lovers and followers; to speak but of
my self for all: That among many thousands, I am assured I shall never find
the like.

But in speaking of his life more particularly, I will first begin with his
love to God; and so descend to his love of men; Touching his love to God, he
was a faithful and sincere lover of God, and his Christ, as appears by these
marks and symptoms following; first, he esteemed the world and all the lusts
and pleasures thereof, as vanities and base: for as the Apostle says, 1. John
2.15. He that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

Secondly, he was so inwardly inflamed with a high affection and estimation of
God, above all things, that he accounted Gods loving kindness unto him, better
then his life; and when any token or sign of Gods love and favor was shown
toward him, he always esteemed it as his greatest joy, and was always ready
to magnify the merits of God, in remembrance of his benefits toward him.
Thirdly, there was in his heart such a detestation of sin and wickedness,
that he hated sin, because God hated it; and he hated sinners, because they
hated God; and was always careful to do the will of God, and to please him in
a willingness of heart, to do or suffer any thing for his sake. Fourthly, he
in all his crosses, troubles, and discontentments, which were many and often,
sweetly comforting himself in God, only ran unto him, making him his
defense, his rock, his refuge in all his troubles: often repeating, which I
have heard, that comfortable place of the Prophet in distress: Many are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. And are not
these with many such that I could recite, most evident tokens of his love to
God in the course of his life, while he lived among us?

Touching the second part, which is his love to men, I must first begin with
his own, and that also first in his single life: A blessed Son was he unto
his parents, happy in this, that they had in him a Son that most dutifully
did honor them, in all obedience, reverence and love. Secondly, in the state
of Wedlock, being after many years of affection, love and liking between both
parties, matched at last to their joys and comforts, unto a right worthy,
virtuous and religious Gentlewoman, a branch descended from a right Worshipful
and ancient Family: Such was the simpathy of their affections, that their
hearts were so truly and fixedly set in love one toward the other, that still
and all this while they both lived, the sight of the one was the chiefest
pleasure of the others eye, both their thoughts feasting themselves with
dearest apprehension each on other; such was his love to her, and hers to him,
in the state of Wedlock, in which estate, soon after twelve months
comfortable comfort, God blessed them with the blessing of a fruitful womb:
for to them was borne a sweet and lovely daughter, to whom, as to a branch
proceeding from his loins, and as a member of himself, his love was most
tender, and his affection dear: and her admired inclination of love toward
her parents being but an Infant, such, that they still esteemed her as a
special blessing, and a precious Jewel sent of God: this my self, besides
many others that were eyewitnesses of what I speak to your ears, can justly
testify. As for his tender and lovely love, and his natural and
Christian-like affection to his brethren, sisters, and kinsfolks, I need say
nothing, the world of this is a sufficient temony, and themselves, if they will
confess the truth, will be sufficient witnesses. Thus much for his own, and
his love to them. As touching his love to others, I will first begin with the
House of God, though he have not for these latter times, by reason of his
lingering infirmities, and dangerous deseases, whereof I have been too often
too true a testimony, so diligently frequented the public exercises of
Religion, as he desired; and that with extraordinary zeal: yet that his love
was to Religion and religious men, appears by his extraordinary favor and
affection to the Ministers of the Gospel; not to speak of all that have had a
full experience of this in themselves, let my peculiar testimony be as a
witness of the rest, who being but the meanest of Gods messengers, have
received from him many great and special encouragments in the course of my
studies.

First, by his countenance as, many witnesses can testify, if I should be
silent; and secondly, by his liberality, in that to his great cost, of his own
accord, moved (questionless) thereunto by the Spirit of God for the
advancement of his glory, he vouchsafed to procure unto me the proper use and
benefit of that well-furnished and costly Library of the Reverend and famous
Doctor late deceased, who by a happy match was joined in wedlock unto the
worthiest of his worthy sisters; who is (as I may say) A Mary by name, and a
Mary by condition, for that the Lord has dealt so bitterly with her, in
depriving her, within the space of two years, of a lovely father, a faithful
husband, and a friendly brother.

Secondly, as for his love to other persons of other callings, his Tenants and
others among whom he lived; and to whom he was well known: how he lived among
them in love, in peace, in meekness, I need not to report, seeing all the
Country round cannot but with one consent confess and acknowledge, that he
was a man worthy of great commendations, and a rare pattern for men of his
rank and fashion to look upon.

Thirdly, for his charity and love toward the poor, many of them being here
present, can testify, that in their necessities he was to them more like a
father than a friend: a man that was ever open-handed in any good cause,
especially to the relief of such whom he knew to be in necessity and want. I
speak but what I know, having a long time had my being here where his Worship
had his dwelling: and besides my private testimony, his Liberality at the last
Feast of Christ's Nativity, and his Legacy now at his death, of twenty pound, to
the use and benefit of the poor, and this Parish, are sufficient testimonies
of the same.

Last of all, as concerning his love to those that were his (as is said)
enemies, and adversaries of his state and fortunes, having received especial
commandment from his own mouth, I cannot but say something. Confess I must
that loath I am to speak too much, and yet his own request (no less to me
than a command) compels me to speak a little, because I heard him say so
much. There are, says he, that (to my thinking) by sinister courses, upon
supposed grounds, endeavor to arm themselves against me, and my state; but in
the mean while, God knows my heart, how willing I have still been to live
with them in peace, without revenge: and hereupon he made this comparison, in
my understanding most fitting to his former words: My heart (says he)
resembles the upper part of the world, which you know (says he) is always
clear and bright of it self, though the air below be never so much
distempered with storms and thunders: So I (quoth he) I thank my God,
notwithstanding these things, have still a patient mind; I am still contented,
and my heart remaining still joyful in the Lord, I stand resolved in all
things to yield up my self in holy obedience to the will of God. And thus
(sitting then with my self alone in the Porch of this Temple wherein we are) I
shall entreat you when you shall stand to preach my Funeral Sermon in this
Church, where I intend to lie when God shall call me, says he, to deliver and
testify these things unto the world both of me, and from me. By this that
has been said, you may then plainly see, that the life of this good man was
not unto himself, but unto to God. If we live, we live unto the Lord. Lastly,
to speak of his death, I must begin with sickness, which was to him, and is
to al, the messenger of death. I must confess that he was but a young man for
years, yet having been long visited with exceeding sickness, he has long
waited (as it were) for his exchanging time; and for that cause, as I know, and
as others whom he loved, can testify, he did daily exercise himself in the
meditation of mortality, and in time of ease, cared to set his house in order,
to the intent that if sickness should come suddenly, he might be free from
worldly cares, and so more cheerfully prepare himself to God: for this cause,
for the space well-nye of two years past, as I can remember, he has had his
Testament always ready: So that being now at last suddenly arrested with the
messenger of death, all the whiles he lay in the mercyes of God upon his
deathbed, to the comfort of all those that saw and heard him, he always
called upon the Name of Christ; yea as often as he received any Physical help
(for no means was neglected for his preservation and life, if God would) he
never received any aid, but he prayed unto God to give it a blessing; and when
he spoke to none, he would yet lift up his eyes, in token of lifting his heart
to God; and the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ he received in his
extremities most cheerfully, most thankfully. And at last, in a great conflict,
he got a glorious victory, and shortly after, in peace and meekness, resigned
his spirit into the hands of God. Thus he that was in his life religious, in
his sickness comfortable, and in his death most blessed, by dying to the Lord,
is gone to God, and now enioyes the blessedness of heaven: in the fruition
whereof let us leave him now to dwell for ever; and strive and endeavor in our
lives to imitate his virtues, that we, as he has done, may dye at last the
death of the righteous, and that our last ends may be like his, and that we may
be fellow-heires, as he was, of the same inheritance with Jesus Christ. To
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory now and
forever.

Amen.
FINIS.

