ARTICLES OF A TREATY OF TRVCE.

Made and concluded in the Town and C^^tie of ANTWERP, the 9. of April 1609.
betwee^ the Commissioners of the most Excellent Princes, Archdukes ALBERT and
ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA, as well in the name of the Catholic KINGS Majesty,
as in their own.

Together with the Commissioners and Deputies the renowned LORDS, the Estates
General of the United Provinces of the Low-countryes: and that through the
mediation and with the advice of the Lords Ambassadors of the most Christian
Kings, and of Great BRITAIN.

AT THE HAGHE

By Hillebrant Iacobz, Printer ordinary to the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low-countreyes.

LONDON Printed for GEORGE POTTER and NICHOLAS BROWN and are to be sold at
his Shop under the Royal Exchange. 1609.

To the Reader.
SO it is, that the most excellent Princes, Archduke Albert and Isabella Clara
Eugenia, etc. having upon the four and twenty of April, 1607. made a Truce
and Cessation of Arms, for eight months, with the most renowned Lords the
general Estates of the united Provinces of the Low Countries in quality, and
as holding them for free Estates, Provinces and Countries; over the which, they
pretend no authority: The which Truce ought to be ratified with like
declaration, by the Catholic Kings Majesty, for so much as might concern
him; and the said ratifications and declarations delivered to the said Lords
Estates, three months after the said Truce, as it is passed by Letters Patents
of the eighteenth of September the said year: And further, gives a special
procuration to the said Lords Archdukes, of the tenth of January 1608. as well
in his name as in their own, to do all that they shall judge to be fit and
convenient, to attain to a good Peace or Truce for many years. By virtue of
which procuration, the said Lords Archdukes should also by their letters of
Commission, of the 27. of the same month name and depute Commissioners, for to
confer and entreat in the said names and qualities: and hereupon have
consented and agreed, that the said Truce should be prolonged and continued at
sundry times: namely, the 20. of May, unto the end of the said year 1608.

But after they had assembled themselves diverse times with the deputies of the
said Lords Estates, who had also procuration and Commission from them, dated
the 5. of February of the said year: they could not come to agree of the said
Peace, for many great difficulties happening among them: For which cause, the
Lords Ambassadors of the most Christian Kings, and of great Britayne, of the
Princes electors Palatine and Brandenburg, Marquis of Ansbach, and Lantgraue of
Hessen, sent thither on the behalf of the said Lords, Kings and Princes, to
the aid, and furtherance of so good a work: seeing that they were ready to
depart and to break off al Treaty; did propose a Truce for many years, on
certain conditions contained in a writing, by them delivered to both parties,
with entreaty and exhortation to agree thereunto. Upon the which writing, many
other difficulties likewise happening.

In the end, this ninth day of April, in the year 1609. there assembled
Seignior Ambrosio Spinola, Marquis de Benafro, Knight of the order of the
Golden Fleece, Counselor of Estate, and of the Wars to his Catholic
Majesty, Master of the Camp, General of his Armies: and Seignior John
Richardot Knight, Lord of Barby, Counselor of Estate, and chief President of
their Highnesses privy Counsel: John de Mancicidor, of the Counsel of war,
and Secretary to his said Catholic Majesty. The reverend father friar John
Neyen, Commissioner general of the order of Saint Francis in the
Low Countries: and Seignior Loys Verreyken Knight, Master of the requests and
chief Secretary to their Highnesses, etc. By virtue of the letters of
procuration from the said Lords Archdukes, to treat as well in their names, as
in the name of the Lord King Catholic; the tenor of which procuration is
hereafter inserted: with the like also of the said Kings on the one part, and
Seignior Loys Earl of Nassaw, Catzenellebogen, Vyanden Dietz etc. Lord of
Bilsteyn, Governor and Captain gene-ral of Frize, the City of Groeningen and
Ommelanden Drente, etc. Seignior Walrauen Lord of Bredero, Vianen, Vicounte of
Vtrecht, L. of Ameyden, Cloetengen, etc. The L. Cornelius of Gendt, Lord of
Loeuen and Meynerswick, Vicount and Judge of the Empire, and of the City of
Nuninegen: Seig. Iehan of Oldenbarneuelt Knight, Lord of Cimpell, Rodenris,
etc. Advocate and keeper of the great Seal, Charters and Registers of Holland
and West-Frizeland: Seignior Jacques of Malderee Knight, Lord of Heyes, etc. The
chief, and representing the Nobility of the Estates and Counsel of the
county of Zealand; the Lords Girard de Renesse, Lord Vander Aa. of
Streeffkirck Niew Lecker landt, etc. Iellius Hillena Doctor of the laws,
Counselor ordinary of the Counsel of Frize: John Sloeten Lord of Sallicq,
Drossart of the County of Vellenhoo, and Steward of the Seigneury of Claunder,
and Abel Coenders of Helpen, Lord In Faien and Cantes, in the name of the said
Lords Estates, as also by virtue of their Letters of procurations and
Commission hereafter likewise inserted on the other part; who together with the
mediation and advise of Lord John Charles Baron of Chagnie, and Monyeu
Counselor of Estate to the most christian King, and his Ambassador
extraordinary, with the said lords Estates.

And the Lord Elias de la Place Knight, lord of Russy, Vicount of Marchault,
Counselor also in the said Counsel of Estate, Gentleman in ordinary of the
said Lord, the kings chamber, Baylife and Captain of Vitry le Francois and his
ordinary Ambassador, with the said lords, the estates. Sir Richard Spencer
knight, Gentleman in ordinary, of the king of great Britaynes privy chamber,
and his Ambassador extraordinary, unto the said Lords the Estates, and Sir
Raphe Winwood knight Ambassador ordinary, and Counselor to the said king in
his Counsel of estate, in the united Provinces, have accorded and agreed, in
the manner and form following.

ARTICLES OF TRVCE. Made in the City of ANTWERP, the 9. of April 1609.
between the Commissioners of the most Excellent Princes, Archdukes ALBERT and
ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA, and the Estates General of the United PROVINCES ^f the
LOVV-COVNTRYES.
FIrst, the said Archdukes and Duchess signify and declare, not only in their
own Names, but also in the Name of the King of Spain, that they are well
pleased and content to enter into Treaty with the Estates General of the
United Provinces in quality, and as holding, accounting and esteeming them to
be free Countries, Provinces and Estates, whereunto they pretend not any Right
or Title of Sovereignty, and in the Names and qualities aforesaid, at this
present to make a Truce with them, upon such Articles and Conditions as
hereafter ensues.

II. That is, that the said Truce shall be good Firm, Loyal and Inviolable,
and shall continue and endure for the space of Twelve years, and that during
the said time, there shall be an abstinence and discontinuance, and ceasing
from all Acts of Hostility in any manner and fashion whatsoever, between the
said King of Spain, the Archduke and Duchess and the States General, as well
by Sea and in all other Waters and Rivers, as by Land in all Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands and Signiories, and between all their Subjects and
Inhabitants, of what quality or condition so ever they be, without exception
of place or Persons.

III. That either Side shall possess, and effectually enjoy all those
Countries, Towns, Places, Lands, and Signiories, which they at this present
hold, possess and enjoy, without any trouble, molestation, or contradiction
whatsoever, during the continuance of the said Truce, wherein it is intended
and to be understood, that the Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, and plain
Countries thereunto depending, shall be comprehended.

IIII. That the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said Countries, belonging unto
the aforesaid King, Archdukes, and States, shall have and use all manner of good
correspondence, and amity one with the other, during the time of the said
Truce, without calling to mind, or remembering any of the offenses, hurts, and
damages, that they or any of them have received, had, and endured in the
forepassed Wars, and troublesome times, and shall and may freely frequent,
inhabit, and dwell in each others Countries, and there use and exercise their
Trades, and traffic of Merchandises, with all security, both by Sea, and in
other Rivers and waters, and also by Land: which nevertheless the said King of
Spain understands to be restrained and limited unto the Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands, and Seignories, which he holds and possesses in Europe,
and in other places and seas, where the subjects of the Kings and Princes that
are his Friends and Alies, have the said free traffic: and touching the
Places, Towns, Ports, and Havens, which he holds out of the Limits
aforesaid, that the said States and their subjects, shall nor may not use any
trade or traffic there, without the license and express permission of the
said King: notwithstanding, they shall and may freely trade and traffic (if
they think it good) in the Countries of all other Princes, Potentates, and
People, that shall or will permit, suffer, and grant them leave, and that
without the said Limits, without any let, trouble or impeachment (of the said
King, his Officers and Subjects, that depend on him) for that cause given,
unto the said Princes, Potentates, and People, which have permitted, or
hereafter shall permit, suffer and grant it unto them: nor unto them of any of
them in general or particular, with whom they have heretofore trafficked, or
hereafter shall traffic.

V. And for that it is requisite that a reasonable long time should be granted
and set down, wherein to advertise those, that are out of the said Limits with
Ships and martial Forces, to desist and abstain from all acts of hostility;
It is agreed and concluded, that the Truce aforesaid shall not begin till this
day twelve month: always provided, that if notice of the said Truce may
sooner be sent unto them, that from that time forth all Acts of hostility
shall cease, but if after the space of one year, any act of hostility shall
there be used and committed, the damages done and received thereby, shall be
restored again without any remission.

VI. That the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said King,
Archdukes, and States, trading and trafficking mutually in each others
Countries, shall not be bound to pay greater customs, rights and impositions,
then the natural subjects of the said Countries, and of their friends and
allies, that shall in that point be least charged and burdened.

VII. That the Subjects and Inhabitants of the States in the united Provinces,
shall have the same security and liberty in the Countries of the said King
and the Archdukes, that has been granted unto the Subjects of the King of
great Britain, by the last Treaty of Peace, and secret Articles made and
concluded with the Constable of Castile.

VIII. That the Merchants, Masters of ships, Pilots, Sailors, Ships,
Merchandises, Money, and other goods belonging unto them, shall not be seized
upon nor arrested, by virtue of any Mandament or Commission general or
particular, nor for any cause concerning the wars, or otherwise, neither yet
under any pretense of using them or any of them for the conservation and
defense of the Countries on either side. Nevertheless it is to be understood,
that Seasures and Arests made by the ordinary ways of Law, and Justice, for
Debts, Obligations and contracts depending thereon, whereby the said Seasures
and Arests have been made, shall not be comprehended herein, but that
touching them, they shall be proceeded in according to the ordinary customs
of Law and reason.

IX. And touching Trade and Traficke in the Netherlands, and the Taxes and
Impositions that shall be taken and Levied upon Wares and Merchandises, if
hereafter it shall be found that they are excessive great and intolerable, and
that thereby some hinderance may grow unto the Subjects of the said Countries,
upon the first motion and request made by the one, or the other part, certain
Committies shall be appointed to order and moderate the same, by common
consent, if it may be done. And yet nevertheless, without any breach of the
Truce, although they cannot agree upon the same.

X. If any sentences or judgments shall have been given upon, or against any
person on either side, (not excepted) either in civil or criminal causes, they
shall not be executed upon the persons or goods of the parties condemned, during
the time of the said Truce.

XI. That no letters of Mart, and reprisall shall be granted or given out,
during the said time, without good cause known, and in such cases wherein it
is permitted to be done, by the imperial laws and Constitutions, and
according to the Orders established and appointed by them.

XII. That it shall not be lawful to arrive, enter nor stay in any Port,
Haven, Place or Road in the country on either side, with Ships, or such
numbers of Soldiers as may breed any cause of suspicion, without the leave
and permission of him or them, to whom the said Ports, Havens, Places and
Roades shall belong and appertain, unless they be forced to do it by
tempests, or of mere necessity, to avoid the danger of the Seas.

XIII. That they, whose goods and lands have bin seized upon and confiscated by
means of the wars, or their heirs, having good cause, shall enjoy their
said goods during the said truce; and shall enter and take possession thereof,
by their own private authority, and by virtue of this present Treaty, without
any recourse unto Law or Justice: Notwithstanding, any Incorporations,
Confiscations, Morgages, Gifts, Contracts, Articles of agreement and
transportations, or any renunciations made in the said transportations, thereby
to exclude any part of the said lands and goods, from them to whom they ought
to appertain; upon charge and condition, nevertheless, that they neither
shall nor may dispose thereof, nor yet raise nor diminish the rents of the
same, during the time that they shall enjoy and possess them, without license
and permission first had, and obtained from the said Archdukes or the States.

XIIII. Which also shall take place for, and to the profit of the heir of the
Prince of Orange deceased: namely, touching the rights which they pretend to
have in the salt pondes, in the County of Bourgoigne, which shall be permitted
and quietly left unto them; together with the Woods belonging to the same. And
touching the Process concerning Chastelbelin, begun in the life time of the
said Prince of Orange deceased, in the Court of Madrynes, against the King of
Spaines Attorney general; the said Archdukes faithfully promise, to cause
Justice to be done therein, within the space of one year next ensuing, after
the pursuit by them to be made, without any delay, and with all sincerity and
right.

XV. If the Fiscall on either side, shall have sold any goods or lands
confiscated; they, to whom they ought to appertain, by virtue of this present
Treaty, shall be bound to content themselves with the interest of the price
thereof, according to the last seasure, which shall be paid unto them yearly
during the Truce, by them that hold and possess the same, or else it shall be
lawful for them to adresse themselves unto the Heritage it self that has bin
sold.

XVI. But if the said Sales have been made by order of Law and Justice, for,
and in consideration of the Truce, and lawful debts of those, to whom the said
lands and goods did appertain before the confiscation made, it shall be lawful
for them, or their heirs upon occasion offered, to redeem them, paying the
sum for the which they were sold, within one years time from the day of
this present Treaty: after the which time, they shall not be permitted to do
it; and the said redemption having bin made by them, they may dispose thereof
as they shall think good, without seeking after any other license or
permission.

XVII. Nevertheless, it is not understood that this redemption shall tend
unto, or concern such houses as are situated in towns, and sold for that
cause, in regard of the great discommodities and notable damages that the
possessors thereof shall thereby reap, by means of the alterations and
reparations that they may have made and done, in, and unto the said houses,
whereof the liquidation would be over long and difficulte.

XVIII. Touching the reparations and alterations, made in, and upon other lands
and goods sold, which are permitted to be reduced, if there be any such
pretense made and called in question; the ordinary Judges shall do each party
right and equity, according to the indifferency of the cause, the Inheritances
remaining to the owners that sue for the same; for the sum whereunto the
reparations or alterations shall be prised, without any right of holding or
keeping of possession (to be permitted unto those that shall have bought them)
until they shall be paid and fully satisfied therein.

XIX. If any fortifications or public works have bin made on either part with
permission and authority of the superiors, in such places where restitution
ought to be made by this present Treaty; the proprietaries thereof shall content
themselves with the estimation and valuation that shall be made thereof, by the
ordinary Judges, both of the said places, and also of the jurisdiction that
they had therein, until the parties themselves can otherwise agree thereon.

XX. Touching the lands and goods of Churches, Colleges, and other spiritual
places, within the united Provinces, that were members depending upon, and
belonging unto the Churches, Benefices and Colleges, that are under the
obedience of the Archduke, which have not bin sold before the first of January
1607. shall be restored unto them again; and they shall enter into, and
possess the same by their own private authority, without any officer of
Justice, and shall enjoy the same during the said Truce, and yet without
disposing thereof as aforesaid; but such lands and goods as have been sold
before the said time, or given in payment by the Sates of any of the Provinces;
the rent of the value thereof, shall be paid them every year, according to the
last seasure, by the Province that shall have made the said sale, and given or
assigned the said goods in payment as aforesaid, so that they may be assured
thereof. The like shall be done and observed on the part and behalf of the
said Archdukes.

XXI. Those to whom the goods and lands confiscated ought to be restored, shall
not be bound to pay the arerages of rents, charges and duties, specially
imposed and reserved upon the said lands and goods, for the time that they
enjoyed not the same; and if they be sued, molested or troubled for the same,
on either part, they shall be freely acquitted and absolved thereof.

XXII. No pretense of any payment shall be made, touching hedging or ditching
of the Lands sold, or to be redeemed, but only for such conditions or
customs, as were anciently accustomed to be used and observed, whereunto the
Possessors are bound, by the Articles of agreement made thereupon, with the
interests of the money payable at the entry into possession, if any have been
given, by reason of the last seizure, as aforesaid.

XXIII. Judgments given touching lands and goods confiscated, against such
parties as have obeyed the Judges, and have bin lawfully excepted, shall be
held for good and lawful, wherein such as are condemned, shall not be
permitted or allowed any appeal, but only by ordinary means.

XXIIII. The said Archdukes, and the States, either of them for their parts,
shall appoint Officers and Magistrates to administer law and justice in the
Towns, and strong Holds, which by this present Treaty, are to be yielded up,
unto such as owe them, to enjoy them according to the Truce.

XXV. Such moveable goods and fruits as are and have been confiscated before
the conclusion of this present Treaty, shall not be subject unto restitution.

XXVI. Such actions or suites, as have bin remitted by the said Archdukes or
the States, for the profit of particular debtors, before the first of January
1607. shall be disanulled on both sides.

XXVII. The time that has past since the beginning of the wars, from the
year of our Lord 1567. until this present year, shall not be reckoned to
induce any prescription, between such persons as were of diverse parties.

XXVIII. Those that withdrew themselves into neuter Countries, during the
wars, shall also enjoy the benefit of this Truce, and may dwell and inhabit
where they shall think good, and return again unto their ancient
habitations, there to dwell and continue in all security, observing the laws
of the Country, and no occasion of dwelling in any place, where they shall
think good, shall be any cause, why their goods shall or may be confiscated,
or seized upon, nor they shall not in that case be deprived of the enjoying
thereof.

XXIX. No new Forts shall be made during the said Truce, within the Low
Countries, neither on the one side nor the other.

XXX. The Lords of the House of Nassaw, shall not be pursued, or yet molested,
during the said Truce, neither in their persons, goods nor lands, for any debts
made by the said Prince of Orange deceased, from the year of our Lord, 1567.
until the day of his death, nor yet of the arrerages happened and fallen out,
during the seasing and withholding of the lands and goods that were chargeable
for the same.

XXXI. If there be any preuentions of the Truce made by any particular persons,
without the commandment or permission of the said King, Archdukes, or States,
the damages shall be recovered in the same place, where the said Preuentions
have bin made, if the parties be found therein, or else in the place where
they shall dwell, without any pursuit elsewhere to be made against them,
either in their bodies or goods, in any sort whatsoever: neither shall it be
lawful for them to enter into arms, or to break the Truce for that occasion,
but they shall be permitted (if it be manifestly proved that justice shall in
that case be denied) to remedy themselves, as the manner is, by letters of
mart or reprisals.

XXXII. All dis-inheritings and dispositions made of lands in hatred and
dispight of the whore, are hereby declared void, and utterly frustrated.

XXXIII. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said Archdukes,
and the States, of what state and condition soever they be, are hereby
declared capable to be heirs and successors one unto the other, both by
testament, and also ab intestato, according to the customs of the places: and
if any Successions did heretofore fall and escheat unto any of them, they shall
be maintained and conserved.

XXXIIII. All Prisoners of the wars, shall be delivered on both Sides,
without paying any ransomes.

XXXV. And to the end that this present Treaty shall the better be observed
and kept, The said King of Spain, the Archdukes, and the States do
particularly promise, to uphold and maintain the same, and each of them to use
all the means they can to make all the passages Free, and to cause the Seas
and Rivers within the Land to be kept free and Nauigable, against the
incursions of mutinous Persons, Pirates, Cursaries and Thieves, and that if
they can apprehend and take them, to cause them to be rigorously punished
according to their deserts.

XXXVI. They do also promise, to do nothing contrary, or to the prejudice of
this present Treaty, nor to suffer the same to be done directly or indirectly
in my wife whatsoever, and that if any such thing be done, to cause it to be
amended and recompensed; without any difficulty or delay. And for the
observation of all the former Articles, the said King of Spain and the
Archdukes and their Successors, bind themselves particularly, and for the more
and better assurance of their said Obligations and promises, they renownce all
Laws, Customs and things whatsoever contrary to the same.

XXXVII. That this present Treaty shall be ratified, and approved by the said
Kings, the Archdukes and the States, and the Letters of ratification made by
the said Archdukes and the States, to be delivered by the one unto the other,
in good and due form, within four days next ensuing. And touching the
ratification to be made by then said King of Spain, The said Archdukes have
promised, and are bound, to give and deliver it unto the said States, within
three Months in good and due form, to the end that the said States, and their
Subjects and Inhabitants, may effectually enjoy the fruits of this present
Treaty with all security.

XXXVIII. That the said Treaty shall be published in all places, where it is
usually to be Proclaimed, presently after the ratification made by the said
Archdukes and the States, and that presently and from henceforth all Acts of
Hostility shall cease.

FINIS.

