A TREATISE OF BLAZING STARS IN General.

As well supernatural as natural: To what Countries or people soever they
appear in the spacious World.

shooting star SOVTH.

WEST.

NORTH.

EAST.



LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold by Edward Wright at his
shop near Christ Church gate. 1618:

A Prognostication of Blazing Stars, according to the opinion of the Poet
Pontanus.
OF stirring winds, with blustering blasts which blow,
Of bloody broils, by force in fatal fight:
Of peoples pomp, the pitious overthrow.
Of Potentates the death, in woeful plight:
The Blazing Stars aloft like lamps of light
In th'Est or West of azure colored skies,
Forewarnings and signs when they arise.
If still they stand, and offer not to change
The place, where first in sight they cast their beams,
Then shall ensue much mischief rare and strange:
As gaping wounds, and sluzing bloody streams,
In foughten field, twixt nigh adjoining Realms.
Such civil storms shall ouerrunne the land,
That some shall bath in kindreds blood their hand.
And if they take their course unto the East,
A sign it is that foreign foes with force
Prepare apace, to spoil both most and least:
With edge of sword sweet life still to divorce
From panting heart, deuoyde of all remorse.
Thus East or West in sight, they have their dome,
And signs they are of things in time to come.
Why, and whereupon Blazing Stars have their Names, CHAP. I.
For So Much as a man furnished with all kind of knowledge and learning, should
so search after the understanding of great and high matters, A reason for
understanding of blazing stars.
that he have not meaner things in contempt and disdain, by whose benefit (as
experience teaches) the greater are attained, because they minister certain
helps and aides to aspire and reach unto them. Hereupon it follows, that
lesser things are not to be neglected, without the which there is no passage
to the greater, nor any possibility to pearce to the perfect proof of them,
except by the forerunning of them preparation be made for us to ascend. and
climb up to the hidden knowledge of the other. Therefore, lest this our labor
lent and laid out for common vtility and profit should be subject to the
biting blows of furious envy, and lest such as desire perfection in
profession, as also certainety in delivering Doctrine, should complain, that
we sell shadows for substances, fantasies for verities, and imaginations for
demonstrations: we will say somewhat in the entrance of this work, touching
the name of a Comete or Blazing star, and so pass orderly to our purpose.

The star which the Grecians call Cometa, A Blazing star is named after the
form and figure which it bears.
the Latins Stella crinita, we Englishmen a Blazing sttarre, has his
denomination (as well by the assertion of the one, as the other from the form
and figure which it bears, at such time as it appears in the air: because
this kind of star seems (in our opinion and judgment) to shoot out long
strakes of fire in the Element, or bright and lightsom sparckles continued in
length like unto the hair, which the Grecians call Coma, and thereupon Cometa,
and the Latins Crinis, whereof it is named Stella crinita: The names of
Blazing stars.
so that the resemblance or representation which this Star gives, is the
occasion that it is called a Comet, or Blazing star, As Augustus Caesar called
that star, which appeared at such time as he published Pageants of pleasure:
and shows of Triumph, by the name of a Comete: and which Suetonius Tranquillus
called Sidus crinitum, and diverse others have semblably termed,

Neither was the Imposition of this name absurd, or against reason: The
likeness of blazing stars as sometimes they appear.
for whosoever shall iudiciously behold those kind of Stars, he shall
perceive, though not most perfectly, yet not very darkly) how it shoots out
long and slender lines of sparkling fire, this way and that way, insomuch, as a
man would think and suppose the same not much unlike unto scattred hair to a
broom or a rod of Byrch, to the tail of a Peacocke, to the bearde of a man,
etc. as we are taught by demonstration.

That Blazing Stars are sundry and diverse. CHAP. II.
BLazing Stars are not only very many in number, but also diverse in
appearance. The Sect of the Stoykes said, that they are beyond two and thirty,
The Stoyckes opinion of Blazing stars.
of whose sundry names and several effects, Abienus not unwisely has written.

Concerning their number and names, we are here to be not curious: wherefore
we will come to their colors and likenesses wherein there is not an uniformity
and general agreement, but a difference, For some blazing-Starres seem blood
read, horrible to behold, Blazing stars differ in color
and (as it were) crisped and curled in the Crown or upper part, tending
toward the Skies: whereupon they are commonly called Comets. of which the Poet
has this saying: Like as in moist and dewie night,
When Comets red as blood,
Appear aloft: the spectacle,
and sign is little good.


This Figure have they, when they are thick on the one side, and stretched out
in length on the other side.

Some Blazing Stars there be, Blazing stars vary in figure. Trailed stars.
which have a certain hanging downward at their lower part, in the likeness
of a long beard, or the mawne of a horse: which happens by reason of the thin
matter and substance which is in the other parts, which kind of stars are
called Pogonii.

Other some there are, which appear in the likeness of a spear or Iauelin,
and they are called Acontij: Spear stars.
or such a one as testifies Pliny, did Tiberius Caesar, in his Consulship,
pen passing and excellent Poems, or Verses of notable invention and singular
conueyance.

Other some there are, shorter somewhat then the former, Sword stars.
and they be shapt toward the top like a sword, whereupon they are called
Piphij, resembling in color gold after a sort, but yet so notwithstanding,
that (of all other) they are most pale, wanting beams, blazes, or strakes:
having nevertheless a cereain brightness in them, like the glittering of a
sword.

Other some there are which are called Phitites, Tun stars.
in form and fashion like a Tun, having in the hollow part of them the show
of a smoaky and smothering flame, much like unto the Blacke-Smiihs Forge, or
vessels daubed and smeered with pitch, set on fire, which cast a dark and
mistie light, and men have sometimes used for the preserving and fresh keeping
of their drink.

There are besides them that we have reckoned Comets called Certarij, Horn
stars.
because they appear to our sight in the similitude and likeness of a Horn:
Such a one was seen, when the Grecians encamped at Salamina.

Othersome also there are, which be called Lampades, Lamp stars.
because they cast a show of a burning torch, or flaming Lamp of which sort
sundry have been, and that not very seldom.

Furthermore, some there are which be called Hippci, Mawne stars.
because they seem to have about them (as it were) a Horse Mawne, going round
about them in circle wise, with strange moving and swiftenesse.

To be short, some Blazing Stars are seen in the Air, glistering with
strakes and streams like bright silver, that it passes the ability of man's
eye to look and behold them, wherein (as in a clear glass) God is
represented, in the likeness and shape of a man. And such a one (as some do
hold opinion) was that which appeared to the Wisemen in the East, A Blazing
star reprpsenting as it were in a glass, the Image of God.
and conducted them to the place where Christ was borne: concerning the
appearing whereof, thus said he to the Hierosolomite. We have seen his
star in the East, and are come to do him worship.

But touching this, we purpose (peradventure) to say somewhat in the winding up
of this work. We know not that besides these which we have rehearsed, there be
many more forms and figures of Comets or blazing stars, and many more sorts,
of which particularly to discourse, is not our meaning or ontent, nor yet a
matter of such weight and importance, that it should require present and
perfect handling: we will therefore to that which is more necessary.

In what part of Heaven blazing stars appear most commonly. CHAP. III,
THey that have written things notable, and profitable of Astrology, and have
discoursed things concerning the influences and governments of Stars, in such
sort and order, that the knowledge issuing from their travels, offers fruit
not deserving repentance: In what part of heaven Blazing stars are seen.
They (I say) have affirmed, that Blazing Stars never appear in the West
part of Heaven: but either under the North, in some one part or other, but
uncertain: howbeit, most commonly in that bright and clear part, which is
called the Milkie Circle: or else (which is seldom seen come to pass) they
appear in the South Pole, but yet without any blazce, in the^ seasons of
Winter especially: yet it is recorded, that a Come appeared to the Aethopians,
and to the Egyptians, and that the King of those people, gave that Blazing
Star a name, calling it Typon, because it had in it a double resemblance,
namely of a round ball, and of a fire, in so much, that according to the
judgment of sense, it might not so aptly be called a Comet or Blazing Star,
as a fiery or flaming ball, or a round compassed and burning knot.

At what time of the year blazing stars appear, and how long they continue.
CHAP. IIII.
ALthough Damascene (an Author in my judgment worthy reverence (is of opinion
that a Blazing star, is a star newly made and created for the time present,
which vanishes out of sight, and cease to appear, when the thing whereof it
is a signification is accomplished, and come to pass: yet notwithstanding,
experience (whom writers name, the Mistress of many mysteries) informs and
teaches us, that a Blazing Star may appear at any season of the year: but
more often in summer and then specially, when the star called Canicula
arises, and rules the weather and time of the year, according to the
proportion of the influence, and that they continue seven days at the least,
and not above fourscore at the most, the authority of Pliny, giving
countenance to this opinion.

Howbeit, this assertion, together with the testimony of Pliny may be improued
by examples: For (as it is universally known) a Comet, which appeared before
the overthrow of Jerusalem, was seen blazing in the Element, to the
wonderful astonishment of the people, by the space of a whole year, as
Eusebius and Josephus verified.

But we must note, that this Comet, and the appearance of the same, which was
full of horror, is not to be ascribed unto Nature, but to be attributed
immediately unto God, The opinion of the Pythagorists touching Blazing stars.
the Father and founder of Nature, although the sect of the Pythagorists
thought, that all Blazing stars were to be referred unto Nature who has
provided that their appearing should be at certain definite, and appointed
times of the year.

Touching these Blazing Stars also, of the same sect there was some, who
supposed they were perpetual stars, and not temporal, and that they had an
ordinary course to run, as other stars have their revolution and circular
motion, and that their appearing proceeded from none other cause, then when
they were, forsaken and left of the Sun, whose brightness and neerenesse is the
occasion as they think, that Blazing stars do not appear.

Whereof Blazing stars are engendered (according to the judgment of Divines)
and what they are indeed. CHAP. V.
THe Religious Divines, like very well of this plausible and true opinion, that
Blazing stars come of no other cause, then from the holy Counsel and
Providence of God; that there is no matter of their generation, Original of
Blazing stars.
as Philosophers imagine, but that God makes them immediate messengers and
Ministers of his will, according to the time and place, as it best pleases his
hie and eternal Majesty: (that by them) he might give us aduertisements of
afterclaps, to prepare our selves onward to meet his fatherly mercy, or to
suffer the bitterness of his sharp judgment. Whereupon they infer this
consequent, that Blazing Stars are supernatural, and mere worlds wonder.

To whose Sentence I agree, and most willingly assent, being thereto moved by
arguments of forcible persuasion, and in number infinite. Principally, because
it is a Christians duty, to ascribe more to Gods providence, then to the force
of Nature, who^ God has not only Created, but also does dispose and govern.

Some Blazing stars natural, othersome supernatural.
Yet for all that, I may not utterly deny, that they are natural, for so much as
I am not (or at least ought not to be) ignorant, that Nature causes blazing
stars; howbeit so, that God is the Original and principal worker of such
wonders and that their ground and causes are natural, and not so secret and
doubtful: but that otherwhile the capacity and reason of man may conceive and
compass them. And yet contrariwise, I stand not in denial, that those blazing
stars are supernatural, which the most mighty Monarch of the heavens,
Creator of all creatures, and Maker of all Stars and Spirits, raises of
nothing to something, upon a sudden, in a moment and prick of time, to the
admiration of all men, and to the reueal^ng of his Omnipotency.

All things are possible to God.
Expedient and necessary it is to believe, that with God all things are in
ability, and that whatsoever is done either by day, or by night, naturally or
supernaturally, it comes to pass by his appointment, and that it pleases
him otherwhiles to create something of something, and otherwiles again,
something of nothing. To that which never had matter, can he give fashion and
figure, and beautify that with form and comelines, which never had Foundation
nor being. It consists in his might to moysten the earth with showers
distilling from the clear skies, without the means of lowering and dropping
clouds. He can work both ways, to whom nothing is impossible: Now gathering
the clouds together in an heap, from the uttermost corners and coasts of the
world, now turning again lightning into rain, which covering the heavens with
clouds, and preparing rain for the land: For, Great is the Lord, mighty is
his power, and of his wisdom there is no number or end: And therefore I am
easily drawn to believe, that Blazing Stars may immediately appear from
God, and be supernatural, when it pleases God, upon (some singular cause) to
give them beginning, matter, and substance of nothing.

Such a Blazing Star (no doubt) was that Pillar of the cloud, The pillar of
the cloud, and the plller of fire were Blazing stars supernatural. The Blazing
star which appeared in Jerusalem, was supernatural.
whereby the Lord (in old time) most miraculously went before the Israelites
his people out of the Egyptian Soil into the Land of Promise in the day time:
and that Pillar of fire, which never left the face of Gods chosen in the night.

Not unlike to this was that Blazing star (as I suppose) which threatening
destruction to Jerusalem, was of no less continuance then terror, enduring
the space of a whole year, which is not proper to natural Blazing stars.

To conclude, as well Divines as Philosophers and Astronomers affirm thus much
in this case, that always, in a manner, Blazing stars do arise of cases
natural, albeit the Lord God is the prncipall author and worker of them, as in
the Chapter following it is evident.

Whereof Blazing stars do engender; according to the rules of Philosophers;
and the Canons of Astronomers, and what they are in deed. CHAP. VI.
COncerning Blazing stars I find some disagreement between Philosophers and
Astronomers. Anaxagoras and Democritus said, That a Blazing star was nothing
else but a certain bright shining in the Element procured by the conjunction
of two stars: To which opinion, I my self of late did somewhat incline and
lean.

Othersome also there were, which supposed a Blazing star to be but a
certain dim and dark light compassed, and (as it were) closed up in a
cloud. Other some said, that it was a cloud purged, and purified from earthly
matter and grossness, which receiving light from the other Stars, casts
abroad clear strakes of brightness, small and slender, like unto hair, or fine
wrought flax,

Othersome again, thought a Blazing star to be but a certain cloud,
Aristotle his opinion of Blazing stars, and their generation.
kindled and set on fire with a hot flaming clearnes whose opinion Aristotle
seems to have favored, who supposed that a Blazing star did consist of a
dry vapor, which being drawn upward into the highest air, is there set on
fire: and that this blazing star takes substance of earthly exhalations,
very hot, dry, fat and clammy: which being carried into the upper region of
the air, is there kindled and burns: to whom all Philosophers (in a manner)
of this our age have subscribed, and some Astronomers also, who with Aristotle
think no less, then a blazing star to be but an earthly vapor, somewhat
thick, fast and fat in substance, like oil or birdlime which being drawn
upward, me to the Sphere of the fiery Element, and touching the hollownes of
the Orb or circle, is thereby heat rarefied, made thin and set in a flame: so
that by the consent and mutual agreement of these two sects (although some do
vary) it is concluded that a Blazing star is engendered and made of Air, set on
fire, by reason of the neerenesse of the Element of Fire, that Air contains
in the matter and stuff of a blazing star, and that the Air next adjoining,
and being by the element of fire, is called a Blazing star, and is no less
indeed then it is named. Which represents the color of fire to our eyes,
because the dry vapor in it is kindled, burns, and lasts with the light
of the flame, which is moved to and fro, by the under air: where vapors of
like nature, quality and substance arising, give continuance and length
thereunto, whereby it purchases the name, after which it is usually called.

Upon this agree our late Philosophers, in a manner all, counting the doctrine
of Aristotle, worthy credit and subscription: although as well the sect
Stoicall vary therefro, The opinion of the Stoics touching Blazing stars.
affirming Blazing stars to be but ordinary Stars, not differing from
other Stars which appear in the Air, and to ^ee above thirty and two in
number, not as also they, which hold this for a verity, blazing Stars to be
perpetual Stars, and to keep a limited course or compass, but never to
blaze and glister in the Air: save when they are left and forsaken of the
Sun, whose clearenesse dimmeth and dampeth up their brightness, that it can
neither appear nor be perceived. And they in like sort, which lean to this
opinion, that blazing stars, be Stars, having their certain appointed
times of appearance.

Now, as I dissent not from the first, those I mean, whose opinion draws
nearest to reason and truth, so I vary not altogether from them, who hold
opinion that a blazing star may be supernatural, and also natural, and
that the same takes generation of a fat human, and of fiery force, whereby it
is dissolved, and at the length consumes.

Whereupon this consequent is to be inferred, that we cannot call a Blazing
Star properly a Star, but Catachrestically, as we may so term them, I
mean (using in our phrase of speech) a certain abuse: although Augustus
Caesar (whereof we have given a (...) in the beginning of this our Treatise)
called that Blazing Star, which appeared at such a time as he published his
Pageants of Triumph, by the name of a Star: and which usurped name also
Suctonius applies to the self same thing: they both adding unto it this word
Crinitus, which we also, with no less abuse then they call Blazing.

This Blazing Star aforesaid, which appeared in the time of Augustus Caesar,
and shined so gloriously, some imagine, An erroneous opinion misliked and
improueds
and suppose, to be the self same star which directed the Wisemen to the
place where Christ was borne. But I cannot allow of this opinion, and why I do
so much mislike thereof, the reasons in the next Chapter following, do declare.
In the mean season, I would not wade into wonders above my capacity, lest I
wander in wildernesses of doubts, but I desire rather to be wise with
soberness.

Whether the star which conducted the Wisemen to the place where Christ was
borne, were the Blazing star, whereof the Emperor Augustus did speak,
calling it by the name of a star. CHAP. VII.
CHristian duty admonishes me, in few words to make men^on, what manner of
miraculous and strange Star that was, which (after a rare and wonderful
fashion) lead the Wisemen unto Christ being in his infancy. Which same men
(very rashly, and with want of aduisement) conjecture to be the Blazing
star, which appeared, and cast a great light at the same time, that Augustus
Caesar made show as of great pampe and solemnity, whose arising was in the
North part of heaven, about the eleventh hour of the day, and continued (as
Pliny plainly testifies) seven days space full and complete.

Of which thing, although Picus Mirandula has not godly and gravely
discoursed: yet think I, that it is my duty, compendiously to reason, what in
this point may be maintained, without hurt or prejudice. And so much the
rather, because I would not seem in this matter, to favor the Astrologians,
for so much as they swarne as far from truth, as the world is made, and the
heaven is high.

Concerning the Star, I mean that which appeared at Christ his nativity, the
Evangelist, whose evidence is ^^yed with the touchstone of truth, writes in
this wise. (...) garten Astera auton en ^e anatole. For we have seen his
star in the East.
Among all which word of this clause, penned, by the finger of the Evangelist,
the Latin interpreter turns this word con Astera, Scotland (...) (no doubt)
and (...) The Evangelist yet again says thus And behold, the star which
they saw in the East, went before them, until by approaching, it stood over the
place, where the (...) was.

By these testimonies, it is apparent and manifest, that neither After, nor
A^^ion, do signify Blazing star. Whereby the errors of Phlenon and
Harpocrates, are convinced, They appeared in contrery regions and at sundry
times of great distance: ergo they were different stars.
who also deemed that the Star which showed and shined in the East, and was
the Wilemens direction to Iudaea, was the selfsame Blazing Star, which in the
time of Augustus Caesar (as is aforesaid,) so gloriously glistered: when it is
as evident (as the Sunneshine at nooneday) how that Blazing-Starre appeared
many years before the Nativity of Christ, and arose in the North part of
heaven: whereas the Star (which was the wisemens guide into Bethlehem
(appeared in the East.

Furthermore, what man would so seen be allured to believe that a Blazing
Star would be thought of the Wise men, a thing of such certain and
infallible Prognostication, that the arising and proceeding thereof, should
embolden them to commence such tedious iourneyes, and to attempt so many weary
labors: wherein they might be of this opinion and judgment as well, that the
Blazing star gave foreknowledge of something else, besides the Nativity and
birth of the King of the Jews.

Wherefore it is more credible, that those Wise men followed the Star which
then appeared, either upon persuasion of the book which Seth compiled: or
else by the motion of Balaams prophecy: for that they were of the Kindred and
affinity of him, as some hold opinion: Or else by the ministry of Angels, or
by Heavenly inspiration, or else by admonition and warning given in (...),
which might (why not?) give them understanding as well of this, as it gave them
knowledge (afterward) to avoid the presence of Hreod, and to return another
way into their country, and not the same by which they came.

No man is able sufficiently to declare the enenicus opinion of Iulianus, that
irreligious reuolter, Iulianus the Apostata his opinion, as repugnant to reason
and verity refuted.
who affirms this Star (which he calls by the name of Asaph, according
to the opinion of the Egyptians) of custom and went, to appear every four
hundredth years, and that it betokens many things both marvelous and mortal.

But tell me (if thou can) thou false Prophet and perverse Apostata, if thou will have thine opinion, carry away, countenance of credit: How comes it to
pass, that those Wisemen never attained to the understanding of that Star,
and the determinate arising of the same, A question to good purpose.
at a definite and appointed time, but that they then came to the intelligence
thereof, when it was within the contemplation and view of their eyes? How
comes it to pass that the appearance thereof was so far from horror and
mortality, and that it gave presignification of joy, that to them was borne
the King of the Jews? And if it be effectual to work wonders, and to
compass strange and prodigious events, why then did it not every four hundred
years (by succession, season and degrees of times) prognosticate some
semblable thing, like unto that which was communicated to the knowledge of the
Wisemen? why did it not, after a thousand, five hundred and thirty years, or
within the compass and revolution of that time, bring forth a new King to the
world, or some other rare and wonderful effect, to kindle in the hearts of men,
manifest admiration? or else if it suffered an Eclipse or deprivation of that
singular quality, and so become dry, barren, and unfruitful: why did it not
appear still, though weakened in working, but lest utterly and for ever
appearance in the Heavens.

Thou swa^uest therefore, and wandrest far and wide from the sincere truth,
and give a witness of thy pertinacy to all people, and of thy soul impiety
toward God, in that thine own opinion, which is mere erroneous, seems unto
thee passing plausible: thou (in the mean season) derogating from christian
Religions due reverence, and struggling with tooth and nail to make it
contemptible. But all in vain, thou wrestles with the waves, which in the end
will ouerwhelme thee in thy wilfulness. For, the truth gives in a contrary
verdict against thee, with the which whosoever have armed themselves to
encounter success has not been prosperous, because they attempted combat
with a mightier then themselves, and being ouermatched, were carried into
captivity, The Authors judgment in the winding up of the controversy.
and cast into confusion. This Star therefore which the Wisemen saw, was no
Comet or Blazing-Star, as diverse have dreamed, but some new star which of
purpose was appointed to express the providence of God, as in the gospel it
is apparent: not being of the number and host of them, wherewith God garnished
the firmament in the creation: but differing all Stars both Fixed, Wandering
and Blazing, which to be this testimony affoordeth authority; For that there
be some which are of this judgment, and holds it for a verity: That in this
stare (as in a glass) was included the likeness of a Child: unto which Opinion
they might (peradventure) be induced, by the words of the Wisemen saying:
Behold, we have seen his star in the East.

It could not choose then, but be a new Star, and a Star importing a
miracle: For so much as neither the self same, nor any like unto it, ever
appeared in the former ages, nor at any time shined in the skies for the space
of a thousand five hundred and thirty years, after the Nativity of our
comfortable Savior, Being I say, a star by the grace of God created, for the
execution of his message, whose pleasure being accomplished it consumed,
vanished, and was no longer object to the eye-fight of men being causall and
temporal, not natural and continual.

But of this Discourse sufficient is said, as well for the improuing of
unsavory opinions, as also for the discovering of the infallible truth
requirable in this present purpose. Now will I make a retrogradation, and
return to mine arguments, concerning Comets or Blazing stars, having thought
my pen not unfruitfully occupied in this last particular.

Whether Blazing stars proport and foreshew some strange and wonderful thing
to follow. CHAP. VIII.
IT is called in controversy, whether Cometes commonly termed Blazing-starres
proport any prodigious thing and worlds wonder. Some in this behalf seem to
be resolved, Blazing stars are signs of some strange thing to come
and make their answer in this sort: That as Blazing stars are rare and
seldom. so they signify some thing that is rare and very strange, unto which
opinion they cleave, being thereunto drawn partly by daily experience, and
partly also lead by the causes from the which they set their original.

And to say the plain truth, when have Blazing stars cast their glimmering
beams, and lightened the air with their glistering brightness: but something
has followed, contrary to common course, and far otherwise then by usual
and accustomed order is received? Why then should not Blazing stars as they are
rare, so infer and draw with them rare effects? And why should we otherwise
think, then that by their generation also, some strange thing is signified:
seeing that other Stars shining in the firmament, are thought not only to
have been created for the service of men: but also for the distinguishing of
times and seasons, of days, months and years, and for other ends also,
which are privy only to Gods secret counsel? specially for that our Lord
Jesus, judged not the superstitious Pharisees (notwithstanding his sore
denuntiations of woes against them) altogether deserving reprehension: nor
utterly blamed the Sadduces for their diligent observation of the Weather, The
Pharisees and Saduces not altogether condemned for their due and precise
observation of the weather.
and marking the face of the Firmament giving judgment: that if the coulles of
Heaven were such and such, then semblable to be the succes of the seasons, As,
if it were covered with red clouds in the evening, that then men should be in
expectation of the next days bright clearenes. Which ceremony of theirs
purchased in process of time such credit and belief, that it grew into a
common and familiar Proverb: What man can say of certainety.
The Evening this does signify.


CHAP. IX. The good and evil which Blazing stars do prognosticate, and
betoken.
AS it is received for an undoubted truth, that Comets carry with them a
Prognostication of some strange wonder: so on the other side, it has been
precisely noted, and by due observation confirmed, that they threaten some
eminent evil and mischief: for which consideration a Blazing star was
called, a sign of Heaven, A Token of great fear, by which name excellent men,
Authors (I mean) or Writers of singular learning and judgment have termed
it. Not that the Blazing star is to be feared, as if it could do harm unto
man, but because the omnipotent God, and guide of the heavenly host, by the
same (as by a burning beaco^) gives us warnings and watchwords of afterclaps
and punishments: and to assure us, that he it is, and none besides him, that is
universally to be feared, not with a servile, but with a filial fear.
Considering, that he has peremptory power over the whole man, body and soul,
upon which parts he consists: and is of ability to judge us to temporal
chasticement for our amendment, or else to condemn us to eternal destruction,
as instruments of reprobation.

But to returns to the Prognostrations of Comets or Blazing Stars, it is found
by authority, that in the time of Charles the Emperor, surnamed, the Great, a
Blazing Star appeared, in the contemplation whereof, the Emperor having his
eyes earnestly bent, and considering profoundly thereupon, at length he was
rapt into a great astonishment, touching the signification of the same. And
sending for a Philosopher, named Eginard; conferred and reasoned to and for
with him about this Star, saying in conclusion, that the appearing thereof
did threaten unto him some miserable calamity. Which the Philosopher hearing,
to the intent that the Emperor should not be more amazed then need required,
he rehearsed the saying of the Prophet in these words: A Signis coelum nolate
metuere, Fear ye not the signs of Heaven, and let not the visions of the
firmament strike terrors into your hearts. Which sentence the Emperor not
mistiking, gave him thanks for that comfortable counsel, saying: That he
remembered the duty of a Christian man to be this namely, to stand in fear of
nothing, but only of him, who both created us, and also this Star. Which
notable speech of so famous an Emperor, gives a sensible instruction, why a
Blazing star may be called a token of terror or a sign of horrible fear.
Pliny also (many years past) affirmed, a Comet to be a terrible Star, and
so inclined to destruction, that it deserved to be called mortal: as in the
civil commotion, which was in the time of Octauius his Consulship, A blazing
star threatens destruction.
and also in the wars between Pompeius and Caesar, many probabilities are to
be gathered, or rather, many verities to be avouched. To the words of which,
Pliny, Virgill (the Prince of all Poets and Plinies Predecessor) alludeth in
this wise: More flashing flames of lightnings clear.
From clouds shine not below:
Nor Blazing stars, whose burning beams,
Some fatal fall does show, etc.


And the same Poet in another place, inserteth these words.

Strange stars did shine from skies in darkesome night,
And flakes of fire did fill the Air with light:
A Blazing star with siluered strakes did shine,
And made men's hearts for fear away to pine.
Whom the Poet Lucane imitating, and setting before him, as a president, for
the observation of order, uses these terms and Phrases of speech in his Poems.

Not Blazing star with glimmering strakes of light,
And lengthned hairs of color red and white,
Which brings to men (as many make report)
Destruction dire in lamentable sort.
Whereby it is to be gathered, that those kind of Writers were not ignorant,
that a Comet or Blazing Star, did most commonly presignifie and foreshew some
imminent mischief, which in tract of time came to pass, and thereupon grew in
use to be called, A terrible or fearful star.

The mischiefs which Blazing stars forewarne to ensue. CHAP. X.
For So Much as it is declared already, that Blazing Stars always signify
nothing else, then the approaching of some pernicious and mischievous thing,
likely after to ensue: it remains, that this question be demanded. What
manner of evils they be, where Blazing Stars are premonstrations, and
foretokens? Whereunto I make this answer: That as Blazing Stars are diverse,
so are their effect and evils which they signify not all one, but sundry and
differing. And for so much as the variety or diversity of them is to be
considered: therefore it is necessary, that the effects which follow such
causes, be accordingly coniectured.

Some hold opinion, that it is to be marked, which way Blazing stars shoot
their light, The observation used of some at the appearing of Blazing stars.
because (say they) that part of the earth seems to be threatened, toward
which the Comet casts his beams thickest and most directly. Again, it is to
be noted, from what star they receive their force, and whence proceeds
their influence, what things they resemble, and represent in likeness, and in
what places they appear.

Furthermore, to touch the effects of Blazing stars, experiences manifold and
innumerable have sealed this for a truth, The effects which have followed
Blazing stars proved true by experience.
that sometimes they signify barrenness of the earth, sometimes the sickness
of the plague and pestilence, sometimes dearth, and scarsitie of victuals,
sometimes great winds and tempests, sometimes extreme heat, sometimes
Earthquakes, sometimes the flowing of waters beyond their bounds and banks, to
the drowning and loss of the land, sometimes seditions, insurrections, cruel
commotions, tumults and battles, sometimes change of Kings and Kingdoms,
alterations of common wealths, and such slaughters as seldom are seen: with
many more calamities infinite and innumerable: insomuch that Lucane the Poet
thought it no matter of doubt, but of assured certainety, to call a Blazing
star, such a Star as changed the state of Empires, and wrought the
alteration of principalities. His verses follow in this order.

Strange Stars were seen in darkesome nights,
The Heaven was on a flame:
And flakes of fire like burning brands,
Sore sights in skies did frame.
The fearful Star which blazeth bright,
And spreades his beams abroad,
And changes Kingdoms in the World,
In the air above abode.
Sundry examples and testimonies, declaring the diverse and manifold mischiefs,
which have followed the appearing of Blazing stars. CHAP. XI,
LEast any man should think this mere fabulous, and a very forgery, because I
have said thus much, and that vyon the opinion and authority of other Writers,
that diverse Blazing stars presignifie and give a forewarning of diverse
mischiefs and evils like to come, it seems unto me an enterprise worth my
labor, to set down in a few words, and the self same agreeing with the true
reports of Histories, the assertion above mentioned not to be imaginacions or
feigned. Wherein it shall not seem a matter depending upon necessity, to run
through all particular examples, and to make an universal repetition of
testimonies from the Worlds Creation, (which passes the capacity of my wit to
comprehend, because they exceed in multitude) But it shall rather be
sufficient, and much more profitable, out of many to gather a few, and such
indeed, as Authors (most worthy of credit) have set down in their Works and
Treatizes.

And first of all to begin with the noblest Writers, and best approved: A
short enumeration or rehearsal of mischiefs which followed upon the appearing
of Blazing stars.
Who is ignorant, that after the appearance of a Comet in the time of Julius
Caesar, not only civil wars followed, in manner most lamentable, but also
the death and murdering of Julius Caesar his own person, which was most
miserable? who being 56. years of age, was assalted, and set upon in a
conspiracy. of 60. Princes and more, among whom were C. Cassius, Marcus, and
D. Brutus, and being gored through and flasht with 23. wounds, in the Court of
Pompeius despitefully perished, whereof P. Virgilius, Lucanus Pliny,
Suetonius, Appianus, Plutarchus, and diverse other Writers of great authority
are witnesses.

What should I linger long in the repetition of those strange tempests, of
snowes, haples, inundations of waters, and other like calamities, that followed
the appearing of the same Blazing Star: Which F. Horatius does not nakedly
describe, but singularly set down with a kind complaynt.

Who knows not, what an unspeakable desolation, and wonderful overthrow of
Hierusalems City, followed after the appearing of a certain Blazing Star,
which was seen in the air, ( Josephus and Eusebius faithfully affirming no
less) by the space of a whole year, burning with flames of lamentable
destruction?

The self same miserable massacre and desolation followed shortly after this
Blazing Star, which the Lord himself, the Father of all mercy, and Judge of
all reuengement, did not only foretell many years, ere it came to pass: but
also wept for very sorrow of heart, as he was prophesying to Jerusalem, her
sharp Visitation. For our Savior Christ (as the Evangelists testify)
beholding the City, wept over her, and sounded as it were, in her ears this
sorrowfall sentence: If thou had known (says he) in that thy day, those
things which belonged to thy peace, and now are hidden from thine eyes, etc.

Did not the death of that most godly and religious Emperor Constantine,
follow and issue the appearing of a Blazing Star, A Blazing star appeared
before the Emperor Constantine.
which was seen Ann. Dom. 304. being of an unaccustomed bigness, and of no
less horror to behold? And did not thereupon likewise follow an exceeding
dangerous insurrection in the Empire, wherein (among many murders) the Emperor
Constantius was spoiled of his life in the Castle of Helena. not far from
Spain.

In the year 444. a Blazing star was seen, which as it gave prefigurations
and foretokens of afterclaps, so did there ensue most miserable slauters and
calamityes, specially in France, and not long after Collen (being assalted and
besieged of the Hunnes) was ransackt, spoiled, and made even in a manner with
the ground: and the most Catholic Emperor Martian, was in a conspiracy of
his own subjects (contrary to the religious oath of alleagiaunce) murdered and
made away at Constantinople.

After the appearing of a Star, in the year of our Lord, 584 there followed
such an inundation of waters, in every place of the land, that it was auerred
and believed, a second deluge or universal flood, to have been prepared for
the drowning of the whole World. After that ensued in Italy, so hot a
pestilence, that within the compass of a little time, many thousands dyed in
manner most lamentable. Not long after that, Rome tasted of the whippe: A
marvelous inundation of waters, with other notable calamities for warned by a
Blazing star.
for the Lombards laying siege against it, made havoc thereof out of measure.
Upon the tail of which sharp punishment, there followed a worse: for the
Sarazens rose up with stern looks and bending brows, compelling the third
part (almost) of the World which professed Christianity, to fall to Apostasy,
and to take part with them in their damnable sect of devilish Idolatry, and
detestable ungodliness.

In the year of our Lord eight hundred and thirteen, there was a Blazing star
seen most strange and terrible, whereupon insued the death of that most
Christian Emperor Carolus Magnus. A Blazing star appeared before the death of
Carolus Magnus.
The Sarazens assaulted Italy, and with violence of sword and warlike Engines,
overcame and prevailed: not without the ruin of many a beautiful building,
and shedding of much blood.

In the year of our Lord, 1^84. there appeared a Blazing star, which did
portend a manifest show of much mischief and misery: Bloody battles which
fellowed after the appearing of a Blazing flame.
for in the year of our Lord, 1302. next ensuing, that memorable and bloody
battle of Flanders was fought, which to the Frenchmen principally ministered
occasion of many a lamentable Alas: for in that battle, the flower of the
French Army, I mean the chiefest in place and countenance, and the gemme of
all their glory, went to wrack, suffering death no less ignominiously then
tyrannically. And after that, Rodulph the Emperor, making siege against
Verona, sustained great loss of his best appointed Soldiers, the Switzers,
whose blood embrued the blades of their enemies, their bodies lying upon the
ground groueling and senseless: and the Emperor himself fighting against
Albert D. of Austria, was flain, only Emperor elected but not crowned. Now,
what manifold miseries and mischiefs, A Blazing star shooting upwards, what
afterward ensued.
a Blazing star which shoots upward, the head hanging downward, does
betoken, may soon be perceived, and known by the experience of a Blazing
star, which appeared in the West, and took his course toward the North,
which Star was seen in the year of our Lord, 1363. The woes whereof this
Star gave foreknowledge, fell upon the Frenchmen, to their no smallsmart, and
lamentable vnlukinesse.

For in a foughten field against the Turks, howbeit, out of the compass of
the French dominion, they were discomfited and overthrown, a hundred thousand
of them slain with the sword, among which number was the Duke of Burgundy, who
with the rest, lost his life without recovery.

Not long after which unfortunate conflict, namely, in the year of our Lord,
1406. Lodouicke Duke of Clarence, and brother to the French King, was murdered
at Paris most traitorously, and frandulently: the loss of whose life was death
and destruction to a great number.

And (that I may grow to an end) who does not remember, what grievous
calamities did follow the appearing of a Blazing star, in the year of our
Lord, a thousand four hundred threescore and twelve, in the Month of January,
over Colen Eastward, to the terror of the Beholders, and astonishment of the
bearers? There followed hereupon, in the Summer next, and immediately ensuing,
a marvelous heat, engendered every where in the earth, which was of such
strength and vehemency, that in some places, the first burst out, and cast up
with it, even the very sand and gravel. Hereupon followed, not here and there,
but every where battles and murders, mortal maladies, loathsome sicknesses,
most noisome and infectious: yea, so horrible, that I want wit, either in
writing to leave them witnessed or by utterance to make them manifest. At which
time also, the right renowned Charles Duke of Burgundy, passed many warrelike
adventures, and achieved many a Martial exployte, to his no small
commendation, and increase of deserved praise, notwithstanding the success of
battle is doubtful and dangerous.

In the year of our Lord, 1408. Further mischiefs which have followed after
Blazing stars.
there appeared a Blazing star, which as in fight it was wonderful and
terrible, so it betokened mischief no less innumerable, then either to hear,
see, or recount is most lamentable: For not many days after, Luycke fell, and
certain men to the number of 40. were cruelly flaine. About that time also,
(the Prussians entering battle against the King of Poland, were foiled, and a
slaughter, the like not heard of) made of them in the conflict. At the same
time also, was the Council at Pisa dissolved by a schism most damnable, the
(...) their convocation and meeting, being for the making and confirming of
unity.

Thereabout also began the Church to be ill appayde, and so stand in hazard of
havoc: whose present assistent Sigismund the King of Hungary showed himself
to be, in such sort with valiancie of spirit, that he might meritoriously
^halenge to be surnamed, The most Christian King. Thus far touching the
evils, yea the heaps of evils which blazing stars have protended observed by
experience and trial to be true, by the event and falling out of many
misfortunes, The conclusion of this Chapter.
which both long ago, and also of late have happened. It remains that we
know, whether they be not foretokens also of some good, which although many
utterly deny, yet nevertheless read our further judgment.

Whether Blazing Stars, do not as well betoken good, as ill. CHAP. XII.
Having before declared, by reasons not a few, and proved also by examples of
verity and truth, that blazing stars (for most part) are prefignificant
shows and tokens of some mischief and evil: Blazing stars supernatural
signs sent from God.
me thinks I hear one asking me this question. Whether Blazing stars are
not tokens of good, as they are signs of evil? To whom I make this
resolution. First, so far forth as blazing stars be supernatural, there
seems in this matter to rest no doubt: because Almighty God, in the
unsearchable profunditie of his wisdom, is wont by the appearing of Stars, to
give signs to his beloved servants (whom no doubt he has fore elected to
salvation) as well of joyful news as also of heavy tidings.

The Rainbow a perpetual assurance of Gods faithful promise.
For, has he not by the rising of the Rainebow. in the clouds of heaven, sealed
security and want of fear to the world, from being drowned, as sometimes it was
in the days of our great Ancients? Did he not by the retrocession and
backward going of the Sun (contrary to the order of his course) signify unto
Ezechias, that his life should be prolonged, and the number of his days were
augmented? Did he not also signify unto all nations, that the light was come
into the World, which should shine in darkness, namely, Jesus Christ to be
borne for the salvation of all people: which thing he would have testified by
the appearing of a new Oriental Star, visible to the eyes of the Wisemen,
and gloryously glistering? Even so doubtless, there is no cause, why the fight
of a Blazing Star should not breed in us, Blazing stars natural may betoken
some good.
as well hope of some good, as fear of some ill, according to the place and
time, where and when it appears, since it is said, Fear not the signs of
heaven which the Gentiles fear; because the laws of the people are vain. Why
then should we stand in fear of those things, which have not in them power,
either to do good or harm? Again so far forth as Blasing Stars are natural, it
is not to be doubted, but that the appearing of them may portend, and foreshew
some good: which is no hard or intricate matter to declare, as well by reason,
as also by example.

For insomuch as blazing-Starres are made of five Planets, as Abienus
affirms, namely, of Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, and Mercury: and that
those blazing stars which are made of Venus and Jupiter, are principally the
best and luckyest, it cannot otherwise be, but that blazing stars, those
specially which have their influence from Venus and Jupiter, should sometimes
betoken good, and not evermore evil. An example of good credit may that
Blazing star be, which when it appeared, was judged so happy and fortunate to
the Emperor Caesar Augustus, that then it was begun to be worshipped in the
Temple of Rome, and no where also throughout the whole world: because the
Emperor beginning those shows and Pageants triumphant: was by the appearing
of that star seven days continuance in the Region of heaven, put in hope and
expectation before hand, of exceeding great felicity and happiness to ensue:
which undoubtedly he obtained in such sort and manner, that none in regiment
was counted happier then happy Augustus, as none was named better then the good
Traianus.

Moreover, upon the appearing of that star, there bredde in the minds of the
Commonalty an opinion of great reverence, to wit that by the blazing star was
signified, the soul of Caesar. to be received to immortality, and to enjoy
among the Gods abundance of blessedness: then which signification, they
believed nothing more joyful or comfortable. So that we see both by reason and
example, that their conjecture and opinion does not always deserve belief,
which say: that blazing Stars never appear, but thereafter follows some
mischief and ill. Touching which matter, more might be said to the increase of
comfort, and the driving away of despair from the hearts of the people, then
we are disposed at this time to call to memory.

To what Countries, and to what persons blazing stars do principally betoken
ill. CHAP. XIII.
THe question is asked, To what Countries, and to what people specially,
blazing stars threaten mischief. Unto which demand doubtless, I might think
no certain answer can be made: because all blazing stars are not alike,
neither have their generation from one and the self same cause: but some of
them are natural, other supernatural, and proceeding from God in the height
of the heavens.

Again, they are without difference, so doubtful in their significations,
that Lucanus supposes their influence to be so general, that the beholders of
them, either on Sea or Land, cannot assure themselves of safety: and therefore
they are universally to be feared. Blazing stars are universally to be feared
both on sea and land.


Unto whose opinion I willingly assent, when blazing stars (supernatural,
and proceeding from God) do appear. For this is of a certainty, that it is
Gods will, by them to betoken and threaten some ill, to all persons in general,
which having offended and done wickedly against the prescript of his holy Law;
withdraw not themselves from that puddie of pollution and filthiness, wherein
they wallow: but continue a life laden and ouercharged with all manner of
mischief: whom he of his singular compassion and clemency, would revoke from
their sinfulness, by the vision and sight of blazing stars, as it were by
horrible threatenings and revokements, that by reforming their abominable lives,
they might frame their conversation acceptable in his sight, according to his
unspeakable bountifulness, long suffering, and patience, who still looks
for repentance before he takes vengeance. As may manifestly be gathered, by
his dealing with the Hierosolimites, whom he admonishes of their wickedness,
by a most horrible Blazing Star, of a whole years appearing, daily looking
when they would be warued, and well appointed with pretense, to prevent Gods
sharp punishment.

But touching natural Blasing Stars, Philosophers and Astronomers have
otherwise judged, howbeit, Blazing stars nataurall appear at Gods
appointment.
neither they shall at any time arpeare without the singular sufferance of God,
or some notable cause worthy remembrance. For my self, thus I say, that as I
am not of belief, that they betoken and prove in working as the Astrologians
dream: So I do not utterly condemn such as hold it much material, and
greatly to be regarded: toward what part of the world they shoot and cast their
beams, from what stars they draw their influencies and force: in what
similitude and likeness they appear, what color they carry, at what season
of the year they show, in what place, under what ecclestiall signs, and under
what Planets aspect. For some there are, which hold this opinion (though
grounded upon no kind of reason) that a blazing star, bearing the likeness
of a Lute, Harp, or semblable instrument, betokens somewhat to Musicks and
Minstrelsie, and to the followers of such vanities. So likewise when they carry
this representation or that, to have in their likenesses semblant
significations.

Again, other are of this judgment, that such Blazing-Starres as appear
under Saturn, are of a leaden color: The color of Blazing stars appearing
under Planets.
under Jupiter white: under Mars, red: under Sol, Golden: under Mercury, light
azur: whereupon it is thought no hard matter, to tell what they signify in
nature generally. Howbeit, to persons placed in dignity, as to Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, Emperors, Kigns, Lukes and such like as are of place and
countenance in the Commonwealth, they foreshew some evil: wherein as I hold
it reverence to be silent: so were it overmuch boldness and presumption to be
meddling. What therefore may be said in this point, let Astronomers show their
cunning.

How and what way Blazing stars are forewarning of somewhat to come, and of
force so to do. CHAP. XIV.
ALthough it may seem diuersely and many ways probable, that blazing-Starres
foreshew somewhat to ensue: yet not withstanding it is not necessary, that we
should believe (as the Astrologians rashly hold opinion) that they can be
signs or tokens of that thing, whereof they are no cause. For a blazing star
cannot be either the cause, or the effect of war or death: albeit, it
prognosticate and foreshew (as a sign from a natural cause) both the one and
the other.

It may be (I will not deny) the cause after a sort: as if that which is the
cause of war and pestilence, we suppose also to be the cause of the blazing
star.

Blazing stars are after a sort the cause of war, pestilence. etc.
As when abundance of vapors are drawn up into the air, which being kindled
and set on fire, there follows and ensues the generation of a blazing
star, and infection of the air, which breeds plague and pestilence, moving
men's minds to mutinies, through the increase and plenty of choler stirred up
in them: whereby they run with maine force to harness and weapon, and so to
battle and bloodshed, not feeling in them any rule of reason, restrayning them
in this their rashness. Hereupon (as it is not unlike) spring commotions in
kingdoms, and mutations of Commonwealths, then destructions: for, A realm
divided within it self, being unable long to last, must needs come to loss.

Blazing stars foretokens of barrenness.
Furthermore, seeing that the generation of a natural Blazing Star, imports
that in some place has been great heat and drought, (for otherwise such
store of matter as is required toward the ingendring thereof, could not be
drawn up:) it is wont to come to pass, that blazing stars do commonly
threaten barrenness to Sandy, and not to Fenny Countries.

Now, because it is likewise known, that by force of Stars, many enuenomed
and infectious vapors ascend, Blazing stars foretokens of pestilence and
mortality.
it seems credible that a blazing star is a forewarning of a following
pestilence, engendered through the air, being choked and poisoned by vapors
of such quality. By which means in like manner, drought sets men's hearts on
fire, and drives them forward to fall at strife, bralling, battle, and
bloodshed: it troubles the brain, estrangeth the seases, and thus arises
seditions. To conclude with the purpose, it is not greatly necessary in this
declaration, to use longer delay, since I am of this belief, that God (of the
abundance of his love toward us, which is unmeasurable) by nature, as a mean
or meet instrument, causes such and such blazing stars to appear: to the
intent, that he might by them (as by premonishments and fore warnings) put us
in mend to remember, that it is time to start from sin, and to prepare our
hearts with repentance, for preventing of those sharp and smarting whips of
Gods vengeance, which by such Blazing Stars, at Gods commandment, are
threatened. For he never or very seldom, since the creaon of the world plagued
any people: but he sent among them some sign thereof, for their preparation to
penitence, as in holy Scriptures it is at large declared.

Why Blazing Stars do specially betoken ill to Peers, Potentates, Rulers of
Realms and Commonwealthes, etc. CHAP. XV.
IT is the opinion of some, though erroneous, that blazing stars do specially
betoken ill to Princes and great men, and to their Kingdoms also and Realms
threaten some mischief: in such wise, that it has been observed and marked,
that no blazing star almost has appeared, but either death, or else some ill
has happened after, to some noble personage in the land; as by our former
examples it is left verified: which made Lucan the Poet to write of them, in
this wise: A Blazing Star in sight most strange,
The state of kingdoms, which does change.


But it is here demanded, what the cause should be, that Blazing Stars do
specially betoken ill to Emperors, Kings, and such like noble personages? I
answer, that there is none other cause, as they suppose, Why Blazing stars
betoken ill to Peers and Potentates: etc.
so far forth as Blazing Stars be natural, then because such great estates
and Peers of Realms, living more delicately and vntemperately then other: are
sooner subject and surprised with corrupt and empoysoned air: and so they
carrying close within them, and secretly nourishing the cause of ill in
themselves, being impatient and not able to endure the working of medicinable
receipts, quickly perish and miscarrie.

But so far forth as Blazing-Starres are supernatural, and as they have
their proceeding and being from the omnipotent God, it is thought this to be
the cause: namely, that God is preparing a plague against them, that the black
tents of his indignation are pitching, that the weapons of his vengeance are
whetted against them, whereof he gives forewarnings, like a most merciful
Father: to the end they might understand, that the cause of this Gods just
dealing, (being sin and wickedness,) is either in Princes themselves, or else
in the people under their ungracious government: in consideration whereof, as
well prince as people might see the horror and abomination of their own
sinful lives, and fly to repentance, whereunto God so fatherly would win them
by forewarnings. The wickedness of the people is imputed to the prince.
That according to the example of that holy King, they may lift up both hearts
and hands to heaven, saying: Enough now Lord, stay thy hand, It is I that have
offended: it is I that have done wickedly: as for these innocent sheep, what
harm have they done? Furthermore, to whom does a Blazing Star betoken somewhat
to follow, if not to the King? For in that it signifies somewhat to the
Realm, it must extend even to the person of the King, who has the rule and
government of that Realm: because he is a King by his Kingdom, and because
the wickedness of the kingdom, is reputed the wickedness of the King, who
either by his ensample gives occasion of wickedness: A heavy reckoning for
such as are in authority and office.
or else having power and authority to suppress sin in the people,
neglects notwithstanding the due execution and administration of justice: so
that the saying of the Apostle is most certain and undoubted: that, All those
whom God has placed in authority, given pre-eminence unto, are tied to the
necessity of this heavy reckning, not only to stand accountable to almighty God
for their own, but also for the souls of all such over whom they have charge.
And therefore right aptly spoke that most wise and worthy King David to all
Kings, (and under their title, to all such as excel other in office and
dignity:) And now ye kings (says he) understand, be ye learned which judge
the earth, serve the Lord with fear, etc.

And thus far touching this matter, which though it be but bluntly and and
shortly delivered, yet is it to be marked.

Of a certain Blazing star which appeared in the year, 1531. the 19. of
Sept. at Mentz, a City in Germany, and was sensibly seeene likewise in other
places. CHAP. XVI.
A Question is asked, what that Blazing star which was seen in the year
1531. might signify, and to whom it is a foretoken of some evil to ensue. In
answering whereunto, I would to God, I might not tell the truth so directly, as
I did of an Earthquake 3, years past, the effects whereof, the City of Mentz,
not without trembling tasted. The Blazing star which appeared, 1531. betokens
a heavy burden of vengeance, not only to the state temporal, but also
ecclesiastical: yea it threatens a plague to the whole world. The fashion and
likeness thereof signifies no less, for it was to see to, in form of a broom,
or a bundell of rods: which figure of a rod we doubt, forwarneth us of that
rod, whereof the Lord speaks by the Prophet: I will visit their iniquities
with the rod, and their sins with stripes. For Almighty God uses for more
certainety of forewarning, to give unto signs and tokens, the likenesses of
things signified, and betokened. As for example.

At what time his will was to forewarne the Jews of the Babylonian captivity,
he spoke thus to Jeremy the Prophet: Make thee fetters and chains, and put
them about thy neck, etc. Thereby to signify their captivity. So the same God,
gave a sign in the air of Titus and Vespasian; his huge host against
Jerusalem, to lay it waste: armed men with spears and lances, running to and
fro in warlike wise, which though they saw manifestly, yet ceast they not to
live as they were wont, most wickedly, the vengeance of God falling upon them,
which by those forewarnings was prophesied.

In the year, 1500, there was seen falling from heaven upon men's garments,
Crosses, and there appeared in sensible manner, A strange sight and wonderful
forewarning of a bloody battle.
as certain signs what should after come to pass: namely, that bloody
battle between the two worthy Princes Rupert the 3. son of Philip, Palsegraue
of Rhene, and Prince Elector, and the noble Prince Albert, Duke of Bauaria: the
ensigns of the one having black crosses, and the other red: so that in the
year 1504. was fulfilled that which in the year 1500. was foretold

Wherefore it is to be feared, lest the Blazing star which was seen in the
likeness of a rod, threaten unto us that rod which the Prophet spoke of,
wherewith God is purposed in justice to visit the wickedness of the people.
For if this Blazing star be natural, we shall perceive nothing in it,
which betokens not some great evil. All mischief comes from the North.
First, because it blazed so even from the West to the North, from whence (as
witnesses the Prophet) all mischief does proceed, having nevertheless an
aspect into other quarters of the world, terrible and thretning enough.

It was variable in color, sometimetimes pale, that is, Leaden and Saturnine,
sometimes Red and Martial. Moreover, in so much as it continued (by the
auerment of Astronomers) under Saturn and Mars, Planets and Signs of unlucky
influence: it seems to betoken not only unto one, or two Countries, but to
the whole World, famine, war, and pestilence: for it blazed most terribly
into all parts of the world.

Furthermore, if the same Blazing star were supernatural, and immediate from
God, contrary to the course and order of Nature, it might not otherwise be
thought, but that it betokened to the world much misery and woe: for God
thereby signified, that his vengeance was to come upon all wicked worldlings,
and upon all such persons, as (to their impenitence) join continuance in sin.

Now, who has the face to say against this, that the World has taken such a
surfeit in iniquity, and is become so drunken in all abomination, that Gods
mercy is changed into judgment, and his patience into punishment, his love
into wrath, and his kindness into fury: in such wise that it may be supposed,
God to speak unto us by this Blazing star, as it were out of a cloud, in
this manner: The end of all flesh is before me. The whole earth is filled full
of their iniquity, and I will sweep them away from the face of the earth, For
they have all played the start backs, they have walked in the by-ways of
wickedness, A supposed speech of God expressing his wrath conceived for iniquity.
and are become unprofitable: insomuch that there is none that does good, no not
one. Which as none can deny, so I think none dares but thus confess, that the
Blazing star seen in our Horizon, betokens a common calamity, considering
how iniquity does abound in a places, and that sin is grown to a perfect
maturity and ripeness which God of his mercy give us grace to amend, that we
feel not the heat of his consuming anger, whereof he has sent us a
forewarning.

Whether such evils as Blazing stars betoken, may by any means either be
prevented or avoided. CHAP. XVII.
IT remains (most puissant Emperor) the premises considered, that your
Majesty taking the King of Niniuie for an example, rise up from your seat of
Royalty, and putting on sackcloath together with us your people, lift up our
hands and hearts to heaven, praying to God most heartily, like humble suitors.

Now who is so blunt of judgment, and dull of understanding that sees not that
the confession of offenses, the repentance and contrition of heart, the
humbling and submitting our selves both in soul and body under the mighty hand
of the omnipotent God, will pacify and assuage the fierceness of his fury,
and so spare us in compassion, through unfeigned repentance, that we perish not
as outcasts from his favor.

Why should we not have this hope and confidence in God, God does not exclude
the penitent from the throne of grace, but receives them to his mercy.
considering that to the penitent Ninevites he did not shut the gates of his
compassion, but seeing their conversion and forsaking of sin, with the
denial of themselves, and all goodness in them, he received them again to
mercy, from which by their sins they were before excluded.

Furthermore, it is not needeful that we stand in fear of the celestial
Signs, because without God they have no power at al to prevail against any
people; but being his servants, are at his commandment, from whom all stars
and all creatures have their office and ministry. To conceive terror and fear
therefore at the appearing of a Blazing star, as betokening some evil like to
follow, it is extreme madness: let us rather tremble at his almightines, and
fear the consuming flames of his justice, who is the Creator and maker, not
only of Blazing stars, but also of the Sun, Moon, and Planets, yea of
reasonable man.

And let us not think, but that God, who framed the whole world, the heaven
above, and the earth below, is able (as he made them) so to rule them: for at
his commandment are all things within the compass of the Heaven, be they
Stars, or whatsoever else: so that he can; according to the greatness of his
power, which fills all places, change and dispose them, after his own
pleasure: yea the threatening tokens of his judgment and vengeance, will he
turn into forbearance and forgiveness, if we penitently neglect not (as did
the Jews) the time of our Visitation: For they being warned by many wonders,
and among others, by a Blazing star, of no less horror then continuance:
lay slugging in the Couch of security and carelessness, and not regarding the
threats of God for sin, either of wilful blindness, or stout stubbornness,
counted those tokens of Gods insufferable wrath, elementarie apparitions, and
toys merely contemptible.

But let us not suffer our selves to be lulled asleep in the cradle of
sensuality: It is good to be warned by the example of others.
Let us not be drunken with the dregs of their abomination: Let not the
vanities of our own hearts so bewitch us, that we fall into a self love and
liking of our own selves, neglecting the preffered time of grace and loving
kindness lest God delivering us over to reprobation in his unappeasable
displeasure, plague us with the same rod of reuengement for our ungraciousness,
wherewith he tooks vengeance upon them for their wilful stubbornenesse. Which
that it may not come to pass, let us in time turn to the Lord, and in due
season take his fatherly admonitions, as ready means to lead us to repentance
and the avoiding of the scourge of destruction, wherewith he punishes the
impenitent. From the which deliver us O Lord God.

To the Almighty, Everlasting. Invisible, and only wise God, be All, above
All, and in All, all Laud, Honor, Glory, Dominion and Majesty for ever and
ever, Amen,

FINIS.

