CAESAR'S DIALOGVE or A Familiar Communication containing the first Institution
of a Subject, in allegiance to his Sovereign.

Matthew. 22.21. Give therefore to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's. AT
LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1601.

Cursed be he, that curses thee: And Blessed be he that blesses thee. Gen
27.20. But to take vengeance on him that does evil. Romans 13.4. Wherefore ye
must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake. Romans
13.5. The Minister of God, for thy wealth. Romans 13.4. portrait of Queen
Elizabeth I

TO All sound Members of that body, whereof her sacred Majesty is Supreme
head, Happiness External, Internal, Eternal.
IF we consider how much this admirablie-beautifull frame of the world, the
earth being adorned with sweet smelling herbs, fruit-bearing trees, infinite
variety of beasts after their kind, the sea replenished with whales and fishes,
after their kind, the air garnished with feathered fouls after their kind, the
heaven beautified with the sun for the day, the Moon for the night, the
bright-shining stars, and all the hosts thereof, excels that formelesse
vastness of the Poets Chaos, whereof says the Scripture, The earth was
without form and void, and darkness upon the face of the deep, then may we
partly conceive how much a Monarchy, which is amongst governments as the Sun
among the stars ((...). Homer Iliad. B.
Not good is the rule of many, Let there be one Lord, one King) where under one
Caesar the Nobility, the Clergy, the Communaltie is prudently, justly,
happily governed, excels a brutish Anarchie, so hateful to Moses soul,
that his death being by the Lord foretold him, not mentioning one word of his
death he presently brake out into a most patheticall prayer for a Governor,
Number. 27.16.17.
That the Congregation of the Lord might not be as sheep which have not a
shepherd. The God of all glory (glorified, therefore be his glorious name) of
his great grace and mercy keeping us from the one, has so blessed us with the
other, as both neighbor, and remote Nations cry out. The happiness of England.
Psalm. 144.15.


O fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint anglos. Happy are the people that be in
such a case. That which abroad so many do admire, shall not every one at home
desire to preserve? Could he, 2. Cor. 8.12.
who was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which cannot be spoken, which
are not possible for man to utter, be himself deceived* would he who was ready
to give his life, Romans 9.3.
his life? yea his soul, for the good of others, deceive others, when he said,
If one member suffer, 1. Cor. 12.26.
all suffer with it, If one member be had in honor, all the members rejoice
with it? Are not we members of the same body, of the same body politic,
and temporal, there being to us all one Queen: members of the same body
ecclesiastique and spiritual, their being one body, Ephe. 4.4, 5, 6
one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all? Who is there of you,
of whom I am not to hope the best? Yet can I speak only for mine own heart,
for mine own soul. Such lively feeling has my soul had of those bonds
wherewith as Countrymen, wherewith as Christians we be combined, that I
could not but desire, desiring endeavor, endeavoring effect somewhat for the
common good. In Arcop.
If sweet Isocrates accounted that not revenues and riches, not laws and
ordinances, but good nurture of youth make a City quiet and happy: If profound
Aristotle affirmed that in vain do men make laws, Pol. 5.6.
if youth be not brought up in good manners: If divine Plato auerred that small
need had his Commonwealth of laws, De repub. li. 4
by reason of the good discipline wherein his Citizens had bin nourished: Prou.
22.6.
If Solomon (who in respect of the others is as a Carbuncle amongst the
meanest gemmes) has delivered, Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when
he is old he shall not depart from it: What (especially if ye look either
upon the pronesse of some to be seduced, or upon the malice of some
mal-contents seeking to seduce, or upon some, who from beyond the seas as
Satan from beyond the wilderness raise up winds to beat our houses upon our
heads) what I say more convenient, what more expedient, what more necessary
tha^ some instruction for our youth in their duty to our Caesar? An
Instruction, least England take up that complaint of the Prophet, Hosea. 4.6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, a plain instruction, least
our youth do not conceive it, a brief instruction (intending hereafter for
riper heads in another tongue more amply to handle the like argument) least
few should read it. But to whom then shall I tender and present it? May I to
you most honorable Counselors? who am I that knowing your Lordships as
Gedeliah did not alone himself serve, 2. King. 25.24
but also incite others to serve his King, not only obey, but most principally
draw others to obedience to our Caesar, should interrupt your grave
consultations with so slight a Schedule? yet have most of your Honors
(respecting the good end) most honorably approved it. Most and Right Reverend
Fathers of the Church, to whom God has given his vrim and his thummim, may I
present it to you? I am peccatorum maximus, Apostolorum minimus, I know ye put
them in remembrance, that they be subject to the principalities and powers, and
that they be obedient. Most grave Judges and Maiestrates may I present it to
you? The Right Honorable, who is among you as a Diamond set in Gould, has in
regard of the intent, given it his double approbation. You all knowing that law
of the Israelites Commonwealth, Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13.
That man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest
(that stands before the Lord thy God to minister there) or unto the Judge,
that man shall die, and thou shall take away evil from Israel, So all the
people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. Do know what
regard is to be had of Caesar being the Priests, and Judges Sovereign. Tutors
and instructors of our youth, dressors of the plants of England, shall I tender
it you, you being accounted most necessary members of every weale-publike? In
nothing more then this can you show your love to your country, nor discharge
your duties to your Sovereign. Masters of families, and keepers of servants,
shall I tender it to you? Col. 4.1.
May I say in this respect, ye Masters, do that unto your servants which is
just and equal? Is it said for food and raiment only, or for civil and
Christian education also, 1. Tim. 5, 8.
That he that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse than an infidel? Is not God
highly displeased with you for not instructing your households, who was so
highly pleased with Abraham (if ye be Abraham's children ye will do the works
of Abraham) for instructing of his household? John. 8.39. Genesis 18.17, 18 19.
Assure your selves, he who upon the Israelites according to the flesh imposed
such a respect of their enemies beasts, Exodus 23.4, 5.
imposes upon the Israelites according to faith a far greater regard of their
own servants: those breath an unreasonable and mortal life, these have a
reasonable and an immortal soul: heirs they be with you of the same
salvation.

Fathers, shall I tender it to you? You remember who enioined you To teach your
sons, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Deuteronomy. 6.6.7, 8, 9.
and your sonnes-sonnes: you remember who said, These words which I command
thee this day, shall be in thine heart: And thou shall rehearse them continually
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou tariest in thine house,
and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. And thou shall (not only for thy remembrance) bind them upon thine hand,
and between thine eyes, (but for thy children and servants) write them upon
the posts of thine house, and upon thy Gates. Those words of God teach us our
duty to God, our duty to our neighbors, amongst our neighbors, first to our
superiors, Exodus 20.12.
amongst our superiors, chiefly to our Caesar, because Caesar is the father
of the Country, the noursing mother of the Church: Hence Solomon, hence Peter,
hence Paul, hence Christ drew that which they have taught us for our duties to
our Princes. As you love your selves, as you love your children, omit not this.
Omit not this if you love your children, for the same Adoniah, who^ David
because he was his darling would not reprove and correct with the rod, 1.
King. 1.6.
(I hold reproof and correction to be either parts or appurtenances of
instruction) the same Adoniah, because he proved a Traitor, 1. King. 2.25.
did Solomon (though he were his brother) execute with the sword. Omit it not,
if you love your selves, for, O how heavy was the Judgment that fell upon
the head of Eli. for omitting this duty: for omitting this duty upon Eli, old
Eli, Eli the high Priest, Eli who had judged Israel forty years, 1. Sam.
2.23, 24, 25.
Eli who herein had done somewhat, O how heavy I say was the Judgment that
for omitting this duty fell upon his bead, when in one day Israel fled before
the Philistines, 1. Sam, 2.17, 18.
there was a great slaughter among the people, his two sons were both slain,
the Ark of God was taken, himself fell backward and brake his neck that he
died. Better then that this should befall, were it that the Roman law were
received into England, whereby it was enacted, that, for the first offense, the
child should be admonished, for the second he should be chastized, for the
third he should be hanged, and the father banished. Mothers, whom nature or
rather the God of nature, has made most kind to your children, let not your
too great kindness to them, be too great hurt to them, and too great hurt too
you. The wisest son that by course of nature ever any mother had has left
this lesson for all mothers for ever, Prou. 29.15.
A child set at liberty shameth his mother. Though I tell you not either of
that too wantonly brought-vp son, who being led to execution by the clamor
of his tongue, and sharpness of his teeth, took irefull revenge of his own
mother: or of that mother, who to maintain her two sons in drinking and
gaming, defrauded her husband in his life, soon after his death with her own
eyes beheld them both (robbing following upon rioting) openly executed, the
one with the sword, the other with the rope. Yet give me leave to tell you,
that if Aretia taught her son Philosophy: if Cornelia taught her sons the
Latin eloquence: If Zenobia taught her sons the Greek, Latin, and Egyptian
tongues: Prou. 31.1.
if Bethsaba taught her son a prophecy: you are to see that your children
learn both those principles of religion already published, that they may give
to God those things that are Gods, and this institution of a Subject, that they
may according to the will of God expressed in the word of God, Give unto Caesar
the things which are Caesar's, So shall you, so shall they please both God and
Caesar. Children, Preach. 12.1.
and all sorts of youth, Remember your Creator in the days of your youth: and
in the days of your youth as carefully learn to honor those that are set
over you by God, Exodus 20.12.
as you desire earnestly that a long life, should be given you of God. Last of
all, I say to all: If there be any consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion
and mercy, fulfill my joy: As we are become a happy Nation by the government
of our Caesar, Barue. 1.11.
so let us and ours, perform all dutiful allegiance to our Caesar, and pray,
and pray fervently, and pray continually, that her daeys upon earth may be as
the days of heaven.

Yours in the L. if you be Caesar's in the L. E.N.

CAESAR'S DIALOGVE, or, a familiar communication, containing the first
institution of a Subject, in allegiance to his Sovereign.
Father. Son.
MY son, A father.
at thy birth I received thee as a gift of the Lord, since thy birth, I made
thee a chief object of my care, it is thy part hereafter to become while I
live, Eccle. 30.4
the staff of mine age, and when I am dead, 2. Sam. 18, 18.
to be so like me (whereof I more esteem then of the pillar of Absolon) that I
shall not seem to be dead. Prou. 31, 2.
But O my son, but O the Son of my loins, but O the Son of my desires,
if by disloyalty thou ever turnest the gift of God into a judgment upon my
head, The Fathers Care.
If thou changest the cares of my head into thorns to my heart. If thou
bring my gray head with sorrow unto the grave, if thou dishonourest my name,
attaintest my blood, ouerthrowest my house,


Son. Dear father unworthy were I of life, if I should so highly offend him
who (next to God) gave me life, The sons acknowledgment.
and whom God himself has commanded me to honor.


Father. Then sweet Son imprint now in thy heart, and express ever in thy
life, that short charge of our sweetest Sauoiur, Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and give unto God, those things
which are Gods. Of giving unto God the things that are Gods (the performance of
which duty is ever to be preferred before the safety of thy life) thou
usually hear both of thy master, from whom as Xenocrates Disciples of
riotous and dissolute, became modest and temperate, I expect thou should
daily return, not only better lettered in thy book, but also more reformed
in thy life, and also of our Ambassadors for Christ, as well in their
Catechisings, 2. Cor. 5.20.
as in their Sermons. Now therefore as my other affairs will give me leave, I
will somewhat instruct thee of giving unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's.


Son. Because as the Kings of Egypt, were always called Pharaos, so I
think the Roman Emperors were ever called Caesar's, and the Roman Emperors
were most high and mighty princes, I take it, that by the name of Caesar, you
understand our high, gracious, and imperial Sovereign.


Father. Our Sovereign indeed, my son, do I understand, who neither as the
Rhagusians to the Turk, paying pencion to any, nor as Bologna from the Pope,
expecting protection from any, nor as the knights of Malta do of the Castilian,
holding in see and fealty of any, nor as the Dukes of Venice to the Colleges
of seven and ten, and to the Signiorie of Gentlemen, (God and her own
conscience excepted) being countable to any, but being so absolute a
Sovereign, and so sovereign an Empress, truly meriteth the true title of
Caesar.


Son. Since I have heard there have been some in Germany, but I hope there
be none in England, who gather out of the Scripture (but I think Spider-like
they gather poison where the Be would gather honey) that we are not to be
subject to the authority of men: I pray you show me since the Son of God
has said, that no man can serve two masters, Matthew. 6, 26
how I can serve both God and Caesar?


Father. My son, as the souldior may at one time, in the same service fulfill
his duty both to the Captain of his band, and the General of the field, (the
one of them being not divided from the other, but deputed by the other,) so the
subject may in his whole life serve his Caesar, and the King of kings, because
Caesar has not (though the Poet sung so) command divided with God: but (for
the Scriptures teach so) deputed of God. And therefore my son, because as among
the Israelites Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, told Moses and Aaron, that they took
too much upon them, Number. 16, 3
seeing all the congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them: So there are among Christians which (as S. Jude says) Despise
government, Jude 8
and speak evil of them that are in authority, (as Saint Peter says) are
presumptuous, 2, Pet 2.10
and stand in their own conceit, and fear not to speak evil of them that
are in dignity, 2, Tim. 3, 4
as Saint Paul says, Be traitors, headie, high minded; 2, Pet. 3, 17
seeing thou know these things before, beware least thou be also plucked
away with the error of the wicked. Call to mind the charge of the Apostle of
the circumcision. Submit your selves to al manner of ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, 1. Pet, 2, 13.14.
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, or unto the governors, as
those that are sent of him. Call to mind the doctor of ye Gentiles, both his
decree, Romans 13.1 Titus 3.1
and his memento, his decree, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers;
his memento, Put them in mind that they be subject to the higher powers, and
that they be obedient. Call to mind (whereof I gave thee a former charge) that
thrice recou^ted precept of the King of kings, and Lord of Lords: Give unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's. Math. 22.21, Mark. 12 17. Luke. 20.25
And God give thee such grace as thou may hearken to the charge, obey the
decree, remember the memento, and fulfill the precept. From the which that thou
may never slide, either by the corruption of thy own heart, or the
persuasion of men, or the suggestion of the diuill, I will only (since the
wisest either of kings or men affirms that a threefold Cable is not easily
broken) show thee a foure-folde Cable, Preach. 4, 12
which may ever hold thy whole heart and soul in all allegiance to thy
Sovereign. 1 The founder and confirmer of Caesar. Romans 13, 1.
2 The haynousnesse of the crime of disloyalty to Caesar. 3 The punishments of
disloyalty to Caesar. 4 The rewards of loyalty to Caesar.



Son. Who I pray you, is founder and confirmer of Caesar.


Father. Neither any wicked spirit, nor mortal man, nor heavenly Angel, but
God himself, God himself is the founder and confirmer of Caesar. 1. Cable of
allegiance is Caesar's founder.

Effectual motives unto allegiance, be the attributes of God, and his benefits
to us.

Attributes of God.

Heb 4.13. 1. Infallible knowledge. Romans 11, 33. 2. Inexplicable providence


In Caesar's founder consider the attributes of him, and his benefits to us:
Among the attributes of him consider his knowledge infallible, his providence
inexplicable, his judgments inevitable, his decree immutable, his wrath
terrible, his love unspeakable, his mercy desyrable. His knowledge infallible,
There is not any creature which is not manifest in his sight, all things are
naked, and open unto his eyes. O the deepnesse of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God. His providence inexplicable, he reaches (with
means, without means, against means) from one end to another mightily, and
orders all things comely. Wisd. 8.1.
His judgments inevitable, Job 10, 7. Inevitable judgments. Psalm, 139.6, 7,
8, 9.
None can deliver me out of thy hand. Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or
whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art
there, if I lie down in hell, thou art: here, let me take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, yet thither shall thine
hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. His decree immutable, James 1.17.
with him is no variableness, neither shadowing by turning. Number. 23, 19
Immutable decree.
God is not as man that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should
repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he
not accomplish it? His wrath terrible, Romans 1.18 Terrible wrath.
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth in unrighteousness. His love
unspeakable, 1. John, 4 10 Unspeakable love.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Joel. 2.13 Desirable mercy. His
benefits. Election. Revel. 1, 4 Genesis 1* 27. Creation. John 3.16 Redemption.
His mercy desyrable, He is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness. His benefits to us, God himself chose us before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy: When we were nothing,
Created us in his own image: When we were worse the^ nothing, So loved us,
that he gave his only begotten son, that so many as believe in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life: In this world externally, has for our
sakes sent out the Angels to minister, Preservation. Heb. 1, 14.
internally, has given us the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba
father, Sanctification Romans 8, 15, 16.
the same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God, Glorification. 1. Cor. 2.9.
against the world to come, has prepared for us the things, which eye has not
seen, neither ear has heard, neither came in-the heart of man.


Son. Being bound by so many bonds to the service of God, Assurance that God
inthroneth Caesar, a great motive to allegiance.
I should ever most willingly serve Caesar, if it would please you to show
some proof that Caesar is enthroned by God.


Father. Proof of that does the scripture show both by plain testimonies,
Double proof that God in throned Caesar. Plain testimonies. And those be
affirmative, Wisd. 6, 23
and evident arguments: By plain testimonies, and that both affirmatively, and
negatiuely: affirmatively, So says the Wiseman, Give ear ye that rule the
multitudes, and glory in the multitude of the people, for the rule is given
you of the Lord, and power by the most high: uncreated wisdom, by me kings
reign, Prou. 8.15
and princes decree justice: The prophet, He takes away kings, Dan. 2, 21.
Romans 13, 1 Or negative.
he sets up kings: the Apostle, The powers that be, are ordained of God.
Negatiuely, So Christ to his disciples, Math. 10, 29
Not a Sparrow falls to the ground without your father. So Christ to Pilate,
John. 19, 11 Romans 13, 1.2. evident arguments.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. So Saint Paul, There is no power but of God.


Son. These evident testimonies be sufficient proofs: but yet what I beseech
you be the other arguments?


Father. His spirit altering their hearts. 1. Sam. 10.9 1. Sam. 16.19
His spirit altering their hearts. Soon after Saul was anointed king, God gave
him another heart. From the day that Samuel anointed David, the spirit of the
Lord came upon David. His eyes securing their thrones. Job. 36.7. Their end.
Romans 13.6. The title he takes of them to himself.

Psalm. 10.16. The title he gives them with his own mouth. Psalm. 82, 6. His
direction of their hearts tongues, and hands.


His eyes securing their thrones. His eyes are with kings in the throne, where
he places the^ for ever, thus they are exalted.

Their end being to do him service: They are Gods ministers applying
themselves for the same thing. The title that he takes from them to himself,
The Lord is king for ever and ever.

The title he with his own mouth gives to them, Ego dixi, not any creature in
heaven or earth, but the Creator of heaven and earth, he says, I have said, ye
are Gods. The kings heart is in ye hand of the Lord, he turns it whenever
it pleases him. In the kings heart is the will of God, Prou. 21.1. Prou.
16.10. 2. Chro. 19.9.
in the kings mouth is the decree of God, in the signing of the kings hand, the
judgments of God.


Son. More clear is it then the light, Objection. Answer. Evil Of Crime Of
Pain.
Evil of crime is not of God He needs it not. Genesis 17.1. He forbids it.
1. John. 3.4. He licenceth no man to do it.

Ecclus. 15.20. He hates all that commit it. Psalm. 55. Heaccurseth it Deuteronomy.
28.15. He severely punishes it. The Impenitent he eternally condemns for
it. Math. 25.41.


that all good princes are of God, but since every evil prince is so great an
evil, so great a plague, how can he be of God, who is the only spring from
whence all goodness flow?


Father. There is an evil of Crime, and an evil of pain, the evil of crime
is sin, the evil of pain is the punishment of Sin. The evil of crime is
not of God. God being all sufficient, does not need it. It is the
transgression of the Law, therefore he does forbid it; he commanded no man
to do it, neither gave he any man a license for it; he hates all them that
commit it: he accurseth it, he (I call to witness Adam thrust out of Paradise,
the old world drowned with the flood, Sodom and Gomor flaming with fire, the
Son of God for the sins of men, giving up his Ghost upon the Cross)
severely punishes it; and in the impenitent he eternally condemns it.

The evil of Pain is of God Esaias. 45.7. Amos. 3.6. A good King comes from the
right hand of Gods mercy.

An evil king from the left hand of Gods Justice. Hosea. 13.11.

For the sins of the people, he suffers the hipocrite to reign.

Job. 34.30. 2. A good King to fall. 2 Samuel 24.1. 1 Cron. 21 1. 3. Changes
Kings.

Prou. 28.2. 4. Punish Prince and people.

1 Samuel 12.25. ^ Brings evil from the good Prince upon the evil.


The evil of Pain is the punishment of sin, and this is thrown from the
Throne of God upon the heads of wicked men. I, says the Lord, form the
light, and create darkness, I make peace and create evil; the Prophet of the
Lord, shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? As a
good King comes from the right hand of Gods mercy, so an evil King from
the left hand of Gods Justice. Sometimes for our sins he gives an evil
King, I gave thee a King in mine anger: he makes the Hipocrite to reign for
the sins of the people, for the sins of the people he suffers a good King
to fall: Israel having sinned against God, God suffered Satan to put into
David's heart the numbering of the people: for the sins of the people he
changes Kings: for the transgression of the Land there are many Princes
thereof. For the sins of Prince, and people, God punishes the Prince and
people. If ye do wickedly ye shall perish, both ye and your King: If thou
be evil, evil shall come to thee from him, though he be good: for he is
the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. Romans 13.4.
Titles of evil princes show the^ to be Instruments of gods Justice.
Since therefore every Prince both good and bad is of God (therefore calls
he Ashur the Rod of his wrath, and the staff in their hands his indignation:
therefore calls he Nabuchodonozor king of Babell, his servant, Esaias. 10.5.
Rod of his wrath. Jeremy 27.6. servant.

Esaias 45.1. anointed. Flagellum Dei. Ira Dei. 1 Peter. 2.18.


therefore calls he Cyrus his Anointed, therefore (I take it, did Attila
call him self Gods scourge, and Themir-cuthclu, vulgarly Tamberlaine himself
the wrath of God) as Peter commands servants to be subject to their
Masters with all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the
froward: so I advise all Subjects to be subject to their Princes with all
fear, not only to the good and gracious, but also, 1 Timothy 2.2. John. 14.15.
though they be as cruel as Nero, (for whom Saint Paul commanded to pray)
for as God the Son says, If ye love me keep my commandments, So me think
God the Father from whom all power is given, God the Son by whom all kings
do reign, God the holy Ghost, framing the hearts, tongues, and hands of
Princes, say to all worshippers of the Deity, The Iniunction of the Trinity to
all worshippers of the Deity. Romans 13.2. The 2 Cable The haynousnes of
Disloyalty.

What a peaceable Kingdom, What a Rebellious multitude resembles.

Thucid. In Rebellion all kind of evil.

Rebellion the channel where the 7. Capital Sins do flow.


If ye love me keep my ordinance.


Son. Though this first Cable be sufficient to hold any heart in Allegiance,
which has any anchor-hold in God, I desire to hear somewhat of the greatness
of the Crime of Disobedience and Rebellion, that the greatness of it, may make
me to abhor it.


Father. Abhor it? abhor it indeed my Son, for where as a well governed
Kingdom resembles the frame of the world, yea the Kingdom of Heaven, where
the holy Angels, and blessed souls glorifying God, day and night live in
eternal bliss: so Rebellion resembles not only the Chaos, but Hell it self,
where is no order, but everlasting horror, that well said the greek
Historiographer in that discourse, in Rebellion is all kind of evil: It is
not one sin, but the sincke of all sin, the Sea of all mischief, will you
see the seven Capital sins? Is not proud ambition, or ambitious pride the
first spark of that fire? Does not envy blow the coal? Does not wrath daily
increase the flame? Do they not seek to bring al into the noisome ashes of
sloth, gluttony, and wantonnnes? Will you look into all the Commandments of
God, Rebellion transgresses all the commandments.
ought we not to honor the only God? but of Rebels and Seditious persons to
their Sovereign, whom the God of heaven Psa. 82.6.
Does God himself say, 1. Sam. 8.7.
as of the Israelites he did to Samuel, They have not cast thee away, but they
have cast me away, that I should not reign over them. Ought we not to use the
worship of God that God has prescribed, to the end he 1. kin. 12.28.
but the Rebel either rejects it, or brings in as Jeroboam the Calves, his
own devises, or pretends sacrifices and sermons* (O what affinity has
Religion with Rebellion) when Ahithophell is sent for, and the treason is
great? 2. Sam. 15.12.
Ought we to take the name of the Lord in vain? but if it be so odious in the
sight of God, Eze. 17.15.16.17
for a king to violate his oath to a King that has vanquished him, how odious
and execrable is it for a subject to violate his oath to his natural
Sovereign? For the Sabbath, how do they hallow it, who either beginning
example, who rested the seventh day, nor his precept, who commanded us to
hallow it, prevail with those ungodly men? In steed of honoring dishonor
their Prince, and in their Prince their parents murdering, which is abhorred of
all men, Adultery, they came to the height of Absolons impiety, they commit
it in the sight of Israel. For stealing and theft, thieves rob private men
privily, seditious, who by false rumors, flaunderous pretenses, and manifest
deceites, seek to defame the faithful Counselors, Est. 16.13.14.
and most assured servants of their Sovereign, that they being taken out of
the way, they might lay wait for their Sovereign: nay, who spare not their
Sovereign, See, 2. Sam. 1 5.3
thy matters are good and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the king to
hear thee. But (to fill up the measure of iniquity) does not this false
witness bearing against the Prince, proceed from unjust desires, desires not
lodging only in their hearts, but breaking out at their 2. Sam. 15.4.
Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which has any matter or
controversy, might come to me? But is it O Absolon, O Absolon, 2. Sam. 15.1.2
5.6.
is it (as thou pretendest) that thou might do him justice? will thou not
when thy Charets and horses, and many attendants, and industry, and
popularitie, and embracing, and dissimulations, and kissing, has stolen the
hearts of the men of Israel, unmask thy self? Thou pretendest the place of a
Judge, to do justice to other, but thine own spies proclaim, 2. Sam. 15.10.
and thy trumpets sound, that thou ( 200. in Jerusalem being received by thee)
aymest at the Crown and Kingdom of thine own father: 2. Sam. 15.11.
he set thee up, will thou pull him down? he gave thee life, will thou take
away his life? he pardoned thy offense, will thou persist in offending him,
Math. 5.9. Peacemaker, and peace-breaker, their difference, portion, and
parentage. Horace.
and in offending God? peacemakers are blessed, because they shall be called
the children of God: O peace-breaker thou art accursed, thou must be accounted
the son of the Devil. It is sweet and comely to die for thy Country, will thou by Rebellion seek to bring thy Country to naught: Math. 12.25. Ecclus.
16.7.
It was the impiety of the rebellious Giants to fight against God, but the
seditious are guilty of the Giants impiety, Romans 13.2.
for, says the Apostle, he that resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God. If Gamaliel, when the Jews brast for anger, yet with this reason,
least they should be found even fighters against God, Act. 5.33.34.38.39.
could cut of their consultation to slay the Apostles, cannot the same reason
bridle all the venomous rancour of thy heart, who art in name a Christian, and
therefore ought to have crucified the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
with the affections and the lusts? But time not permitting me to speak the
least part of that which might, and should be said of this daughter of Lucifer,
know that this mother-vice breaks out in Thought, in Word, and in Deed.


Son. Shall not thought be free?


Father. God who is a spirit, will himself be worshipped in spirit and truth,
John. 4.24.
and will have servants obedient to their masters, with fear and trembling,
in singleness of heart as unto Christ, not with eye service as men pleasers,
but as the servants of Christ, Ephesians. 6.56. How we must seeue our sovereign.
Gene. 6.5.
doing the will of God from the heart, will much more that subjects shall so
serve their Sovereigns. He knows, the imagination of the thoughts of our
hearts: and understands al imaginations of thoughts: 1. Chro. 28.9.
will have an inquisition made for the thoughts of the ungodly: Wisd. 1.9.
and if thou will not hear him, curse not the king, no not in thy thought, God
both Wisd. 20.1.3.
he (from whom wicked thoughts do separate) will have it revealed: for the
fowls of the heaven shall carry the voice, And threatens the revealing of
treacherous thoughts.
and that which has wings shall declare the matter.


Son. How can the fowls of heaven carry a voice? how can that which has
wings declare it? or any man discover the thoughts of our hearts?


Father. Examples of secret sins revealed. Acts. 5.2.3. Dan. 13.45, 46,
54.58. 2. Pet. 2.26.
He who showed to Saint Peter the secret compact of Ananias, and Saphira; he
who raised up the holy spirit of a young child to clear Susanna, and convict
the wicked Judges: he who caused the dumb Ass speaking with man's voice, to
forbid the foolishness of the Prohhet: he who discovered Bessus his Paracide
by the chattertng of Swallows: Plutarch.
he can cause every foul of heaven, and every creature upon the earth, to
reveal and revenge our mutinous, Wisd. 5.17, 20
flaunderous, sedicious, and impious thoughts against Caesar.


Son. To him that has not denied the power of godliness, it is enough, that
God has forbid us to curse the king in our thought: to every believer it is
enough, that God has foretold the declaring of such thoughts: to every one
that is not an open Infidel it is enough, that he need not go far for an
informer, If they with Michal despise David in their heerts, Michals thought
uttered by her own tongue
their own tongues sometimes with Michals utter it, O how glorious was the
king of Israel this day, which was uncovered to day in the eyes of the Maidens
of his servants, as a fool uncovers himself: and with her, And punished by
Gods hand 2. Sam. 6.20.23.
for this crime, receive punishment at the hands of God. Therefore Michal the
daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death. Yet pardon me though
I desire to know whether man's law forbid evil thoughts of Caesar?


Father. The laws of men for common crimes punish only words, Both the civil
and common law punish treacherous thoughts with death. 13. Eliz. 1.
and deeds: but for this point of high treason, if any man has thought it,
though he never attempted it, the law both Civil and Common, does punish him
with death.


Son: But was there ever such a president seen? The law in this point, when
and where executed.



Father. Neither far hence, nor long since, need we look for such a
president. That Norman Gentleman who confessed to a Franciscan Friar, that he
had a thought to kill Frances the first of France, though he had changed his
mind, repented, and asked pardon of that crime, yet the Friar reporting it to
the King, and the King referring it to the Parliament of Paris, the grave court
of that great Parliament, though that king showed himself very gracious,
condemned him to death. Yea so great detestation is there to be had of the
least show of violence to the prince, that whereas the law excuses mad men
from punishment: Madness excuses not the show of violence to the Prince.
(madness it self being so great a punishment) yet when Capito, a man raging
mad, drew his sword upon Henry, the son of king Frances, he was therefore
executed.


Son. Since to offend Caesar even in the thoughts of my heart, it is
prohibited and punished both by God and man: how may my heart be preserved from
wicked thoughts against Caesar?


Father. The custody of the heart is the preservative of the tongue, and whole
body.
As he that would have a stream sweet and wholesome, will have care that the
spring be kept from poison, and all corruption: so, if thou will have the
words of thy tongue, and the works of thy hand, to savor nothing but pure
alleagiance, then must thou of necessity, first see that the thoughts of thy
heart be pure from this venomous infection. That thy thoughts may be pure from
al corruption, thy heartmust be puryfied, and kept. Purifying of the heart
necessary in respect of original corruption.

Genesis 8.21. dangerous polution, 1 Cor. 5.6. and a fearful Wisdom. 1.4.
assertion. Jeremy. 4.14. What purifyeth our hearts. James. 2.19. Acts. 15.9.
and how. Revel. 1.5.





Son. How is that done?


Father. By purifying thy heart. By keeping thy heart.


Son. Needs my heart purifying?


Father. In regard of the original corruption, in regard of the dangerous
polution, in regard of a fearful assertion, I say with Jeremy: O Jerusalem,
wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall
thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?


Son. What is that gift of God which purifyeth our hearts?


Father. Faith (not every Faith for the Devils also believe and tremble) Faith
puryfieth the hearts, for being the hand of the soul, it apprehends and
applies unto us Jesus Christ, who has washed us from our sins in his blood.


Son. What helps be there for the confirmation of our Faith, Helps hereof
be
and purifying our hearts?


Father. Prayer, the word, the Sacraments: Prayer, Psa. 51.20.
Prayer, and therefore pray with David, Create in me a clean heart O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. John 15.3. The word.
The word, Now, says Christ, are ye clean through the word which I have
spoken unto you. Iam. 1.23.25. The word as a glass.
The word helps to purify as water, it helps to purify as a glass, as a
glass it shows our corruptions, as water it serves to wash away our
corruptions.

Prou. 13.14. As water helps to purify the heart. The Sacraments. 1. Mac.
6.34. The heart 1. Cor. 6.19. of a christian, the holy of holyes. Hence
Integrity 16. in us.
Sacraments, showing the Lords death till he come, as the blood of Grapes and
Mulberies provoked the Elephants to fight, purify our hearts, and provoke us
to fight against all corruptions that can come.


Son. Must we be very careful of this?


Father. If thy body be the Temple of the holy Ghost, then must thy heart be
Sanctum sanctorum, the holy of holyes. Hence good in thee, if the root be
holy, so are the branches: if thy heart be clean, so will thy tongue, so will
thy hands. Hence favors on earth, he that loves pureness of heart, Favors
on earth. Prou. 22.11.
for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his friend. Hence glory in
Heaven, Math. 5.8. Felicity in Heaven.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.


Son. So has this of the puryfying of the heart, ravished my heart, that I
desire for the keeping of my heart, to be also instructed.


Father. For this hear Solomon, Keeping of the heart. Prou. 4.23.
keep thy heart with all diligence. And first of all, since as except the Lord
keeps the City, ps. 127.1.
the Keeper watches it in vain: so unless the Lord keeps the City of
thy heart, thou keep it in vain. As the Priests with hands lift up to
Heaven, besought him that was ever the defendour of their Nation for the
Temple, 2. Mac. 14.34, 36.
with lift up hands and bowed knees, For keeping thy heart pray to God.
beseech the preserver of thy soul, O most holy Lord keep this house (of my
heart) ever undefiled which lately was cleansed: praying to God to keep it,
Libertine-like, be not thou then secure, (If Lucifer in Heaven, if Adam in
Paradise, presume not.
if Judas in the School of Christ fell, what place can there be for carnal
security? Blessed is the man, says the wisdom of Solomon, prou. 28.14. But
use diligence.
that fears always) But says Solomon, keep thy heart, keep thy heart with
diligence, keep thy heart with all diligence: with diligence within, least
there arise corruption from within thy heart: with diligence without, least
from without there come corruption into thy heart: within, Within.
least corruption arise within, for even as in a weeded Garden, there will
spring up new weeds, so, even in the puryfied heart, since there is still
sin dwelling, Romans 7.20. Romans 6.12. Because of sin dwelling. 2. Sam. 3.1.
Gal. 5.17.
though not sin reigning, as there was a long time war between the house of
Saul, and the house of David, so there will be a long time striving between
the flesh and the spirit, Ovid. The poets advice.
as the Poet advises stop the beginning: for as it was said of Babell, so of
the flesh (whose lusts cherished, will be our Babell, our Confusion) may it
most fitly be said, psalm. 137.9.
Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth thy young ones against the stones.
Exodus 12.29, 31.
When the first born of Pharaoh was slain, Israel was delivered: when the
first temptation is cut off, we are freed: keep thy heart with diligence from
without, And without because of the Devil tempting. Ephesians. 2.2.
for as Abner strenthened the house of Saul, so the Prince of darkness, that
rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the Children of
disobedience, strengthens the flesh against the spirit, the affections against
reason, he being the first Rebel daily inciteth to Rebellion. But resist him
says Saint James, and he shall fly from thee. Whom if we resist he will
fly. James. 4.7. From whom seducers to sedition be sent.
If any Rabshakeh (such be your seditious Libellers, lewd Inuentors of fained
sightes, and prodigious apparitions, and others of like brain) be sent out by
this spiritual Senacherib, to draw either you from Alleagiance to Hezechiah,
or Hezechiah from confidence in the Lord (since they that are such serve not
the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 16.18. Whom they serve, and what they do. Romans
16.17. How.
but their own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts
of the simple) I beseech all Subjects, that they would mark such and avoid
them: nay, since such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ* (who commanded us to
give to Caesar those things that are Caesar's, Math. 22.21.
who submitted himself to Caesar's Lieuetenant) John. 19.11.
but neglect his example, and transgress his Commandment, and not his alone,
but resist the ordinance of his father, Romans 13.2.
I charge thee my son, though thy hand be not presently upon them, as it was
commanded against them that sought to seduce to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
yet though it be a Prophet that gives a sign or a wonder, the Son of thy
mother, They are to be
or thine own Son, or thy Daughter, or thy Wife, that lies in thy bosom,
or thy friend, who is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, thou shall
not consent unto him, nor hear him, neither shall thine eye pity him, show
mercy, nor keep him secret. Nulla est excusatio peccati, Cicero in his ^aelius.
si amici causa peccaueris, It is no excuse of thy offense, that for thy
friends sake thou did offend. But (not to speak so hard in this crime as
in that) discover him or her, Entertained, and wherefore. Against them we are to
watch.
how near, how dear so ever, to show thy true loyalty to Caesar, thy
religious duty to thy country. And as Jonathan in regard of the enemies,
commanded his men to watch, Ephesians. 6.13. Arm.
and to be in arms ready to fight, so keep thy soul diligently, and be
armed for resistance. And as Ioachim upon the coming of Holofernes, Judith.
4.6.7.
wrote to the Bethulians, to keep the passages of the Mountains, for by them
there was an entry into Judea: so keep the passages of thy senses, Keep our
senses.
for by them there is an entry into thy heart. We resist an enemy rather
without the gates, than within the walls: so David that his heart might not
fall into vanity, Psa. 119.37.
prayed to God to turn away his eyes, that he might not behold vanity, Job.
31.1.
and to this end did Job make a covenant with his eyes. 1. Cor. 15.33.
If evil words (written or spoken) corrupt good manners, with David pray, that
God would turn away thy eyes and thy ears: with Job make a covenant with thy
eyes, and with thy ears, that they look not on, that they hear not any kind
of seditious Libelles, treacherous pamphlets, Prou. 24.21. Where we be to arm
most.
or the smoothest words tending to Rebellion. My son, says Solomon, meddle
not with them that are seditious. Arm most where thou art weakest, for where
thou art weakest, there will they assault most. Is Indian gold offered to make
battery in an English heart; How against covetousness. 1. Tim. 6.10.
with both thy ears receive that Oracle, The love of money is the root of all
evil: with both thy eyes behold Judas, who for love of money betrayed his
Master. Math. 27.5. How against ambition. Judge. 9.14.
Art thou high minded? do the seditious say to thee, as the trees did unto the
bramble, Come thou and reign over us. Remember that God resists the proud.
1. Pet. 5.5. Esa. 14.12.
How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning? Art thou
wrathful? do they inflame thee with revenge? remember, the wrath of man does
not accomplish the righteousness of God: James 1.20. How against wrath. Romans
12.19.
Mihi vindicta, avenge not your selves, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says
the Lord. Remember a fathers curse upon his two sons, that were brethren in
evil; Cursed be their wrath, Genesis 49.7.
for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel, I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Remember that of Christ, So likewise shall
mine heavenly Father do unto you, Math. 18 35.
except ye forgive from your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses.

If ever thou have in thought offended, that which Peter to Simon Magus for his
Simoniacall, Advice to all Acts 8, 22. Who have offended in disloyal thoughts.
I to thee for thy disloyal intent, do say, Repent of this thy wickedness,
and pray God, that if it be possible, the thought of thy heart may be forgiven
thee.


Son. Your instruction for the thoughts of my heart finished, my next suit
is, that you would next give me instruction for the words of my tongue.


Father. Seditious thoughts like an inward malady, Seditious words worse then
seditious thoughts.
be hurtful to the heart, wherein they rest, therefore are they to be
avoided: but seditious words like a contagious disease do infect others,
therefore are they more to be abhorred. But if thy heart be good, thy speech
says Socrates, will show like a Temple excellent similitudes of thy soul, as
Christ said, Out of the good treasure of thy heart thou will bring forth good
things. Matthew. 12 35.
If at the presence of Job (who was as a king in the land of Hus, Job. 29.10.
and his friends as Princes) the voice of Princes was hid, and their tongue
cleaued to the roof of their mouth, shall the voices of mean persons break
out against their Caesar? Examples of reverence in speech. 1. pet. 3.6. Gen
31.35. Act. 26.24, 25
If Sara speaking to her husband Abraham, gave him the title of sir: If Rachel
speaking to her father Laban, called him Lord: If Saint Paul conuented before a
Pagan President, and told by him, that too much learning made him mad,
replyeth, O noble Festus; if to king Agrippa, he for honor sake (in that six
and twenty Chapter) be found six times to have given the title of King, James.
1.19. The Canon of the Apostles Natures work manship. David's resolution. Psalm.
39.1. James. 3.9. The end of the tongue. The reward of him that uses it well
Ecclus. 21.28. Our proanesse to fall by it. James. 3.2. Ecclus. 14.1. The
difficulty of reclaiming it.
who can speak of so high majesty, without giving thereto honor? If I call
to mind how Saint James has willed every man to be slow to speak; If I
consider how nature has compassed my tongue with a double ante-mure, one of my
lips, another of my teeth; If David's resolution, I will take heed to my
ways, that I sin not with my tongue; If the end of this member, to bless God:
the reward of him that well uses it: He that keeps his tongue, and is
discreet, shall come to honor: our proannesse to fall by it; he that falls
not in this, Saint James calls him a perfect, and the Son of Sirac, a
blessed man: the difficulty of reclaiming it, the whole nature of birds, and
of beasts, and of creeping things, James. 3.7.8. The Treasure which he
keeps, that keeps it. Prou. 13.3. Esaias. 6.6, 7. The Author (of the evil
tongue.) James. 3.6. The situation, Ibidem. The damage which it does James.
3.5. The name thereof not a Rod. Psalm. 57.4, A sharp sword Ecclus. 28.17.
James. 3.6. Fire.
and things of the sea is tamed; and has been tamed of the nature of man,
but the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, what he keeps that
keeps it, he that keeps his mouth, keeps his life; the Author not as the
Prophets by a blessed Seraphin with a coal from the Altar of God, but by the
wicked spirit, It is set on fire of hell: For the situation, so is the tongue
set among the members, that it defiles the whole body: the hurt which it does,
behold, how great a thing a little fire kindles: Shall I call it a Rod? An
evil tongue is called a sharp sword, not a Rod, for the stroke of the rod
makes marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaks ye bones; but
because the sword cutteth no more then at once it touches, the Apostle calls
it fire, which goes on further still burning and consuming. The psalmist a
poison, Adders poison, Psalm. 140.3. Adders poison. James. 3.8.
the Apostle full of deadly poison, which goes on still further infecting and
enuenoming, but poiso^ enuenometh not, fire consumes not, but things near
hand that they touch, but the tongue back-biteth him that is far absent from
us, Jeremy. 9.8.
and therefore Jeremy calls it an Arrowe, An arrowe shot out.
not an arrow in the quiver, for then it would not hurt: but an arrow shot out,
2. Sam. 1.22.
and so it will slay. The Bow of Jonathan never turned back, 1. Sam. 2 2.9,
10, 18, 19.
some tongues be so bent as they will never turn back: the bow or arrowe of
Jonathan kills one at a shot, but the tongue of Doeg, 1. Sam. 51.3.
at a shot besides women, Children, Sucklinges, Oxes, 2. Sam. 16.7.
Asses, and sheep, killed 85 persons that were a linen Ephod. The Archers of
the Philistines wounded Saul, but because they were enemies: but the tongue of
Shimei wounded David, the one being a Sovereign, the other a Subject. Shimeis
tongue wounded David when he was abroad, fleeing, weeping, his head covered,
his feet bare, his people about him mourning, his enemy reigning: but is there
any tongue that will, that dare, that can wound David being within the privy
Chamber of his own Court; tryumphing, blessing God for deliueries, his head
crowned, his feet of all true hearts honored, all true Subjects rejoicing and
giving thanks to God, who blesses David, and them in David, enemies at home
and abroad, by the watchful providence and mighty hand of the Lord, detected
and confounded? Is there, such a tongue, is there such a tongue in all Israel?
Is there such a tongue in all England? that tongue is neither Rod, nor sword,
nor poison, A seditious tongue no Rod no sword no poison, no fire.
nor fire, nor arrowe, nor arrow shot out, nor arrow of Jonathan, nor arrow
of the Philistines, nor shot of Doeg, nor tongue of Shimei, (whom neither
holy David dying, nor wise Solomon reigning, thought meet to be pardoned) but
hell it self: Nay, But Hell it self. Eccus. 28.21.
hear not me, hear Jesus the Son of Sirac: Hell (says he) were better
then such a one. Has any man such a tongue, and yet goes for a Christian? and
yet seems to be religious? The seditious tongue does but counterfeit
Religion. James. 1.26. The badde tongue worse then a thief.
Let him hear S. James: If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth
not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain. Oh
how wicked then is a had tongue? how wicked be Thieves? but Thieves (says
Saint Ambrose) be more tolerable then the badde tongue. Thieves take away our
riches, but a badde tongue takes away out good name, which in the judgment of
Solomon, Prou. 22.1. John 1.34.
is to be chosen above great riches. O cruel spear of the soldier, which
pierced the side of my Savior: O cruel tongue of the Seditious, The seditious
tongue Prou. 25.3.
which (though Solomon affirms, that the heavens in height, and the earth in
deepnes, and the kings heart can no man search out) pierces ye head and heart
of my sovereign. The spear of the Soldier pierced not the side of my
Savior, Compared to the soldiers spear John 19.33 34.
until he was dead, the tongue of the seditious, (I tremble to think of it)
pierces the head and heart of my Sovereign in her life. There is not (said
the son of Sirac) a more wicked head, Ecclus 25.17.
then the head of a serpent, yet is the tongue of the seditious head as wicked,
as the head of a Serpent, The seditious tongue compared to a serpent.

The seditious tongue as evil as the head of a serpent.


the tongue of the seditious head, is more wicked then the head of a Serpent.
Is as wicked as the head of a serpent, the Serpent is treacherous, it stingeth
in secret, the tongue of the seditious is treacherous, it stingeth in secret; at
the voice of a man the Serpent flies, at the voice of a good Subject the
seditious is silent; the Serpent feeds but upon the dust of the earth, the
seditious tongue talks but of the infirmities that be, nay lewdly faineth
infirmities to be in the Prince: the Serpent goes not straight along, but
wreatheth and inuolueth himself, the seditious speaks not sincerely and
plainly, but will protest that he is sorry to see this, sorry to hear that, he,
forsooth, wishes only the saving of souls, and the good of the estate; and
yet he is more wicked then the head of a Serpent, The seditious tongue worse
then the head of a serpent.
The Serpent poysoneth one at once, but the evil tongue (Saint Bernard says)
poysoneth three at once, himself that speaks, him that he speaks of, and
him that he speaks too; but (there) rests not his poison, for at the same
instant he offends God, Acts. 10.33,
in whose presence we all do speak. And therefore if you will know how wicked
he is, God by S. James tells us, that the tongue is not wicked, but
wickedness, not a little, but a great wickedness, And if you would know
how great, The evil tongue James 3.6. A world of wickedness. Genesis 9.22.25.
Examples which may move us to take heed to our tongue. Numb. 12.10. 2. Sam.
6.7.
he says it is a world of wickedness. If Cham (who told his brethren of his
fathers nakedness) had that sentence from his father, Cursed be Canaan, a
servant of servants shall he be to his brethren: If Miriam (though a
Prophetess) murmuring against Moses the leader of Israel was leprous like
snow: If Vzzah for putting his hand to the Ark of God, incurred Gods so great
indignation, that he stroke him in the place, that he died in the place: what
may he look for at the hands of God, who shall set his mouth against heaven,
and bend his tongue against the God upon earth? Pray for the government of the
tongue. Psalm. 141.3. Murmur not says Paul. Phil, 2.14.
when thou should not speak, make a door, and a bar, and a sure bridle
for thy mouth: pray with David: Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, and keep
the door of lips: Remember that of Paul, Do all things without murmuring,
and reasonings: That of God himself, Thou shall not walk about with tales
among thy people: Sow not sedition. Leuit. 16.16. Says God himself.
Nay since such are fit to kindle the fire of sedition, and their words
sink deep, thou must drive them away with thine angry countenance, yea, I
cannot but say with the Apostle, Prou. 25.23. Frown upon such says Solomon.
Wish them cut off with the Apostle.
would to God they were even cut off which do disquiet you. when of thy
Sovereign, to whom (as Isaac said to his Son) God seems to have said,
Cursed be he that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee, thou
shall speak, Pray also with David, Whom god seems to bless, and Genesis
27.29. whom to curse. Psalm. 51.15. Pray forthy speech of thy Sovereign.
Open thou my lips O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Son. Since neither in Thought, nor in Word, much less in Action, may I
break my Alleagiance to Caesar:


Father. Much less, my Son.


Son. But must I then obey an hard and oppressing Prince?


Father. Were he as cruel as Holofernes, thou were to obey him. If thou
had already played the Fugitive, Judith. 3.7, 8. Allegiance must be
performed to the hardest Prince. Punishments of Fugitives. Counsel for
Fugitives.
(a Fugitive the Aeginians punished with the loss of the Thumb of the right
hand, the Samians with the picture of an Owl branded in their face, the
Mitylenians with the loss of their lives) and were now in the midst of ye
enemies Troops, Remember the Mandate, not of a man of Beliall, but of an
Angel of the Lord, to Hagar lately fled from Sara, Genesis 16.6, 9.
who had dealt roughly with her, return unto thy Dame and humble thy self
under her hands.


Son. But what if he be a wicked and ungodly Prince?


Father. Nabuchodonozor was so, and yet was Zedechiah grievously punished,
Allegiance must be performed to the ungodly Prince.
Jerusalem sacked, Israel miserably afflicted for rebelling against him.


Son. But what if the ungodly Prince command me to do that which is wicked
and ungodly?


Father. 1. Tim. 17. 2. Tim. 3.6. Jude. 19. Math. 23.15. 2. Peter. 1.20. Ps.
119.105. The ungodly Prince is not to be obayed in ungodliness Acts. 5.29. But
beware thou speak not evil of God, and call not sweet Sow.
First be sure that thou be not misled either by these whom Paul and Jude
describe, nor by such to whom Christ himself does denounce a woe, and then
being assured of this, by the constant Harmony, not private interpretation of
that which thou ought to account a Lantern unto thy feet, and a light unto
thy paths, Resolve with Saint Peter, we ought rather to obey God then men.


Son. But if a man adorned with singular virtues, honored of the people,
gracious in the Court, great in authority, deserving well of Prince and
Country, being oppressed by a wicked king, the king though there be manifest
testimony of most assured loyalty, still persecuting him, may he not by his
Princes peril, free himself from peril?


Father. Either never purified, or evil kept has thy heart been, who once
durst think, much more propound such a question. The Essei, the wisest, and
most virtuous Sect among the Jews, Josephus.
affirm that the person of the Prince, is of the Subjects to be accounted
sacred: the Ciuilians teach, that it is sacrilege to dispute of that which is
done by the Prince, and dare any dispute whether any man for any cause may
offer so unspeakable outrage to that sacred person? Advice to the young, yet
fit for all. Not Saul's wickedness, not David's deserts nor any other motive
could seduce David to indaunger Saul.
Upon my blessing, let not thy heart ever hereafter entertain such a thought,
nor thy ear hear, much less thy tongue speak such a word. Yet for this
time let thy self, and all with thy self, learn of David, a man according to
Gods own heart. To whom better might it be done then to Saul, for who
wickedder then Saul? Saul wicked to God, whose express commandment by
turning to the pray he transgressed. 1. Sam. 15.3.19.9. verse.
Not secret and hidden was his wickedness, but open and apparent, 1. Sam.
15.26.27.28.
Samuel sharply reproved him, God rejected him, and by a manifest sign showed
he had rejected him, 1. Sam. 16.14.
an evil spirit sent of the Lord vexed him. who might do it better then David?
David deserved well of the people and Country, by slaying Goliath, 1. Sam.
17.24.50.51.
the Philistine, the terror of the whole Country, deserved well of Saul, 1.
Sam. 19.5.
not only for this public service to him, and his Country, but also for that
other private, 1. Sam. 16.23.
in easing him of the evil spirit. Who better then David? 1 Samuel 18.5.
he was accepted in the sight of Saules servants, all Judah and Israel loved
him, 1. Sam. 18.7.
the very women honored him with Ten Thousand for Saules one Thousand.
David no ordinary subject, David was set over the men of war, went in and
out before the men of Israel and Judah, fought the Lords Battles, 1. Sam.
18.27.
was the Kings son in law, was anointed King by Samuel, 1. Sam. 16.12.
at the commandment of God himself. And how was David provoked? not his wife
alone taken away, but his life sought: not in word, but in deed: not by
some flight blow to give him a scarre, but by a mortal wound to take away his
life: and this by no enemy, but by his own Sovereign, by his own Father in
law, By his own Sovereign, by his own Father in law, whom his own hand
saved from the open enemy, eased from the evil spirit, not by the bribed, or
enforced service of so base. Cutthroat, but by the violence of the Kings own
hand, Not in a Fray in the field, but by the throwing of a spear, when he was
playing on the Harp to ease Saul of the evil spirit. In peril he put him
not once, 1. Sam. 18.10.11.
in peril he put him often: his former service was forgot, the mediation of a
Son, for a Son in law to a Father, would not serve: the slaughter of the
innocent Priests would not satisfy his bloody mind: 1 Samuel 20.32, 33.
the time of absence (though time deuoreth al things) could not aswage his
fury, his fury being so great, that David's saving of his life, 1. Sam. 24.5,
7.
when he had him in the Cave, could not quench the flame of it, but his blood
spared by David, he still persisteth to seek the blood of David: so that he
living David was still in danger to die, he dead, in all appearance David was
sure to reign: he was again closed into David's hand, David need not touch
him, 1. Sam. 26.8.
Abishai desires but leave that he might smite him, snite him he would but
once to make him sure: not any man's blood but his alone need be shed, that this
was done either in his presence or by his consent, 1 Samuel 26.7.
who could make report since this was in the night? and that it might seem
that God himself favored him in this Action, 1 Samuel 26.12.
God sent a dead sleep upon them. If then thou will know David's mind in this
matter, from his own mouth hear his prohibition, his resolution, 1 Samuel 26.9,
10, 11. His prohibition.
his question, and his prayer. his prohibition, David will not only not act
it, but he will not permit it: and therefore to Abishais offered service,
there is this charge returned, Verse. 9.
Destroy him not. Question, if Abishai should take this for an ouer-sight, His
Question.
here is reason to satisfy him: Who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed,
Ibidem,
and be guiltless? No man so good, no Prince so bad, no cause so great, that
can dispense with violence offered to ye Lords anointed. His resolution
testified by an oath, not by the mercy of God, which the desperate feel not,
nor the Justice of God, which the Libertine fears not, nor the providence of
God, whereupon most wicked men rely not, nor the Omni-presence of God, which
the offenders remember not, but by the life of God, which the heavens above us,
setting forth his glory, Psa. 19.1.
the air about us, daily infected, and daily purified, the sea aside us, at
his commandment staying her proud waves, the earth beneath us, Job. 38.11.
so huge a mass firmly fixed in the midst of the air, our souls and our
selves (for we are his generation) do proclaim, Acts 17.28.
by this life of God, does he testify his resolution, 1. Sam. 26.10.
that where many thirst for revenge, David will take no revenge, whereas many
wicked children be ^^^ks of the father for a little wealth, David would not
the death of his father, in law for the Crown. Many a man has taken arms
against his sovereign for his own safety: for his own safety, David will
not assail his Sovereign, but taking Gods providence for his sheeld, using
prayer for armor (saying in heart with Christ, Shall I not drink of the cup
that my father has given me) faith, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish* His prayer, (the Lord
knows ^^ine infirmities, least injury move me, ambition puffe^ me, his
inflexibilitie drive: me, my own safety draws me, opportunity entice t^
me, fond friends incense me) the Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon the
Lords anointed. John. 18.11, Sam. 26.10. His resolution 1. Sam. 26.11 His
Invocation. 2 Samuel 1.10.
Will yet any man do its here ye, hear what he said to Abishai hereafter see
what he did to the Amalekite, though the Amalekite brought him the Crown from
Saul his head, and the Braflet from his arm: After he had not clapped his
hands for joy, 2 Samuel 1.11.12
but rent his clothes for grief, after he had not reioiced and laughed, but
mourned and lamented, after he had not feasted but fasted; (mindful of that in
the Psalm, Psalm. 105.15. 2. Sam. 1.14.
Touch not mine anointed) he says, How wast thou not afraid to put forth
thine hand to destroy the anointed of the Lord? To kill a private man it is
death, to kill a Prince it is more then death: to kill a man is death, because
he is the Image of God: Genesis 9.6.
to kill a Prince, though it be even Saul, it is more then death, Psalm.
105.15.25.
for he is the Lords anointed, he is Gods minister. If David so revenged the
injury that was done to his Ambassador, Sam. 1.14. Romans 13.4. David's Justice
2. Sam. 10.4. and cap. 12.30.31.
upon the king of Ammon, and all the Ammonites, will God suffer, will God
suffer his Vicegerent, in his own presence, not to be disfigured, but
destroyed of a private person, And the divine. Vengeance.
especially of a Subject? Is God blind that he cannot see it? Is he improuident
that he does not observe it? Is he unjust that he will not, or not omnipotent,
that he can of revenge it? The Traitors terror.
O when any Traitor thinks such a thought (considering with what a world of
miracles God has discovered them) his hand should quiver, his head tremble,
his body quake, his heart fail, and his soul faint: and yet need not God
work any miracle, for every one that has David's authority, if there heart
be as like David's heart, as David's heart was to Gods heart, will presently
with David (though it be his Saul that is dead) both command his execution,
2. Sam. 15.16. His reward to the Amalekite.
and give this sentence, Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own
mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed.


The third Cable.
The punishments of the disloyal to Caesar.
Son. Since the haynousnesse of the Crime of treason is apparent, may it
please you to make the punishments of treason apparent.


Father. That there is punishment, it appears by that of the Apostle, they
that resist, Romans 23.2.
shall receive to themselves Judgment: of the greeuousnesse of the Judgment,
we may be assured by the hainousnes of the crime. And further, since, the Law
requires, that Offenders pay life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
Ecclus. 21, 23, 24.25.
hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe
for stripe, what wounds, what burnings is he to endure that is guilty of this
Crime? how many feet, how many hands, how many eyes, how many lives is he
worthy to loose, who so offends those feet, of whom so many Thousand feet,
those hands, of whom so many Thousand hands, those eyes, of whom so many
Thousand eyes, that life, whereon so many Thousand lives depend? Because he
has not so many feet, so many hands, so many eyes, so many lives, therefore
is he punished of God, and punished of man. Punished of man in his house,
punished in Lands, punished in Offices, punished in death, punished in burial,
punished in Name, and punished in Posterity. Punished in house, In house.
for so was the house of Haman given to Queen Ester. Punished in Lands,
Esther. 8.1. In Lands. 2. Sam. 16.3.4.
so Siba having falsely accused Mephiboseth to David, until the troth was
known, had all that was Mephiboseths given him by David. In Offices.
Punished in Offices, so Abiathar ye high Priest, though for his fidelity to
David in all his afflictions, he had his life spared by Solomon, 1. Kings.
2.26.27.
yet Solomon cast him cut from being Priest unto the Lord.

In body punished by imprisonment, by drawing.
Punished in body by imprisonment and tortures in life, after being drawn on a
hurdle, from prison to execution (to show how he had been drawn by brutish
passions, and beastly affections) by death, By death extraordinary.
and that not ordinary, as an ordinary Malefactor, but extradinarie, as an
extraordinary Malefactor: a Thief taking goods from any man is hanged, but
because the Traitor offends no common member, but the head of the whole
Estate, and in the head the whole estate, being drawn, is first hanged, (for I
will omit the more exquisite punishments inflicted upon Traitors in other
Countries) his secrets (to show he was most unworthy to be begotten, or to
beget others) cut off and thrown into the fire before his face, his belly
ripped up, his heart, the impure Vessel of pernicious Treachery, rent out and
thrown into the fire before his face, his body, having harbored so wicked a
heart, having been the Cage of a rebellious spirit, as it was in the body
politic divided, by Treason, from the head, and other members, so, now by the
Axe, it is cut off from the head, and divided into many quarters.


Son. How be they punished in burial?


Father. In burial, or rather by the defect of burial, are they punished. Was
it not a punishment, that was foretold by Jeremy, of Iehoiakim the son of
Josiah, Jeremy. 22.18.19.
he shall be buried as an Ass is buried, Even drawn and cast forth without
the walls of Jerusalem? But greater is the punishment of traitors in their
burial, then was that of Iehoiakim, Iehoiakims burial was the burial of an
Ass, the Traitors burial is worse then the burial of an Ass: an Ass drawn
without the gates of Jerusalem, and devoured of dogs, or the beasts of ye
field, is soon forgotten, but the Traitors body (though our merciful
Sovereign does herein many times show great mercy) not drawn without the
Gates, Judgment in burial.
but fixed upon the Gates of Jerusalem, is not devoured of the beasts of the
fields, and forgotten, but exposed to the eyes, and reserved in the memory of
men, that as his perninitious attempts were an evil example to others, so his
mangled and unburied lims might be a heedfull and dreadful caucat to others.


Son. In name.
Wherein are they further punished?


Father. In name, a good name (says the royal Preacher, is better then good
ointment, A good name, says he, is to be chosen above great riches, and loving
favor is above silver and gold; but the name of the wicked (who so wicked as
Rebels and Traitors) shall rot; rot? Well were it for them if there name could
so rot that it might utterly be extinguished, but being putrified, it gives a
noisome savor, so, that as that which Jacob said to Simeon and Leui, ye have,
So every Traitors offspring may say of their Sire, Genesis 34.30.
Thou have made me stink among the inhabitants of the Land. What more odious
smell to all true English hearts, Then the unhappy memory of Cade, Straw,
Ket, Parrie, and others of like deserts, though greater estates?


Son. Remains there to the Rebel, any further punishment after death, but
in their burial, and in their name?


Father. To the Rebel there remains further punishment, for though in
England they put not to death every one of the family as they did in Persia,
In posterity. Esther. 16.18.
nor five of the Traitors nearest kinsfolk as they did in Macedonia, yet even
among us is the Traitor punished in his posterity.


Son. Since Kings are Gods Ministers, Romans 13. Deuteronomy. 17.19. Obiec. against
punishment in posterity.
and are to read in the word of God all the days of their life, I greatly
marvel that they punish a Traitor in his posterity, since God himself has
said, the same soul that sins, it shall die. Ezeki. 18.20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the
Father bear the iniquity of the Son, but the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself.


Father. My Son, as Pithagoras enjoined his Scholars to five years silence,
that by hearing him and his more ancient Disciples they might know what and how
to speak before they did speak, A caveat to youth.
so the Scripture charge youth to be silent: the Apostle wills us to think
others better then our selves, not rash like many ignorants both in State, and
Church, striving to reprove that which they understand not, but be thou most
advised in matters that be too high for thee, yet since I am persuaded thou
speak rather to have instruction, then to use reprehension, that thou
might not, as in years, be also in understanding a Child, 1 Cor. 14.20.
know that a man consisting of a body, which we have from our Parents, Genesis
5.3. Eccles. 12.7.
and a Soul which is given us immediately from God, is Subject both to
Corporal or Temporal, and to Spiritual, Ob. answered.
and eternal punishments, of which spiritual and eternal punishments, thou
art to understand that of the Prophet, the same soul that sins it shall
die, God punishes in posterity.
the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father: but for Corporal and
Temporal punishments, the God of Heaven and earth visits the iniquity of
the Father upon the Children unto the Third and Fourth generation, Exodus 20.5.
and judges the house of Ely for ever, 1 Samuel 3.13.
because his Sons ran into a slander, and he stayed them not. Thus Cham in
Chanaan, Ioab, and Gehezi, Genesis 9.25. 2. Sam. 3.29. 2 Kings. 5.27. Math. 27.25.
in their posterity were punished: thus the blood of our Savior is upon the
Children of the Jews unto this day. Thus pray we in ye church of England, How
the Church of England prays that God would not remember the sins of our
Forefathers.
that the Lord would not remember the sins of our Forefathers. And thus the
Gods on earth have punished Traitors in their Children and Childrens children.
Thus Assuerus, because Haman desired to destroy Mordocheus the preserver of the
King, Ester. 16.13, 14.
and innocent Ester the Partaker of the Kingdom, whom when he had taken away,
his mind was for to have laid wait for the king, and by this means to
translate the kingdom of the Persians, The severity of Persia and Macedonia
in this point.
unto them of Macedonia, was not only (having been the second to the King)
hanged on a Tree of Fifty Cubittes high, but also his Ten Sons and all
his Family were hanged. And the clemency of the English government.
Though in detestation of Treason, this punishing of the Traitor even with the
death of his posterity have been used, yet such is the clemency of our
English government, that it sparing their lives, punishes them only in Lands,
howses, goods, Offices, blood, and honor. Ye
Oh my Son, since as the fish swimmeth with the stream, as the stream
flows from the spring, as stones run down the hill, as the say ascends
from the root to ye branches, so ye love of parents desce^deth to their
children: Fathers
what father though he could not be moved (yet where is there one so senseless
that is not moved) with ye loss of his houses, with the loss of lands, with
the loss of his Offices, with the loss of his goods, with the loss of his
good name, with the loss of his liberty, with the loss of his life, by the
imbowling and dismembring of his body, with the loss of Christian burial, by
his unchristian behavior toward so Christian a Prince, yet what father bred
of Tigers brood, be not
and fed with milk of Wolves, can be so stony hearted, as not ever to keep
himself loyal to his Prince, and contrie, least he unnaturally and most
unjustly, bring those just punishments upon his children, and childrens
children, Traitors.
so enforcing them, if not to accurse, yet (even when they are silent) to
proclaim to all future ages their ancestors disloyal trecheries, and
treacherous disloialties to their Prince and Country?


Son. Sir, I remember you divided the punishments of Traitors into
punishments inflicted upon them by man, and punishments inflicted upon them by
God: remains there any more then these you have already named?


Father. There remain more then these. These are from God, Judgments from god
and man upon Traitors.
but by the ministry of men, and therefore I called them punishments
inflicted by men: I call the other Gods punishments, because they come
immediately from God. The punishments that are to be inflicted by the
ministry of men, men by favor, by policy, by power, sometime escape: but
those that God himself immediately inflicteth with his own hand, no man can
escape; Prou. 21.30.
for says Solomon, there is no Wisdom, Si sera, tamen certa. From god.
neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord; and these be External,
Internal, or Eternal.


Son. So many before, and so many more?

I pray you what be the external; External.



Father. Then may we say that God immediately punishes Traitors externally,
where either ordinary means be extraordinarily stirred up, Men.
as ye people of the land to punish those that conspired against king Amon; or
by means which man cannot use; 2. Kings. 21.24.
so, for brevity sake to omit others, God himself by Jeremy denounces, the
nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nabuchodonozor king of Babel,
and will not put their necks under the yoke of the King of Babel, The same
Nation will I visit with the sword, Ierem 27.8. Sword. Famine. Pestilence.
Leprosy. Fiery Serpents. Earth Swallowing. Confederacy of unreasonable and
senceles creatures. 2 Samuel 18.9.
and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have wholly given them
into his hands, so punished he Miriam with leprosy as white as snow, ye
murmuring Israelites, with the fiery Serpents, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with
the earthes swallowing of them up quick, Absolon with his own Mule to draw
him, and his own hair, and a great thick Oak to hang him.


Son. How does God punish them internally?


Father. Not to speak of other internal punishments, Internal.
he punishes them in conscience: A good conscience is, says Solomon, a
continual feast: Prou. 15.15: Romans 13.5.
but such as will not obey for conscience sake, such as will not submit
themselves for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
are by the Lord deprived of this good, and tormented with an evil conscience:
and that this is a fearful punishment, we may learn of the Wiseman: A
fearful thing is it, says he, when malice is condemned, Wisd. 17.10.
by (which another says, is more then a Thousand witnesses) her own
testimony, and a conscience that is touched, does ever forecast cruel things.
These be those furies whereof the Poets, Romans 2.15.
those accusing thoughts whereof the Apostle, that never dying- worm, whereof
the Evangelical Prophet, Esaias. 66.24. Mark. 9.44, 46, 48.
and he whom the Evangelical Prophet did foretell, that book whereof S. John
says, Revel. 20.11, 12.
That it shall be opened when the earth and heaven fly away from his face that
shall sit on the great white throne. This, when they are abroad, Leuit. 26.36.
though there be but the sound of a leaf shaken, chaseth them: this, when they
be within, Prou. 28.1.
makes them fly though none pursues them: this writing in their heart, like
the handwriting (which Balthazar saw upon the walls, Dan. 5.5, 6.
when they are in the height of their pride, will cause their countenance to
be changed, their thoughts to be troubled, the ioints of their loins to be
loosed, and their knees to smite one against the other. 1. Sam. 24.6.
This if they cut but the lap of the Princes garment, will touch them at the
heart. This, if they offer violence to their Lord, Acts. 2.37.
will prick them at the heart. Genesis 4.13.
This, as it did Cain for his brothers blood, will much more for their Lieges
blood, make their own hearts to think, and their own mouths to say, that
their punishment is greater the^ they can bear, that their sin is greater
then can be forgiven them. This, as it did Judas, will make their souls to
loath and abhor their bribes received for their treachery, Math. 27.3, 4.5.
and their hands to cast them down, and their tongues to proclaim that they
have betrayed innocent blood. This, will make their own hands to hang them,
Math. 27.5. Luke 10.17. 2 Samuel 17.23.
though like Judas they have faith to work Miracles, or like Achitophel they
can give counsel, eas if one asked at the oracle of God. Were there no other I
would say with Iuuenall. 2. Sam. 16.23.


-- Cur tamen hos tu
Euasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti, Iuuenal.

Men's habet attonitos, and sur do verbere
-caedit
Occultum quatienti animo tortore
-flagellum?
-How deem'st thou them ac-quite,
Whom guilty mind of fact so foul does frighte:
And scourge vn-seene does beat with vn-heard bloe,
Their hangman restless Conscience, biting so?

Son. O hateful treason: how art thou environed with fearful judgments?
judgment in house and lands, judgment in Offices, judgment in body,
judgment in burial, judgment in honor and reputation, judgment in
children, Thus pray we all.
judgments powered upon thy head, even by the hand of God eternally, and this
of conscience, internally! O most mighty and most merciful God, of thy
infinite mercy, by thy infinite grace, bless me evermore from this sin,
that I may be evermore blessed from the punishments of this sin.


Father. As Chrysostom wished, that men would daily think of hell,
Chrisostomes wish.
and speak of hell, that so by fear thereof, they might be drawn from
sin, so I wish they would daily think of, The Authors wish.
and daily speak of the judgments which resisters and Rebels do receive,
that so they might be driven from treason: but the better to drive them from
it, know there is another judgment upon traitors more grievous then any of
these, more grievous then all of these.


Son. Is it possible?


Father. If Lucifer for Rebellion fell from heaven, Eternal.
if Adam for disobedience was cast out of paradise, his whole posterity
infected with original sin, made subject to death, became the children of
wrath, then no marvel though sedition be such a fruit of the flesh, as
whosoever is guilty of it, it hinders him from the inheriting the kingdom of
God. If it seemed grievous to Absolon lying in Jerusalem, Gal 5.20, 21. 2 Samuel
14.32.
not once in two years to see the face of David, O how grievous shall it be
for all Rebels, (dying without repentance) neither to come into the new
Jerusalem, Pain of loss.
nor to see the face of God for ever? if it be a grievous thing to lie fettered
in a prison, O how grievous is it with the ungodly, (of whom Rebels be in the
first rank) to be turned into hell, and there to lie bound hand and foot?
Pain of sense Acerbitie. Math. 25.41.
would thou know the sharpness of those pains? Christ tells thee, they
go into fire: would thou know the time they do last? he calls it
everlasting: Eternity.
would thou know the company they shall have? Society.
he tells thee the devil and his angels: would thou have it further
expressed? assure thy self that as the joys of the godly, purchased by the
obedience of the son of God, Unspeakable.
are such, as the eye of man has not seen, nor the ear of man has not
heard, nor can enter into man's heart, so also be the pains and torments
prepared for the the disobedient sons of men.


Son. The father of mercyes of his great mercy, keep me and all my
contrymen from this crime, His wish to the English.
and from these pains.


The fourth Cable.
The reward of the loyal to Caesar.
Father. He is the minister of God for thy wealth: Romans 13.3.4.
Do well, so shall thou have praise of the same. General rewards of the
Loyal.
The rewards of loyalty be either general to all, or particular to some.
general to all, this Daniell declares somewhat darkely in the tree, Dan.
4.7.8.9.
Behold I saw a tree in the midst of the earth, Darkely sha-
and the height thereof was great, a great tree and strong, and the height
thereof reached to heaven, and the sight thereof unto the ends of all the
earth. The boughs thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was
meat for all, it made a shadow under it, for the beasts of the field, and the
fowls of heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh fed of it. Esaias
more plainly, dowed. Esaias. 32. Plainly expresses.
That man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for the
tempest, and as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land. If Israel for her peace must seek Ierem. 29.^ the
peace of Babel, Will not England for her good seek the good of Elizabeth?


Wherefore, as Jeremy willed the Israelites, to seek the prosperity of the
city whether they were carried, so I beseech all true Englishmen, to seek
the prosperity of Caesar, under whom they are governed: and Ieremias reason
may induce them, for in the peace thereof, they shall have peace, in the
prosperity thereof, they shall have prosperity, in the glory thereof they
shall have glory. Judah and Israel dwelt without fear, every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan, That Solomon was to Israel, that
Elizabeth is to England. Particular rewards for the loyal. Prou. 22.24. Prou.
16.15.
even to Bersheba, all the days of Solomon: have not England done the like,
from Barwick to saint Michaels Mount, all the days of Elizabeth? But if any
man through diligence, stands before Kings, not before the meaner sort of
men, he shall find that in the light of the Kings countenance is life, and his
favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. If I regard a house, House. Ester.
2.21, 8.2. External pomp. Genesis 41.43.
I see it brought Mordecay from sitting at the Kings gate, to be placed over
the house of treacherous Haman: If I respect outward show? I see Joseph in the
second Charret of Egypt, and Mardocheus upon the Kings horse in royal
apparel, a crown of gold on his head, Ester. 6.8.11
Haman proclaiming before him in the streets of Shusan, thus shall it be done
to the man whom the King will honor, and Daniel in Babylon clothed in purple,
and a chain of gold about his neck. If estimation of the people, for it,
David was honored with his Ten Thousand: if favor and friendship of the
worthyest, this knit the soul of Jonathan eldest Son to the King, to the
soul of David: If alliance with the greatest, this espoused Joseph the
prisoner to Asenath daughter of Potipherah priest, or Prince of On, this
brought David the Shepherd to Michall Daughter of Saul King of Israel: If
power and authority, this made Joseph 2. in Egypt, Mordecai 2. in Persia, and
Daniel 2. in Babylon: If good to our nation, this lift up Mordecay to ye
deliverance of his people from destruction: If the good of the Church of God,
this, with the blessing of God upon him, who aimed at so good an end, made
Zorobabel gracious in the eyes of Darius: if a good name, and eternal renown
(what more precious then a good name, especially eternized?) This caused
Mordecaies virtues, and Mordecaies magnificence to be celebrated in the
Chronicles of Media and Persia, this, Ester. 10.2.3.
eternized them in the neuer-fayling word of the eternal God: If the good of
our posterity, (a dead man still seems to live in his posterity) Barzillaie
when David fled from Absolon provided him of sustenance lying at Mahaynaim,
Barzillai dutyfull, loyal.
and after David's victory, conducted him over Iordane, David for this not only
offered to feed Barzillai with him in Jerusalem, and to do for him whatsoever
he would require of him, David.
and when he would needs depart, blessed him, and kissed him, but also for his
sake accepted of Chimham, and dealt royally with him in his life, but also in
his deathbed, commanded Solomon to show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the
Giliadite, and to let them be among them that eat at his table* O blessed
loialtie blessing the loial not only generally, with the common and public,
but also particularly, with the private good, good in possession, good in
estimation, good in authority, in honor, in favor, in alliance, in name, in
religion, in fame, in posterity. O blessed loyalty! Is it not enough that thou
blessest us with so many favors, but others for us, not us and others at this
present; but others for us herereafter? Gratefully.
Barzillai was loyal to David in his distress, David was grateful to
Barzillai, when he was delivered from distress, grateful in life, grateful
in death, death makes men forget their own children, their own selves, death
and the panges of death, could not make David to forget Barzillaies loyalty;
death had power to end and cut off David's life, death had not power to end or
cut off David's gratuity for Barzillaies loyalty, Royal.
ye both might remain after death, even at death, he charged his son to show
kindness to Barzillaies son, Both
to Barzillaies son? to Barzillaies sonns: and such kindness, that they should
eat with him at his table: Immortal.
Barzillai dead, Barzillaies loyalty, David dead, David's gratuitie brightly
shines in their posterity.


Son. Good father, you showing Caesar to be set over me of God, my duty to
God moved me to perform my duty to Caesar: you showing me of the haynousnes
of the crime of disloyalty, my heart abhorred it, and I beseech God no
disloyalty come into my heart, much less break out of my tongue in speaking,
or my hand in action: you showing the judgments incident to the disloyal, if
I had so little grace, and so little reason that naught else could, fear of
them may keep me from this crime: but now you show the great benefits that
arise out of loyalty, you have inflamed my heart with a more fervent love of
the same.


Father. Let me then my son further inflame it. If Caesar being over such a
people as Solomon was, and as Paul was for all the Churches, 1 Kin. 3.8. 2 Cor.
11.28.
cumbred with the care of them daily, or be thy merits be not of ye moment, or
there is not that opportunity, to have them known unto Caesar, and therefore
Caesar cannot say with Assuerus (though Caesar be as bou^tiful and royally
grateful as Assurus) what honor, Ester. 6.3.
and dignity has been given to Mordecai for this? Yet for the Public good,
(for which Curtius in Rome, Sampson in Israel, many in many nations sacrificed
their lives) and in the public, thy private good (though Caesar should never
hear if thou were disloyal, and therefore could not punish thee) yet give
Caesar's to Caesar, Luke. 17.10. Math. 3.15. Romans 13.5. 1. Pet. 2.13.
as the Lord Jesus says for duties sake, and for righteousness sake, as saint
Paul says, for conscience sake, as saint Peter says, for the Lords sake, and
the Lord whose reward is with him, who will come quickly, whose word shall not
pass away, (though heaven and earth pass away, will reward thee, though man
do not, whose life is a vapoure; whose flesh is grass, whose rewards be
temporary) the Lord, I say, will reward thee, reward them, as else he will
punish thee Externally, Internally, Eternally.

Gods rewards of loyalty.
Externally, (for our good Subject is to be a good man, our true Caesarian to
be a true Christian: otherwise, if he go not out with Absolon, I suspect his
going out with Adoniah, and neither good man, nor good Subject is he, who
gives not to God those things which be Gods, and for Gods ordinance to Caesar
those things which are Caesar's) Blessed shall thou be in the City, External
Deuteronomy. 28.3, 4, 5, 6.
and blessed also in the field, blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase of thy
Kine, and the flocks of thy Sheep, blessed shall thy baskette be and thy dowe,
blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed also when thou go
out.


Son. How internally?


Father. What greater blessing then the souls banquet, Internal Prou. 15.15.
then the souls continual banquet? a good conscience says Solomon, is a
continual Feast, what mellodie to that sweet harmony of excusing thoughts,
what comfort to that most comfortable assurance that the opening of the Book
will show, Romans 2.15. Romans 8 16. Revel. 20.12. Luke 10.20.
that our names are written in Heaven? when others wringe their hands for
grief, this will make thee clappe thy hands for joy, when others tremble
thou shall triumph: This makes thee to sleep quietly, to wake cheerfully, to
be alone without fear: and with others without distrust, in thy affairs
confident, in thy recreation comfortable: If Rebels be behind thee, and before
thee, 2. Sam. 10.9, 12.
as ye Ammonits and the Aramites were before Ioab, and behind him, yet thou
would resolve with Ioab, be strong, and let us be valiant for our people,
and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his
eyes.


Son. And how eternally?


Father. Eternally, when after all thy loyalty to thy Sovereign Prince,
Eternal.
the Sovereign of all Princes shall advance thee into the holy City new
Jerusalem: was it not said of thee by the Psalmist, Revel. 21.10.
very excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of God? has not the
divine Aegle, Psalm. 87.3. Revel. 21.10. Matter. 18. Street. 21. Splendour. 11.
the Aegle of divines, said of thee, that thou art pure gould like unto clear
glass? of thy street, that it is pure gould as shining glass? of thy
shining, that it is like unto a stone most precious, Foundations of the Wall.
19.
as a Jasper stone clear as Crystal? of the foundations of thy wall, that
they are garnished with all manner of precious stones? of thy twelve gates,
Gates. 12, and 21.
that they are twelve pearls? of every gate, that it is of one pearl? of the
keepers of the twelve gates, Porters. 12.
that they are twelve Angels? of thy light, that it is the glory of God and the
lamb? Light. 23.
of thy Temple, that the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are thy Temple?
Temple. 22.
of the purity of the Inhabitants, Purity of Inhabitants. 21.27.
that there shall enter into thee, no unclean thing, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or lies? of thy records, Records. 20.12.
that they be the Book of life? of thy water, that it is not that aqua vitae,
Water. 22.1.
or aqua Caelestis, that is used on earth for bodies, but for souls it is a
pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne
of God, and of the Lamb: the souls of them that drink of this shall live for
ever: Tree. 2.
Of thy tree being in the midst of thy street, and of either side of thy
River, that it is the tree of life? that it bears 12 manner of fruits? Fruit.
ibidem. Immunities. 3, 5. Estate. 5.
that it gives fruit every month? that the leaves thereof serve to heal the
Nations with? of thy immunities, that there shall be no more curse, no night, no
need of candle, nor light of the Sun? of ye estate of thy inhabitants, that
they shall live and reign for evermore?

Remember my son, who is the founder of Caesar, whose ordinance they resist
that resist Caesar, the judgments they receive that resist Caesar, the rewards
of them that obey Caesar, God in Caesar. For as Moses says to Israel, so I say
to thee, The Author
and in thee to England, I call heaven and earth to record this day against
you, His contestation, to England. Deuteronomy. 30, 19.
that I have set before you death and life, blessing and cursing, therefore
choose life, that thou and thy seed may live, and with Jeremy, But if you will
not hear this, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and mine eye
shall weep and drop down tears.


Son. Dear Father, neither shall heaven nor earth, by the grace of the
Almighty, His protestation. Ierem. 13.17. Acts. 2.2.
bear record against me, neither shall your soul weep in secret, nor your
eyes drop down tears, for my Disobedience, either in Thought Word, or Deed:
for more do not the four winds purify the air, then these four
propositions have purified my heart, and I hope that that holy spirit, which
came down from heaven with a mighty and rushing wind, will enable me to hold
my course against the wind, and tide of all traitors, and therefore as you
divided the breach of allegiance, into Thought, Word, and Deed, so I pray you
show me some branches of allegiance, that I may the more certainly see what I
owe to Caesar.


Father. My son, for thy memories sake, understand, Six branches of
allegiance. 2 Chro. 9.18.
that as there were six steps to the throne of Solomon: so there be six
parts of thy duty to Caesar.


Son. How I pray you, shall I know them?


Father. See thou the sword in her hand, or carried before her: Romans 13.4.
Psalm. 21.3. Psalm. 45.6. 2. Chron. 9.17 Rom 13.4. 1 King. 2.15.
the Crown of pure gold upon her head: the Scepter of righteousness which
she does sway: the magnificent throne whereon she does sit: her person which is
the minister of God for thy wealth, and the Lord by whom the kingdom came unto
her?


Son. Blessed be God I do see them, and God long so bless me, that long I
may see them.


Father. The sword exacteth fear: Fear. Honor.
the Crown imports honor: the Scepter requires obedience, Obedience.
Tribute. Defense. Prayer.
the throne deserves tribute, the person meriteth defense, and the Lord
commands prayer.


Son. First, I beseech you instruct me in the first.


Father. Fear.
Fear is to be given to Caesar, so teaches humanity, so teaches divinity.
Fear of Princes taught both in Humanity and Divinity.
For humanity, Periander he says, Fear Princes. For Divinity, Solomon he
says, Fear the Lord and the King. If I be a master, does God say where is my
fear? If I be a master, may the King say, Prou. 24.21.
Where is my fear? Be ye afraid of the sword, says Job, for ye sword will be
avenged of wickedness. Malach. 1.6. Fear due to Caesar, as to a Father, Job.
19.29. as to an auenger of wickedness. God distinguishes between private
persons,
Would any private man strike men's hearts with fear? Let him know that God
has not given the sword of Princes to private men. Concerning these, he said
in the law Thou shall not kill, he decreed before the law, Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, affirmed in the Gospel, All that
take the sword, shall perish with the sword, confirmed in the Revelation, Exodus
20.13. Genesis 9.6. Math. 26.52. Revel. 13.10.
If any man kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: but of every one
of those he says by the Apostle, He is the minister of god to take vengeance
on him that does evil. Is he only for a show? Romans 31, 4. and the Prince. Prou.
16.14. Prou. 19.12.
No, says Salomo^, the wrath of the King is as the messengers of death: And
again, the kings wrath is like the roaring of a Lio^: The sword not for a bare
show.
No, says Paul, he bears not the sword for naught. Hence may it be that
Solomon affirms of the seditions that their destruction shall rise suddenly.
Sudden in the destruction of the seditious. Prou. 24.22. To what we must take
heed.
I therefore with Solomon advertise thee, to take heed to the mouth of the
King. If thou will have another reason added to the former, he says, where the
word of the king is, there is power: If thou will know how great power, Ecces.
8.2, 4.
the second of those Squires of the body making Orations before Darius and his
Nobles tells thee, The greatness of the Kings power..
though men rule by land, and sea, and over all things in them, yet is the king
greater, 1 Esdr. 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
for he rules all things, and is Lord of them. If he bid them make War one
against another, they do it: If he send them against the enemies, they go,
and break down mountains, and walls, and Towers, they kill and are killed,
and do not pass the commandment of the king: If he bid kill, they kill: if
he say spare, they spare: if he bid smite, they smite: if he bid them make
desolate, they make desolate: If he bid build, they build: If he bid cut of,
they cut of. Fear the sword of Caesar, the drawn sword of Caesar, ye powerful
drawn sword of Caesar. But especially (for a wise man says Solomon fears
and departs from evil, Prou. 14.16. A difference of the wise man and the
fool.

Caesar punishes the transgressor of the laws of the land. Caesar punishes
the tra^sgressor of the laws of God. Romans 13.

Whereupon and to what end this fear bears the eyes of subjects.

What the virtuous subject fears. Job. 29.8.


but a fool rages, and is careless) fear to commit evil, fear the breach
of the laws of the land, fear the breach of the law of God. fear the breach
of the laws of the land, for the king of the land will take vengeance of the
transgressions of the laws of the land. Fear the breach of the laws of God,
for the King of the land, being the Minister of God, will take vengeance on them
that transgress the law of God. This fear carries one eye of the Subject
upon the Princes sword, that he never provoke it: the other eye upon the
offense, that he never commit it: he fears blame, as much as pain: reproach,
as much as torment: dishonor as much as death. So the young men fearing to be
seen, (where and when they should not) when they saw Job, hid themselves.
This fear, as the Porters keep Traitors out of the Princes Court, This
fear is a porter of the heart.

The ballast of the soul.

The bridle of the affections The nail that fasteneth us in our duties.

Revel. 12.14. The two eyes of this fear be two wings wherewith we fly from
Rebellion. Hest. 15.5.6.7.11.

The two waiting women wherewith a subjects mind endued is prepared to the
service and favor of his Sovereign. Rom, 13.7.


keeps treachery out of the Subjects hearts. This fear, as ballast
preserves the ship from being ouerblowen of the wind, keeps the soul of
the Subject that she be not overthrown by others flattery, or her own
presumption. This fear, as a bridle, curbes us from all disobedience. This
fear, as a nail fixes us firm in our duties. This fear, as the woman in
the Revelation with the two wings, fled from the Dragon, with her two eyes
flies from all Rebellion the seed of the Dragon. This fear as Esther with
her two maids coming into the presence of Assuerus, was graciously
entertained, with these two eyes comes into the service and favor of her
Sovereign. This fear give to Caesar, to Caesar thou owe this fear.


Son. The God of heaven imprint this fear, in my heart. But to this fear am
I to adioyne honor?


Father. Honor.
If as among the Elements the fire is most excellent: If as among the creatures
on earth, man is most excellent: 1. Cor. 15.41.
If as among the stars of heaven, one star differs from another star in
glory: So Caesar (amongst men) by the finger of God is made most excellent:
Honor are we to give to Caesar, least we bear false witness.
Who will not (since honor is as the Philosopher says, a testimony of
excellency) give honor to Caesar, least they bear false witness not against
their neighbor, not against Caesar, Least we break the Canon of the Apostle.
Romans 13.7.
but against God who has exalted Caesar: least they break the Canon of the
Apostle, Give honor to whom ye owe honor: least they be unjust,, not giving
to every man his duty: Least we be unjust. Least we transgress Gods
Commandments. Exodus 20.12. Lamen. 4.16. Least we give just occasion of
complaint against our Nation.
least they transgress Gods own commandment: least, as Jeremy complained of
the Jews, They reverenced not the face of the Priests, some other complain
of the English, they reverenced not the face of the Prince? The Priest is a
figure of Christ, the King is the figure of God. If Nabuchodonozor setting up a
dead Image, prevailed with his ungodly subjects at the sound of musical
Instruments, Dan. 3.1.7.
to worship it with honor forbidden of God, Shall not God rather prevail with
his Servants, then Nabuchodonozor with his Subjects? What the harmony of the
Scripture sounds. 1 Pet. 2.17. The Philosopher and the Scripture teaches us
to honor Caesar. The Philosopher compares a king to a Father, to a Physician,
to a Pilot, to a Shepherd. Malach. 1.6 Caesar is to be honored as a Father.
Eccus. 38.1. to be honored as a Physician.

Our Caesar is a Physician Political, and Metaphysical,


shall (...) Jehovah setting up, not a dead, but (as Menander calls the King)
his living Image, prevail with all his godly Subjects at the sweet harmony
of the sacred Scripture, sounding out with Saint Peter, Honor the King, to
give him that honor which he has commanded? Will you see whereunto the
Philosopher compares a King? will you see what titles God gives a King? The
Philosopher compares a King to a Father, to a Physician, to a Pylot, to a
Shepherd. If I be a Father, says God, where is mine honor? If I be a
Father, may the king say, where is mine honor? Honor Caesar as a Physician:
The Physician delivering the body of man from evil humors, and noisome
diseases, restores it to health: Caesar delivers the body of the estate from
evil humors, from dangerous diseases, preserves the sacred Clergy, the
honorable Nobility, the well meaning Communaltie, in perfect health. Caesar is
not only a political, but also a corporal, and that not a Physical, but
(that you in Caesar may see an extraordinary stamp of the finger of God) a
Metaphysicall ph^sitian, curing that evil, which to the skilfullest
Chirurgions is incurable, which one rarely skillful in that science, first not
believing, but afterward with his own eyes often seeing, he is with the
Wiseman ready to say, Wisd. 16.12.
Neither herb nor plaster healed them. Wherefore as Pharaoh said of Joseph
expounding his dream, Can we find such a man: So we seeing her most
excellent Majesty by the myraculous gift of God healing this disease, Can we
find such a woman as this, Genesis 41.38. To be honored as a skillful Pilot. An.
Dom. 1588. By the conduct of the right honorable Charles Lord Howard (now Earl
of Nottingham) Lord high Admiral of England.
in whom is the spirit of God? Honor her as a skillful Pylot, who
notwithstanding tempests by winds from beyond the Alps, and Pyrenaean
Mountains, notwithstanding the waves of the Sea have been lift up to heaven,
an invincible Armada out of Castile, Portugal, Biscaie, Andolusia Arragon,
Scicilia, Naples, Sardinia, the Baleares, the Canaries, the Treceras, the
Indias, with assistance of Rome, Florence, Genua, Malta, and others devoted to
the Spanish when peace was pretended, came against us: Notwithstanding the
dreadful rocks, dangerous gulfes, deuowring sands, horrible swallowing
whirle-pooles upon our own coasts, This the present age admireth, and
posterity will celebrate. As a good Shepherd. The great Shepherd who
redeemed us by his cross, and will crown her with an incorruptible Crown,
has brought her from being a Sheep to the slaughter, to be a Shepherd for
our salvation. Psalm. 23.2. Judith. 7.8, 12, 31, 14. How the Scripture teaches
us to honor Caesar.
does so still guide us in a calm, that admiring and amazed we may say, what
man, what woman, what woman more excellent than any man, so, to the worlds
admiration protected, directed, and blessed of the Almighty, that winds and
seas do so obey her, that rocks, that shelfes, that syrts, that gulfes, that
whirle-pooles cannot annoy her? Have not the sheep a respective regard of the
shepherd? That flock for keeping whereof ever since the great shepherd (for
whom she was sometime tanquam ouis, of whom she shall receive an incorruptible
Crown of glory) has given her a hook, she has by most vigilant shepherds
made us rest in green pastures, and leads us by (though many a vassal of
Babylon have endeavored to cut them off from our Bethulia) the waters of
comfort. Will you see what titles God gives to a King? the title of Father, of
Lord, of Gods Minister, of comforter, of anointed of God, yea all the titles
of honor in Heaven and Earth. The people joyfully. 1 Kings. 1. 39, 48. Men of
war in the actions most respectfully. 2 Samuel 12.27, 28.
God, and man having so honored Caesar, let all our people honor Caesar, as
all the people with joy and musical instruments honored Solomon. Let all
Generals of armies, so honor her, that all be done to her honor, as Ioab
fighting against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and being ready to take the
City of waters, The greatest in acces most carefully. Ester. 5.1, 2.
sent to David to come in person, that David, not Ioab might have the honor.
Let her be honored with great regard in access to her presence even of the
nearest and dearest unto her, In presence even the Ministers of God most humbly,
as Esther being in her royal apparel, stood in the Court of the Palace
until the King held out the golden Scepter. Let her be honored in her
presence, with most humble gesture even of the Ministers of the eternal God, 1
Kings. 1.23.
as Nathan the Prophet being come unto the King, made obeisance before the King
upon his face to the ground. Let her be honored with grateful acknowledging
of the Lord his unspeakable blessinge: and therefore as Ioachim the high
Priest, and the ancients of the children of Israel said to Iudeth, In
acknowledging gods blessings upon us, all generallye are to honor Caesar.
for the benefits that God by her had showed to the children of Israel, let the
Reverend Fathers of the Church, and the truly honorable Nobility of England
say of Elizabeth for ye benefits which God by her most excellent Majesty has
showed to England, Thou art the exaltation of Jerusalem: thou art the great
glory of Israel: thou art the great rejoicing of our Nation: Judith. 15.8, 9,
10.
thou have done all these things by thine hand: thou have done much good to
Israel, and God is pleased there with, blessed be thou of the Almighty Lord
for evermore, and let all the people say, So be it.


Son. Finding that your instruction for these two, Fear, and honor prepare
us to other duties.
have prepared my mind to receive the rest, I desire to know the rest of my
duties to Caesar.


Father. Of them the next is Obedience, which, since it is unjust, Obedience.
Not to obey Caesar, our own practice teach us to be unjust. Aristot. in his
Oeconom.
to require of inferiors, as the husband of the Wife, the Father of the son,
the Master of the servant, and not to give it to the Superior, every Subject
to his Sovereign: since that is true in the estate, Diligent obedience, the
path to preferment. Obedience of Subjects, the felicity of the estate.
Sophocles in Antig. Then disobedience no greater evil Matt. 12.25.
Disobedience ruinateth an estate. Titus 3.1. Paul gives a memorandu^ to teach
obedience. 1. Pet. 2.14. Peter comma^deth not only to obey the king, but for
the kings sake the officers of the king. Examples of obedience in the beasts.
Insecta, be the flies and worms such as be divided in their bodies: as the
Be, the wasp, the Emot, or Pis-mier, and such like. In the fowls. In all
Estates. In man. In the celestial spheres. In the Angels. Psalm. 103.20. In the
son of God. Matthew. 26, 53. In his coming into the world. In his being in
the world. In his going out of the world. John. 6.38. John. 4.34. Matthew. 26.38
In his agony manifested by his sweat and his prayer. Luke 22.44. Matthew.
26.39.42 44, Obedience active and passive.
which Aristole avouches in a family, by how much the more diligently any
obey, so much the greater favor they find: since that, as he says, the
obedience of the Citizens, is the felicity of the City, since that then their
disobedience, as says that Philosopher, and with him the tragic Poet, there
is no greater evil: Since that with it a house (says Christ) cannot stand,
and a Kingdom come to naught: Since that Paul for this duty would have a
Memorandum, since Peter would have us perform this not only to the King, but
also to such as are sent of the King, let us all give all obedience to Caesar.
But do examples prevail more then reason? The whole world swarmeth with
examples of obedience. If among the insecta the Bees obey their King: If among
the beasts of the field, the Flocks follow their chief, and the herds their
head: If among ye fowls of the air, the Cranes, when he that watches over
them calls, they come, when he flies they follow: If among men, the servant
obey his Master, the son his Father, the Wife her Husband: If in man, the
body obayeth the soul: If all the spheres of Heaven notwithstanding their
proper and peculiar motions, be circumuolued by the first moveable: If the
Angels, which excel in strength be obedient to the Commandments of God: If
the Son of God (who could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels)
performed obedience, obedience coming into the world, Obedience being in the
world, Obedience going out of the world: coming into the world, I came down
from Heaven not to do mine own will, but his which has sent me: being in the
world my meat is that I may do the will of him that sent me, and finish his
work: going out of the world, when his soul was very heavy, even unto the
death, when his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground
when his prayer was once, and again, and again: Oh my father, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will: Obedience of the law, by fulfilling it, Obedience of the cross, by
suffering it. Being compassed with such a cloud of examples, The end of these
examples. Obey Caesar readyly, sincerely, generally.
let us cast off all impediments, and obey all that Caesar commands us. Let us
obey Caesar readylie, obey syncerely, obey generally, obey earnestly. Obey
readily, David did but say to Ahimelech, and Abishai, who will go down with
me? and Abishai, said presently David, 1 Samuel 26.6.
I will go down with thee. Obey syncerely, for that which Saint Paul says
to servants, I may well say to subjects, be obedient to them not with eye
service as men pleasures, Col. 3.22.
but in singlenes of heart fearing God. Obey generally, not what likes us, but
what pleases Caesar to commannd us: for that which the Reubenites, Joshua. 1.16.
and others said to Joshua, we must say to Caesar, Earnestly.
all that thou have commanded us we will do, Genesis 31.6.
and whether soever thou sendest us, we will go. Obey earnestly, as Jacob
professed, he has served Laban with all his might: Philip. 2.8.
and as Paul says of Christ, he became obedient unto the death. To Caesar
give this obedience, this obedience thou owe to Caesar.


Son. Is not tribute to the throne of Caesar, the next duty which I owe to
Caesar?


Father. When I consider that many times Caesar's eye lids do not slumber,
that our eyes may safely sleep: Tribute.
that Caesar's sword cutteth off thieves, that Subjects may enjoy their goods:
that Caesar's Scepter curbeth Adulterers, that we may keep our wives, our
daughters, our maidens in chastity: that Caesar's government is our safe conduct
to pass the high ways, wide heathes, thick woods, wild mountains without
danger, either to our purses, from theeus, or our lives from Cutthroats:
Benefits from Caesar.
that Caesar's royal Navy at Sea, and mighty Forces to Caesar's great
expenses, sometimes at home, sometimes abroad, beat of the Enemy from inuading
our Land, wasting our Country, spoiling our goods, rifling our Treasure,
burning our houses, sacking our Cities, deflouring our Daughters, forcing our
wives, dashing out the brains of our tender Babes, tormenting our selves with
cruel death, taking away from us the word of God, which as Elies daughter in
law said of the taking of the Ark of God, 1. Salm. 4.22.
would be the departure of glory from Israel: Mat, 12.34.
my tongue cannot but out of the abundance of my heart speak of the
Sovereign minister of God among us, as Saint Paul has before spoken from God
himself for the ministers of his Church, Equity.
1. Cor. 9.7.8.
Who goes a warfare at any time at his own cost? who planteth a Vineyard,
and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not
of the milk of the flock? If David entering into a serious consideration of
Gods benefits bestowed upon him, Psalm. 16.12.
breaks out into this question, Others gratuitie.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? If the
Israelites so soon as Joshua had divided unto them the Cities which the Lord
had given them, presently gave Joshua an inheritance, a City for an
inheritance, Ios. 19.49, 50.
a City which himself would crave, Eccles. 1.7.
even Timnah-serah in mount Ephraim: If rivers go out of the place whence they
return and go: if the earth receiving seed, returns a crop: O my son are
our hearts like to David's heart, are not the English more unthankful then the
Israelites, more unnatural then the waters, more ungrateful then the earth,
If in consideration of these infinite benefits, which they daily receive from
Caesar's throne, 2. Cor. 9.7.
they be not ever most willing, and that with cheerfulness (for as God, so
surely Gods Vicegerent loves a cheerful giver) to return tribute, Necessity
of tribute.
which Cicero calls the sinews of war, which Vlpianus calls the sinews of
the common wealth, without which there was never, that any part of the
Scripture can show, any well ordered state, as a pledge of our thankful hearts
to the throne of Caesar? The will of God. Romans 13.7. Expressed in his word.
If thou will see what is commanded, the blessed Apostle he says, Give to all
men their duty, tribute to whom ye owe tribute, and that ye may know to whom
ye owe it, of this especially (I call to witness, Mat. 22.21. Mark. 12.17.
Luke. 20.25.
S. Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Luke) the Lord Jesus says, Give to Caesar
those things which be Caesar's: Is any so wicked to detain this? To take from a
private man it is theft, to take from the church it is sacrilege, to take, or
detain from the Prince, it is peculatus, robbing of the common treasure, The
greatness of their offense Prou. 28.24. who detain it.
the common treasure to be employed to common good. He says Solomon that
robs his Father and mother, and says it is no transgression, is the
companion of a man that destroys: He, may any man say, that detaineth
tribute, or other duties from Caesar, being the father or mother of his
Country, Examples of God.
and says it is no transgression, is the companion of a man that destroys
his Country. Exodus 30.14.
Are we so unreasonable that without examples we yield not to reason? Before
there was any king in Israel to take tribute, David.
the Lord himself took a tribute: when they had kings, the flowers of all
their kings, 2 Samuel, 20.24. 1 Kings. 4.6. Solomon requiring it. Examples of the
people of God. Nehemiah. 5.4. Of the blessed Virgin.
had for their tribute a peculier Office: David the pattern of devotion, over
the tribute set Adoram: Solomon the myrror of VVisdome, placed over the
tribute, Adoniram: when they were under the kings of the Gentiles, there were
amongst the people of God, that upon their lands, and their vineyards,
borrowed money for the kings tribute. When the blessed virgin was very great
by the holy Ghost, with the Savior of our souls, in the depth of winter she
tranailed from Nazareth in Galile, Luc. 2.4, 5, 6.
to Bethlem in Judah, to perform this duty to the under Officers of a
Lieutenant to an heathen prince. When the son of God conuersing with the
sons of men, Math. 17.24, 25, 26, 27.
Peter was asked if he paid not tribute, he taking tribute of an unreasonable
creature, that tribute for him and peter might be paid, bound all the
reasonable men, Of the Son of God paying it, though to pay it wrought a
miracle, may move every one to the perfourmance of this duty.
though they do it with their great difficulty, to perform this duty to
Caesar. Wherefore I conclude this point with Saint Ambrose, Si censum filius
Dei soluit, quis tu tantus es qui non putas esse soluendum? If the son of God
paid tribute or subsidy, who so great a man art thou, which think it not to
be paid?


Son. Before you enter into your speech of defense, Defense.
I desire to hear some encouragement to this duty.


Father. To encourage us in this duty (wherein whosoever through dastardie, or any
other vile respect fails, Punishments of Dastardie amongst the Romans.
I wish him banished either into Italy, whose glory the ancient Romans
condemned such wretches never to eat their meat but standing, Transiluanians.
and hereunto bound them by oath: or to the Transiluanians, Those of that
country of Dacia.
whose predecessors the Daci enjoined them servile subjection to their own
wives, and to sleep with their heads ever toward the beds feet: Or to
that part of Greece where sometime dwelt the Spartanes, Spartans.
who ordained that their clothes should be rent, their Beardes ever half cut,
permitted every man to strike them without penalty, but accounted it a great
disgrace to match in their stock)

To encourage us to this duty, let us consider her Majesty's confidence in
God, Encouragements to this duty.
Gods encouragement to her Majesty, the confusion of her enemies, the
thanksgiving befitting England. Her Majesty's confidence in God, The Lord is
my rock and my fortress, and he that delivers me: God is my strength, and in
him will I trust, my Shield and the horn of my salvation, 2 Samuel, 22.2.3
my high tower, my refuge, my Savior, thou have saved me from violence. 1.
Caesar's confidence in God.


Gods encouragement to her Majesty, Be strong, and of a good courage: Gods
encouragement to Caesar. Joshua. 1.6.
The confusion of her foes, whither foreign inuading her Dominions, or
conspiring at home, but confounded from heaven: That as, The confusion of
Caesar's foes.
Heliodorus told the King Seleucus of the Temple, they may tell their Spanish
and Italian founders of her Majesty, 2. Mac. 3.38.39.
If thou have any enemy or Traitor, send him thither, and thou shall receive
him well scourged, if he escape with his life: For in that place no doubt is a
special power of God, for he that dwells in heaven has his eye on that
place, and defends it, and he beats and destroys them that come to hurt
it. The thanksgiving of Israel, now well befitteth England, The thanksgiving
now befitting England.
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, may Israel now say, if the
Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us, Psalm. 124.
they then had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul: then had
the swelling waters gone over our soul: praised be the Lord which has not
given us a pray unto their teeth, our soul is escaped as a bird out of the
snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and wear delivered, our help is in
the name of the Lord which has made heaven and earth. Therefore I speak not to
the alone, Cant. 2.7.
but as the true lover of souls, says, I charge you O daughters of Jerusalem
by the Roes and by the Hindes of the field, that you stir not up nor waken my
love until she please: so I charge you (my duty to my God, my duty to his
Church, The Adiiuration
my duty to my Sovereign, together with my desire of the safety of your
selves, and the salvation of your souls enforces me this to charge you) I
charge you O sons and daughters of the supernal Jerusalem, by the joys of
Heaven, as ever you would enjoy them: by the pains of Hell, as ever you would
avoid them: Gal. 4.26.
by the precious blood of the Son of God, as ever therein you would be washed
from your sins, by the blessed favor of the eternal Father, to reveal
foreign complots. 2 Kings. 68.9.12.
as ever you would see his face: If you know of any King of Aram, taking
counsel with his servants agninst Israel, if God by any means reveal it unto
you, that you would with Eliseus make known to our Caesar, even the words that
the King of Aram speaks in his privy Chamber: If any Bigthan and Teresh, To
detect domestical conspiracies. Ester. 2.21, 22.
seek to lay hands on our Sovereign, that you would presently with
Mordocheus, and Ester certify our Sovereign: If your service be fitting, To
perform all dutiful service. 1. Sam. 10.26. Careful to guard her Majesty.
1. Sam. 26.15, 16.
that whersoeuer she go, ye attend her, as that band of men did Saul, whose
heart God had touched: that when she rests ye keep her, that none that be
willing to hurt her, come near the Lords anointed, least as David said to
Abner, it be said to you, ye be worthy to die, because ye have not kept the
Lords anointed: That if ye see any appearance of peril, you with David's men,
To prevent all peril. 2 Samuel 21.17 2 Samuel 18.3.
and with the true hearted people, be careful that she being worth ten
thousand of us, come not into any peril: If in the least distress (the Lord
keep her from all distress) her soul desires any thing, that may preserve
her, To provide whatsoever may preserve her.
that you would with all alacrity provide it as the three mighty even with
the hazard of their lives, brake into the host of the Philistines, 2 Samuel
23.15, 16.
and drew water out of the Well of Bethelem and brought it to David: If any
with Is^ibenob think (my touge faultreth in pronouncing the word, 2 Samuel
21.16, 17. To destroy all that would assault her. An assertion of assistance.
Judges. 5.20, 21. Judges. 5.15, 18. Prediction of honor to all true
Seruitours. Judges. 4.14, 15, 16. and 5.12, 15. Especially the chief
commanders. 5.16, 17. But of dishonorable reproach to the negligent, And
verse 23. of a curse from God himself upon obsti^^^e Offenders in this point,
and the Lord confound them that entertain any such intent) to slay David;
That with Abishai ye prsently though with exposinge your bodies to peril to
keep her sacred body from all peril, sucour David and smite them that so
presume and kill them. And know that as the Stars of Heaven fought against
Sisera in their order and the River of Kishon swepte them away, so Heaven and
Earth and all the creatures in them both, shall fight against, and sweep away
her enemies. If any loially serve under Debora, their memory with Issachars,
Zebulus and Nepthalis shall be honorable: If any be a valient general against
her enemies, his honor with Barakes shall be eternized: If any be backwarde they
with Ruben, Gilliad, Dan and Asher shall be branded with dishonor: If any with
Meroz cannot be drawn to take opportunity to assist Debora and the Lord in
Debora, let them look for the curse given to Meroz, not a curse only from
Debora, but a curse from the Lord, the Lord, who wills you to bless them
that curse you, not by man, Math. 5.44. Luke. 6.28. may draw us Judges. 5.23.
to this duty.
but by his Angels wills to curse Meroz, for not assisting the Lord, for not
assisting the Lord against the mighty.


Son. Dear Father, with many thanks for your pains in the former, I beseech
you to speak of Prayer which you reserved to the last.


Father. To the last I reserved Prayer for Caesar, Prayer.
not as the least, but as the greatest of our duties to Caesar. Prayer the
most excellent of our duties to Caesar.
The other be intended wholly to the King, this is directed immediately unto
God. Fear, is in regard of the sword: Honor, in respect of the Crown:
Obedeence, in regard of the Scepter: Tribute, to the Throne: defense, to the
person: But Prayer, to the founder, protector, To fear of the sword, 2 Samuel
1.22.21.
and director of Caesar. Saul's sword never returned empty from the blood of of
the slain, and the fall of the mighty, as yet was the shield of the mighty
cast down. The shield of Saul as though he had not been anointed with oil.
Acts. 12 21, 22.23. To honor of the crown.
Herod (whom Josephus still calls Agrippa) was honored, when arrayed in
royal apparel, sitting in the Judgment seat, making an Oration, the people
showted, the voice of God, and not of man, yet imediately the Angel of the
Lord smote him because he gave not glory to God, so that he was eaten of worms
and gave up the Ghost. Assuerus had a golden Scepter, Obedience to the
scripture. Hester. 11.5, 2
and was obeyed from India even to Ethiopia in 127. provinces, yet godly Queen
Hester had no pleasure in his feast, and drank no wine of his drink
offerings. How was the throne of Nabuchodonozor supported with Tribute, Tribute
to the throne.
who besides the abundant charges of his house, and the excessive expenses of
his Armies made an Image of gould whose breadth was 6. whose height was 60.
Cubits? Dan. 3.1.
yet was he driven from men, and did eat grass as the Oxen, 4.30.
and his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hairs were grown as
the Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws. Defense to the person.
Mat. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 28.
Antiochus defended with his Armies, swelled with pride, breathed out fire in
his rage against the Jews, thought he might command the floudes of the sea,
weigh the mountains in the balance, reach the Stars of heaven, yet was he
smot with an incureable and invisible plague, the worms came out of the body
of this wicked man in abundance, whiles he was yet alive, his flesh fell off
for pain and torment, and all his army was grieved at his smell: and
notwithstanding his protestation concerning Jerusalem, concerning the Jews,
concerning the Temple, the holy Vessels, the Sacrifices, and his own
conversion, (wherein O how shines the triumph of the Deity?) He died a
miserable death in a strange Country among the Mountains. So little do fear
of the sword, honor of the crown, Obedience to the Scepter, Tribute to the
Throne, Defense to the person, Without prayer to the Inthroner make not Caesar
happy.
prevail to Caesar's happiness without Prayer to the inthroner and preserver
of Caesar. Prayer therefore, my Son, Prayer which springs from the holy
Ghost, the Spirit it self says Paul, Whence prayer springs. Romans 8.26.
makes requests for us with sighs which cannot be expressed. Prayer, which
is the Messenger of the faithful soul to God, the prayer of him that humbles
himself says the son of Sirac, goes through the clouds, Ecclus. 35.17.
What prayer affects. That prayer excels. Apoc. 8.3. 1. Tim. 2.1. Prayer
whereunto Paul before all things Exhorts for all men generally. 1. Tim. 2.2.
He exhorts for kings specially.
and cease not till it come near, and will not depart until the most high
have respect thereunto. Prayer, which is the odours in the golden violl offered
upon the golden Altar, which is before the Throne: Prayer whereunto Saint Paul
exhorts Christians before all duties: Prayer were unto he exhorts
generally for all men, he exhorts specially for Kings: Specially for Kings in
respect of the greatness of the cares which they take, in respect of the
perils whereto they be subject, in respect of the difficulty in destribution
of rewards and punishments, in respect of the abundant good which discendeth
from them to the whole estate. Prayer for Kings, In respect of the cares which
they take. Hester 6.1 In respect of the perils whereto they be subject.
in respect of the cares they take: In the greatest Dominion, says Salust)
there is the greatest care, through this the Kings sleep departs from him.
In respect of the perils to the which they are subject, because in the Prince,
the enemy has Nero his wish, all ye heads of the people upon one body, like
the king of Aram, 1. King. 22.31.
the Enemy commands his captains to fight only against the King of
Israel. In respect of the difficulty in the deserts, right bestowing in
rewards and inflicting of punishments. 1. King. 3.9. In respect of the
abundant good that descends from the Sovereign to the whole Estate. The
Sun in the world, our Sovereign in her Dominions resembles the divine
Majesty. Pray for Caesar.

For Caesar needs thy prayer. Ezra. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

For Caesar esteems of thy prayer.


In respect of the difficulty of the right bestowing rewards and inflicting
of punishments there being (heaven alone being free from all corruption)
smooth Absolons dogged Doegs, black mothed Shimeis, bloody handed Ioabs,
false hearted Sibas, shameless harlots. So that Solomon, and all for Solomon
had need to pray. For who is able to judge this mighty people? In respect of
the abundant good which descends from the royal Majesty to the whole
estate: for as the Sun is a resemblance of the Deity in the frame of this
world, giving light, heat, life to all things: so the Sovereign of every
estate, is a pattern of the great God, from whom our whole estates, laws to
live by, and comfort in our several courses do proceed. pray therefore for
Caesar, since Caesar needs thy prayer. Pray for Caesar, for as Darius highly
respected the Sacrifices and prayers of the priests of Israel for his life, and
for his sons: so her most gracious Majesty greatly regards that prayer be
made for her, by her truly-christian subjects. And let subjects pray for
Caesar: since prayer is honorable, prayer is easy, prayer is profitable
prayer is honorable, If we account it a grace unto us to follow the fashions
of the greatest persons on earth, For prayer is honorable. Reave. 8.8, 9, 10,
11. For prayer is easy.
O how great honor will it be for us to imitate the blessed spirits in
heaven? Prayer is easy, if thy purse be so poor, that it ca^ pay no tribute
to Caesar: if thy body be so feeble, that it can do nothing for the defense of
Caesar: yet if thy heart be not too lewd, too wicked: if thy heart be not void
of all piety, For prayer is profitable against all calamities. Jonah, 2.1, 7,
10. Act. 12.5, 7, 8, 9, 10. Tobit. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Against sickness. Ecclus. 38.9 -- 2 King. 20.3, 5.6. Against death. Against
the enemies.
void of all Christian duty: thy heart will daily and often every day pray for
Caesar. Prayer is profitable, profitable against all calamities, it delivered
Jonas out of the Whales belly, Peter out of prison, Sara the daughter of
Raguel from reproach: profitable against sickness, for (says the son of
Sirac) my son fail not in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord, and he will
make thee whole: profitable against death, It prolonged Ezechias life fifteen
years: profitable against the enemies, against the enemies, this, but without
this, against us, the enemies prevail: when Moses lift up his hand, Israel
prevailed: Exodus 17.11. If Paul commanded to pray for Nero, 1 Timothy 22.
Baruch. 1.11. Ierem. 29.7. If Baruch and Jeremy commanded to pray for
Nabuchodonosor.
but when he let his hand down, Amaleck prevailed: if Paul exhorted and
commanded to pray for Nero a man so wicked that he murdered his Tutor, his
mother, and was natures Monster: If the prophets commanded the Israelites to
pray for the life of the king of Babylon, who had wasted Judea with sword and
fire, besieged and taken Jerusalem, burned the Temple, carried away the holy
vessels, set fire on the whole city, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round
about, 2. King. 24, and 25. chap.
murdered many people, carried others to miserable servitude, slew the sons of
the king before his eyes, pulled out his eyes, bound him in chains, carried
him to Babel, and as if to murder the innocent, to ravish the chaste, to carry
princes into captivity, to sack the holy City, to burn the Temple of the
God of heaven, were not impiety enough, that he might come to the full height
of all impiety: he set up a golden Image, and by a Herald proclaimed that
whosoever did not worship it, Dan. 3.1, 4, 5, 6.
should be cast into the midst of a hot fiery furnace: If the holy Prophet
commanded the Israelites to pray for wicked Nabuchodonosor, 2 Peter. 1.21.
What would the holy ghost that we should do for Elizabeth? The royal acts of
Augustus, David, Solomon, Asa, and Josiah. performed by her Majesty. 1. Chro.
16.4, 5:6, 7, 37, 38, 39. 1 King. 15, 13 2 King. 23.1, 2.3. 1. King. 6 That
which one said of Solomon, many have said of Elizabeth. 1. Kin. 10 8, 9 That
which the stranger Jews said of the Apostles, having received the holy Ghost,
we can not but say of our ministers in the days of Elizabeth.
what would that holy spirit, by whom both the Prophets and Apostles did write,
that all English, all Irish, all others under the subjection, or protection of
her most gracious Majesty, should do for Queen Elizabeth, who whereas
Augustus said he found Rome of Brick, but left it of Marble, may say she
found England of Brass and Lead, but brought it to Silver and Gold, with
David appointed the Levites to sing in their courses, with Asa destroyed Idols.
with Josiah restored the Book of the Law, with Solomon builded a Temple to the
God of Heaven. So that as the Queen of Saba said of Solomon, many have said
of Elizabeth, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants that stand
before thee, and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved
thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel, because the Lord loved Israel for
ever, and made the Queen to do equity and righteousness. Our English and Irish
returning from foreign coasts, may say of the Ministers of their Countries in
the days of her Majesty, as those stranger-Iewes, did of the Apostles having
received the holy Ghost, Acts. 2.11.
we heard them speak in our own tongues, the wonderful works of God. Shall we
not pray for such a Queen? 1. Tim. 2.2, 3.
Pray for her (says S. Paul) in respect of your selves, and in respect of God.
In respect of your selves, Pray for her in respect of your selves. 1. Tim. 2.2.
That you may live a quiet, and a peaceable life, in all godliness, Genesis 28,
16, 17
that you may live a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness, and
honesty. A quiet life, that we have no insurrections at home: a peaceable
life, that we have no invasion from abroad: In all godliness, that it may be
said of England as Jacob said of Bethel, Surely the Lord is in this place, this
is none other, but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven: And in
honesty, And in honesty. Romans 2.24.
that the name of the Lord be not blasphemed among the Gentiles, among ye
Mahumitans among ye Anabaptists, among ye Romish Recusants through you, but ye
as Christ says, your light may so shine before men that they may see your good
works, Matt. 5.16.
and glorify your father which is in heaven, as saint Peter says, that they
which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they
shall see, 1. Pet. 2.12.
glorify God in the day of the visitation. In respect of God our Savior, Pray
for Caesar in respect of God, our Savior. for this is good. 1. Tim. 2.3. O
acceptable in his sight. Psalm. 19.1. Baru. 3.33, 34. If all the creatures in
heaven and earth, seek to please God. Psalm. 104, 19. 7, 21, 32. Ierem. 8.7.
Esaias. 1.3. Shall not man being more bound then they all. Genesis 1.26. 1. Pet.
1.19. 1. Cor. 3.16. Aphe. 2, 10. 2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Pet. 5.4.
pray for Caesar, for says Saint Paul, this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior: If the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament show his handy-worke: If the Light obey him with fear: If the
Stars shine in their Watch and rejoice: If ye Moon keep her appointed
seasons: If the Sun knows his going down: If the waters fly at his rebuke:
If the Lions seek their meat at God: If he look on the Earth and it
trembles: If he touch the Mountains and they smoke: If ye Storke in the air
knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow
observe the time of their coming? If the Ox know his owner and the Ass his
masters crib: shall not man being not liue-lesse like some, not senseless
like others, not unreasonable like others; But created by a consultation of the
deity, redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and
without spot, sanctified by the holy Ghost, expecting a Crown, a Crown of
life, a Crown of righteousness, a Crown of glory, perform to Caesar all
duetifull alleagiance, Seek in all things to please his Majesty. 1. Tim. 2.3.
since the blessed Apostle has taught us, that this is good, and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior?


THE eternal Father for his sweet Sons sake, by the holy spirit so rule our
hearts, The Authors prayer for Caesar, and Caesar's true subjects. James. 5.16
2. King. 1.10, 12.
that we being righteous as Elias, and our prayers fervent as Elias, they may
open heaven, and bring from thence Gods Judgments as fire upon Caesar's
enemies: but the dew of the divine grace upon Caesar, 1. King. 18, 45 Romans
13.5.
and Caesar's true Subjects: that her most sacred Majesty may long,
religiously, happily rule us, that we for conscience sake, least we resist the
ordinance of least we receue Judgment, least benefits incident Fear, Honor,
Obey, Pay tribute to, Defend, and Pray for her most sacred Majesty on earth,
and in the end, and without all end, reign together with her in the kingdom
of Heaven, Amen.


