The Married-womans Case: OR Good Counsel to Mayds, to be careful of hasty
Marriage, by the example of other Married-women.
To the tune of The Married-mans Case.


(...) Maidens all, that are willing to wed,
(...) before you are we will advised,
Make not too much haste to the marriage bed,
(...)est the sheets be too dearly prized:
(...)urs to try before you do trust,
(...) any love not but only for lust;
(...) make their po^re wives to leap at a crust:
(...)us lives a woman that is married, is married,
(...)ues a poor woman that married.
(...)lives single has little to care for,
(...)ent and ^^et'^ prov^^^d;
(...)nceithen wherefore
(...)est to be brided*
(...) rest,
(...) be possessed;
(...)udge at the best:
(...) married, is married,
(...)t's married.
(...) rich man,
(...)ion,
(...) ^he can,
^
(...) and his shoes,
(...) flatly refuse;
(...) choose:
(...), is married,
(...)y'd
A woman that marries a quarelling Coxcombe,
has cause enough to ^^sta^^e her:
For when f^d the Alehouse be brings a Fox home,
he will find some occasion to bas^e her:
She seldom shall go without her face black,
She shall not want blowe^, though ville she lack,
Although from a man he will perhaps turn his back:
And thus lives a woman that is married, is married,
Thus lives a poor woman that is married.
Not only at home he is given to quarrel,
but also in other places:
Where now and then, to his wonderful peril,
he mee^es with knocks and disgraces;
And then his poor wife his Surgeon must be,
To cure his infirmities ready is she;
Yet for her endeavor ungrateful is he:
And thus lives a woman that is married, is married,
Thus lives a poor woman that is married.
A woman that to a whore-monger is wed,
is in a most desperate case:
She scarce dares perform her duty in bed,
with one of condition so base:
For sometimes he is bitten with Turnbull-street Fleas,
The Pox, or some other infections disease;
And yet, to her peril, his mind she must please:
Oh, thus lives a woman that is married, is married,
Thus lives a poor woman that is marr'yd.
The second part,
To the same tune.


A Woman that marries a drunken sot,
must look for no competent living;
For he all the day will sit at the Pot,
and never takes thought for thriuing:
From Alehouse to Alehouse all day he will come,
While she sits with bread and fair water at home;
What-euer he gets, he gives her none:
And thus lives a woman that is married, is married,
Thus lives a poor woman that is married.
And if she have children, her grief is the more,
to hear them complain for vittle,
While their wretched father in the Alehouse does rore,
and think of their want but little:
Too many such husbands there be, the Lord knows,
That will have good liquor, how ere the world goes:
But she that has such a one, needs no more woes:
Yet thus lives a woman that is married, is married.
Oh, thus lives a woman that is married.
A woman that is to a gamster espoused,
her ease is to be lamented:
For he from his gaming can hardly by rouzed,
by any means can be invented:
He Is either at ^^^ide thrifth, at Tables or Dice,
Where while he sits wishing for Kator and Size,
His money consumes away with a thrice:
And thus lives a woman that is married, is married.
Oh, thus lives a women that is married.
As long as his purse with moneys is lined,
he never has power to give over;
And if he have lost, it is still in his mind,
that he shall his losses recover:
And thus night and day with vain foll^y he is led
And wastes what should maintain his household with bread,
Who often are constrained to go fasting to bed.
And thus lives a woman that is married, etc.
A woman who is ty'de to a jealous ass,
is a slave to his doub^full condition:
She hardly dares look any man in the face,
but still it produces suspicion;
He marketh her steps with so watchful an eye:
And though she all baseness does scorn and dress,
Yet he dreams of horns, when he knows no ca^^^^ why*
And thus lives a woman that is married, etc.
And thus it is difficult, do what you can,
a perfect good husband to light on:
Then let do fair Maiden be in love with a^ ^a^
that she has but only set sight on:
For marriage must not be accounted a toy,
One hour brings much sorrows or joy:
Then do not (sweet Damsels) your fortunes (...)
By being too hasty of marriage, of marriage,
Think first how to live when you are married.
And thus I Will conclude, as I began,
with this friendly admonition:
Let no woman heedlesly marry a man,
before she has tri'de his condition:
For time will bring every action to view,
And try whether Lovers be faithless or true:
And thus, gentle Maidens I bid you Adieu;
Desiring you well to be married, be married,
Or else may you never be married.
M.P.

Finis.
London Printed for H. G.


