A TREATISE Of Mental Prayer.

WITH ANOTHER Of the Presence of God.

Composed by the R. Fa. ALFONSVS RODRIGVEZ, of the Society of JESUS.

AND Translated out of the Spanish, into English.

I H S



Permissu Superiorum. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND LADY ABBESS Of the English Religious Dames, of the
Order of S. Benet in Gant.
MADAME, Since by the instinct of Nature, all things acknovvledge the
Fountain, whence originally they flow: I should have vvronged this Excellent
TREATISE, had I directed the same, into any other, then your LADISHIPPS Hands,
from whom I first received it; and to whom, by the TRANSLATOVRS Intention,
and for many other respects, it is singularly due.

And although, this be but a small Part, or one single Tracte only, of the
admirable WORKS of the Author; yet has it been judged fit, to be published
alone; to the end the pious Reader may not be deprived of so Excellent a
Treasure, until the Whole may come to light. And I doubt not, but that the
printing of this, will be no small Motive to the Worthy TRANSLATOVR, to go
forvvard with the rest; seeing his former Devout Labors, in furthering of
Spiritual Matters, are highly esteemed, and honored by all pious, and
impartial Readers thereof.

In this Treatise (MADAME) may the Devout Contemplant, read without
Weariness, and repeat without Tediousness; sucking evermore from hence,
most svveet Delights of Divine Comfort; the which do so satiate, as they
procure also new Appetite, in those, who addict themselves to the practice of
MENTAL PRAYER.

For, amongst all the Spiritual BOOKS, now extant, I know not any one, more
generally Applauded, or accounted more Necessary, for such, as attend to the
devout Exercise of Prayer, then this: The AUTHOR vvherof, having been not only
trained up, all his life time, in the School of VERTVE; but also, one of the
most expert Masters of SPIRIT, that are known, at this day, in the Christian
world.

Unto this Tracte of MENTAL PRAYER, have I adjoined another more brief, Of the
Presence of God, made by the same AUTHOR. For, as these two pious Exercises,
have such dependence one of the other, that they cannot be separated in
Practice: So was it thought convenient, to combine them together in one
Book; that the same might be more entierely useful, for the arriving unto a
true, and perfect Spirit of Devotion, and Union with God.

I will not enter into further Discourse, in praise heerof; as well, not to
be ouer-tedious to your LADISHIPPE; as not to hinder you from enjoying the
svveet Content, which you will (no doubt) receive, by the Perusal. As for
the small Pains, I may have taken in the publishing of it, the Benefit which
many souls will reap hereby, shall be my Comfort; and my poor Prayers shall
ever be attending You, for the perpetual Increase of your spiritual Happiness:
Whereof I humbly beseech You, to make him Partaker, who has dedicated
Himself, to remain ever,

Your Lap. devoted Servant. I. W.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this Book.
Of Mental Prayer.
CHAP. I. OF the Value and Excellency of Prayer. Page ^. CHAP. II. Of the great
Necessity, which we have of Prayer. Page 6. CHAP. III. That we are much bound to
God, for having made that thing so easy to us, which on the one side is so
Excellent, and on the other so Necessary. Page 16. CHAP. IV. Of two Kinds of
Me^tall Prayer. Page 19. CHAP. V. How the Holy Scripture does declare to us,
these two Kinds of Prayer. Page 28. CHAP. VI. In which the same doctrine, is
more declared and confirmed. Page 41. CHAP. VII. Of the ordinary Kind of
Mental Prayer. Page 46. CHAP. VIII. Of the necessity of Meditation. Page 53.
CHAP. IX. Of the great Benefit, and Profit, which we are to draw from
Meditation; and how we are to use it, to the end to profit by it. Page 61.
CHAP. X. Of other benefits, and profits which there are, in the use of
Meditation. Page 68. CHAP. XI. Of the manner, which we are to hold in Prayer;
and of the Fruit we are to gather thence. Page 74. CHAP. XII. Of how great
importance it is, to deteyne our selves, in the acts, and affections of our
Will. Page 82. CHAP. XIII. Wherein satisfaction is given to their complaints,
who say, that they cannot, nor know not how to meditate, nor discourse with
their Understanding. Page 87. CHAP. XIV. Of two directions which will be of much
help to us, for the procuring to make good Prayer, and to reap much Fruit
thereby. Page 94. CHAP. XV. How it is to be understood, that in prayer we are to
take some one thing to heart, whereof we have greatest need; wherein we must
insist till we obtain it. Page 104. CHAP. XVI. How we may be able to deteyne
our selves much in Prayer, about the same thing: and the way and practice of a
very profitable Kind of Prayer it set down; and that is, to descend to
particular Cases. Page 117. CHAP. XVII. That in the consideration of these
Mysteryes, we are to go on, at good leisure, and not to passover them
superficially: and of some means which help therein. Page 133. CHAP. XVIII. It
is showed after a practical manner, how it is in our power, to pray ever well
if we will; and to gather Fruit from thence. Page 153. CHAP. XIX. Of some easy
means, or ways, to have profitable, and good Prayer. Page 153. CHAP. XX. That
we must content our selves with this Prayer, whereof we have spoken; and not go
with complaint, and grief, for not being able to obtain that other Prayer,
which is more high. Page 170. CHAP. XXI. Of the causes of Distraction in
Prayer, and of the Remedies. Page 178. CHAP. XXII. Of other remedies, for the
making us remain with attention, and reverence, in our Prayer. Page 187. CHAP.
XXIII. Of a matter of great consolation, for them who are molested, and
distracted in Prayer. Page 199. CHAP. XXIV. Of the temptation of Sleep, and
from whence it comes; and the remedies thereof. Page 203. CHAP. XXV. How much it
imports us to take some extraordinary time, for the giving of our selves to
Prayer. Page 207. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Fruit which we are to gather when we
recollect our selves, to make the spiritual Exercises. Page 222 CHAP. XXVII.
Of some directions, which will help us yet more, to profit by these Exercises.
Page 231. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Reading of Spiritual Books; and how important
it is: and of some means which may help us to do it profitably, and well. Page
238.
Of the presence of God:
CHAP. I. OF the excellency of this Exercise: and the great benefits, which are
contained therein. Page 261. CHAP. II. Wherein consists the Exercise, or
Practice of going always, in the Presence of God. Page 273. CHAP. III. Of the
Acts of the Will, wherein this Exercise does principally consist; and how we
are to employ our selves therein. Page 283. CHAP. IV. The practice of this
Exercise is further declared; and here a way is laid down, of going in the
Presence of God, very easy, very profitable, and of much Perfection. Page 291.
CHAP. V. Of some differences, and advantages, which there are, in this
Exercise, of going in the Presence of God. Page 295. CHAP. VI. Certain pious
Considerations, of Gods Immensity, and of his Presence in all places, and in
all things. Page 300.
Of Mental Prayer.
CHAP. I. Of the Value, and Excellency of Prayer.
THE glorious Apostle, and Evangelist S. John, in the fifth, and eight Chapters
of his Apocalypse, does well declare the value and excellency of Prayer, and
says: That the Angel stood before the Altar and held an Incensary of Gold in
his hand; and that a great quantity of Incense was given to him, which were the
Prayers of the Saints; to the end, that he might offer them up before the Altar
of Gold, which stood before the Throne of God: and that the smoke of that
Incense, did ascend, from the hand of that Angel, into the presence of God. S.
Chrysostom speaking upon this place says: Chrysostom. ho. 13. super Matthew in opere
imperfect.
Hereby you may discern how high and precious a thing Prayer is, since it
alone, is compared in holy Scripture to Thymiama, which was a confection of
Incense, and other things, most odoriferously fragrant. Because, as Thymiama,
being well compounded, and framed, did extraordinarily delight me^ by the odor
of it; so that Prayer, which is made, as it ought, is very sweet and and
pleasing to Almighty God; and does delight and recreate the holy Angels, and
all the other Citizens of Heaven. Guiller. Paris. in sua Rheto. diui. c. 4.
In such sort, as that S. John says, They have in their hands, as it were so
many pomanders of admirable odor, which are the Prayers of the Saints;
whereunto they do very often apply their most pure sent, (to speak after the
manner of men) that so they may enjoy this most sweet smell: Habentes singuli,
Phialas aureas, plenas odoramentorum, quae sunt orationes Sanctorum. Aug. in
tract. d^ misericor. Tom. 10.


S. Augustine speaking of Prayer says: Quid est oratione clarius? quid vitae
nostrae vtilius? quid animo dulcius? quid in tota nostra religione sublimius?
What thing is there more excellent? What more profitable? what more delightful,
and sweet? what more sublyme, and high in all our Christian Religion, then
Prayer? S. Gregory of Nice, Greg. Niss^n. de orat. Domin. Ber. ser. 7. super
Ca^t. and Ep. 78.
says the same: Nihil ex his, quae per hanc vitam coluntur and in precio sunt,
oratione preastat.

S. Bernard says, That although it be certain, that the Angels do very
ordinarily assist the servants of God with their invisible presence, so to
deliver them from the frauds and sleights of the Enemy, and to set forward
their desires of serving God, with greater fervor: Yet much more assistance do
those Angelical spirits give, when we employ our selves, in making Prayer. And
he brings to this purpose, many places of Holy Scripture; as that of the
Psalmist, In conspectu Angelorum Psallam tibi: I will praise thee, Psalm. 137.
in the presence of the Angels. Praeuenerunt Principes coniuncti psallontibus,
Psalm. 67.
in medio inuencularum tympanistriarum; which he also declares of the Angels,
who associate themselves to such as pray. And that also, Tob. 12.12.
which the Angel said to Tobias: When thou did pray with tears, I offered up
thy Prayers to God. For when the Prayer issues out of his mouth who makes it,
just then, do the Angels, who are present, offer it up to God. S. Hilary says
the same thing: Hilar. can. 16. in Mat.
Angeli praesunt fidelium orationibus, and eas quotidie Deo offerunt. So that
when we be in Prayer, we are environed, and circled in by Angels; and our
selves are also doing the office of Angels; and we are practicing, and
exercising our selves in that, which hereafter we are to do continually in
Heaven, and that is, to bless and praise our Lord. And for this cause, we are
particulerly favored, and beloved by the Angels, as being their Companions
now, and being also expected to be so hereafter; filling up those seats, which
grew empty, by the fall of their fellows.

S. Chrysostom, treating of the excellency of Prayer, and being desirous to
express the greatness of it, Chrysostom. lib. 2. de orando Deum.
says: That one of the highest greatnesses which did occur to be expressed by
him, was this, That whosoever makes Prayer, does confer, and treat with God
himself: Considera quanta est tibi concessa faelicitas, quanta gloria
attributa, orationibus fabulari cum Deo; cum Christo miscere colloquia; optare
quod velis; quod desideras postulare. Consider the dignity, and the glory to
which our Lord has exalted thee, in that he has given thee power, to treat
and converse with him; to have conversation, and speech of intercourse with
Jesus Christ; to desire what thou will, and to ask what thou desyrest. There
is no tongue (says he) which can ariue to declare of how great dignity, and
height, this treating and conuersing is, with Almighty God; and of how great
use and profit to us. For if they, who have their ordinary conversation here on
earth, with wise and prudent men, do feel much profit in short time; and it
grows quickly to be known, that they are much improued in wisdom, and
knowledge; and if they, who hold familiarity with virtuous men, do suck of
that virtue into themselves, (as the Proverb does thus express) Converse with
good men, and thy self wilt grow to be one of them; what shall become of such
persons, as converse and treat, in frequent, and familiar manner, with
Almighty God? Accedite ad Deum and illuminamini. Psa. 33.
What light, and knowledge, what benefits and benedictions, will they receive
by such conversation, and communication as this? And so S. Chrysostom says:
Chrysos. ho. ^e orat. and super illud Ps 7. Confitebor Domino secundum
Iustitiam eius.
That there is nothing, which makes us so much grow in virtue, as much
Prayer, and frequent conversation with Almighty God. For thus the heart of man,
grows to be truly generous, and to have the things of this world in great
contempt; and to raise himself above them all; and to unite, and transform
himself, after a certain manner, into God; and to become, in fine, a
spiritual person, and a Saint.

CHAP. II. Of the great Necessity, which we have of Prayer.
How necessary Prayer is for us, we have enough, and enough experience. I
would to God (i^ he were so pleased,) that we had not so much. Now, since man
is so full of need of Gods favor, in respect that he is subject to the taking
of so many falls; and that he is inuiroued by so many, and so fierce enemies;
and labors under the want of so many things, which belong as well to the
soul as the body; there remains no other remedy for him, but ever to be
resorting to God; beseeching him, with his whole heart, to be favorable to him,
and that he will help him out of all his dangers, and necessities, according to
that which King Iosaphat said (when he found himself hemmed in by his enemies:
1. Paral. 10.^.
) Cum ignoremus quid agere debeamus, hoc solum habemus residui, vt oculos
nostros dirigamus ad te. Since we are so weak, since we are so poor, and
needy, and know not which way to turn our selves, we have no other remedy, but
only to cast up our eyes to God, Celest. ca. 9. contra Pelagium.
and with our hearts to beg of him, those things whereof we are in so great
need. And so Pope Celestine, in one of his Decretall Epistles, to teach the
importance of Prayer, speaks thus; I know not what better thing to say to
you, then that which Zozimus my Predecessor said, Quod est tempus, in quo eius
auxilio non indigemus? in omnibus igitur rebus, causis, and negotijs, exorandus
est Protector Deus. What time is there; wherein we have not necessity of the
help of God? There is no such time. If that be so, then are we, at all times,
and in all occasions, and in all affairs, to resort to God by Prayer, with
desire that he will protect us. Superbu^ est enim, vt humana natura aliquid de
se praesumat. For a great pride it is, that a frail and miserable man, should
presume any little upon himself.

S. Thomas proves the necessity of Prayer, S. Tho. 2.2. q. 8^. ar. 2. Damase.
l. 3. fidei ca. 24. Aug. l. 2. deser. Domini cap 7. and ser. 230. de t^mp.
Basilius in Iul. mart. Chrysostom. ho. 30. in Ge^. sim. Gre. l. ^. dial. ^.8.
by a very solid, and substantial reason; and it is the doctrine of the
Saints Damascen, Augustine, Basil, Chrysostom, and Gregory. These Saints
declare, that the things which God, by his divine wisdom and disposition, did
determine, from all Eternity, to give to souls; he would impart in time, by
means of Prayer; and that by this means, he had resolved upon the redress,
the conversion, and the salvation of many souls; and upon the progress, and
perfection of many others: in such sort, that as God disposed and determined,
that by means of marriage, mankind should be multiplied; and that by plowing,
and sowing, and cultiuating the ground otherwise, there should grow abundance
of bread, and wine, and other fruits of the earth; and that, by means of
Artificers, and materials, houses, and buildings should be erected: So did he
also ordain to work great effects in the world, and to communicate many
graces and gifts to souls, by this means of Prayer. And so did Christ our
Redeemer assure us, in the Gospel: Petite and dabitur vobis, quaerite and
inuenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis: Matt. 7.
omnis enim qui petit, accipit, and qui quarit, inuenit, and pulsanti aperitur.
Ask and it shall be given, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you: for he who asks receives, he who seeks finds, and to him who
knocks, it shall be opened.

So that Prayer, is the means and maister-conduit, whereby our Lord will be
pleased to releive our necessityes, to enrich our poverty; and to replenish us
with benedictions and graces. Whereby we see well, the great necessity which we
have of frequenting Prayer. And so the Saints do frame, a very fit comparison,
when they affirm, that Prayer is as a Chain of Gold, one end whereof is hooked
up in heaven, and the other end reaches down to the earth; and that, by this
chain, all celestial graces, are derived, and drawn down to us; and by the
same, our selves ascend, and mount up to God. And we may also say, that this is
a kind of Jacobs Ladder, which reaches from heaven to earth; and whereby the
Angels do ascend, Genesis 28.11. Aug ser. 226.
and descend.

The glorious S. Augustine says, that Prayer is the Key of Heaven, which is
made, to open all the gates thereof; and of all those coffers which are full of
the treasures of God, Aug exhort. de salutaribus monitis ad que^dam Comitem ca.
28.
without excepting any one. Oration iusti, clauis est caeli: ascendit precatio,
and descendit Dei miseratio. And else where he says: That look what bread is
to the body, that very thing is Prayer to the soul: Sicut ex carnalibus escis
alitur caro, Nilus ca. 95. de orat. ^n bib. SS. PP. 10.^.
ita ex diuinis eloquijs and orationibus, interior homo nutritur, and pascitur.
And the same is affirmed, by the holy Martyr, and Abbot Nilus.

One of the most principal considerations, whereby the Saints declare the
value, and estimation which we ought to make of Prayer, on the one side; and on
the other, the great necessity which we have thereof; is, because Prayer; is a
very principal, and efficacious means, to order and address our life, and to
explayne, or overcome all those difficultyes, which may offer themselves to us,
in the way of virtue. And so they say, that upon it, depends the gouerme^t of
our life; and that when Prayer is well made, the life is well led; and that
when Prayer is discomposed, the life grows also into disorder. Recte nouit
viuere, qui recte nouit orare, Aug. ho. 4. ex 150. quae eius nomine circumf.
says S. Augustine. He knows how to live well, who knows how to pray well.

And S. John Climacus says, that a servant of God delivered a memorable speech
to him; and it was this. By the very beginning of the morning, I do already
know, what kind of days work, it will be; Climacus.
Giving to understand thereby, that if he complied well with his Prayer, in the
morning, all the rest would succeed well; and so, that it would fall contrarily
out, if either he did not comply with it at all, or else did it not so well, as
he could. And the same rule holds, with all the rest of a man's life. Our selves
do take daily experiment hereof; so that when we make our Prayer well, we go so
well in order, so cheerful, and so full of good purposes and desires, that it
is to make one wonder; and contrariwise, if we take no care of our Prayer, all
the good which we had gotten, is in the way to be lost.

S. Bonauenture says: Sine isto studio, omnis religio est arida, Bonauen. de
progres. religionis. ca. 7.
imperfecta, and ad ruina^ promptior. By not resorting to Prayer all goes
backward, and by and by comes in tepidity; and then by little and little, the
soul begins to grow weak and to wither, and to loose that vigor, and breath,
which it had before. And then, I know not how, those holy purposes and first
thoughts, grow to vanish; and then begin to awake, and revive all our passions.
Soon after, will a man find himself, to become much inclined to vain mirth,
and to talking and laughing, and passing away time idly, and such other
vanities as those; and that which is worse, the appetite of vain glory is
revived, and the appetite of ambition, and such other things, as formerly
seemed to have been dead.

The Abbot Nilus says, That Prayer is to be the glass of the religious man,
Nilus,
and in this glass, are we to view and reuiew our selves daily, and that at
leisure, that so we may come to see and know our faults, and to be removing
such deformityes, as we shall discover in our selves. And in this glass also,
are we to behold and consider, the virtues which shine in Christ our Lord; to
the end that we may go adorning, and beautifying our souls, by the
contemplation thereof.

The glorious S. Francis was wont to say, Gratia orationis, Lib. 1. Confornat
p. 1. hist. Mi^^^. c. 7.
viro religioso maxim desideranda est: nullus enim sine ea, in Dei seruitio,
fructus sperari potest. One of the things, which the religious man were to
desire most, is the grace or gift of Prayer: forasmuch as without it, no fruit
or profit can be hoped for, and by it we may hope for any thing. S. Tho. ^hift.
S. Dominici li. 3. ca. 37.
S. Thomas of Aquine, amongst many other grave sentences which are related as
from his mouth, in the history of his life, was wont to say, That a religious
man, without Prayer, was like a soldier, sent unarmed into a battle.

That holy Archbishop of Valencia, Thomas de Villanoua said, Tho. de Villa noua
ca. 13. vitae suae. Note.
that Prayer was like natural heat in a man's stomach, without which it was
impossible for the natural life to preserve it self, or, that meat should do
it any good; but with that, any meat is disgested and concocted well, and the
man is well nourished, and all the parts of the body are supplied with virtue
and strength, for the performance of al their operations: So, says he, without
Prayer, the spiritual life of man cannot be conserved, but with Prayer it may.
For by Prayer the soul is refreshed, and the spirit gets strength, for all the
Actions, and Obediences which it is to perform; and against all troubles, and
difficultyes which it is to undergo. By the help of Prayer, all these things
grow to be disgested, and made pastable, and prove good blood for the soul.

Finally, if we make that use of Prayer which we ought, we shall find therein,
full remedy of all our infirmityes, and means to conserve us in Religion and
virtue; for if perhaps you forget your selves in point of Obedience, and
observation of your Rules; if you begin to take certain little libertyes; if
that passion which you are most subject to, should resume a little life, and
reflourish; by laying hold upon the help of Prayer, all these inconveniences,
will with the favor of our Lord, be soon checked, and stayed. And if by
chance, you grow negligent, even in the use of Prayer it self, and should
consent to some tepidityes therein; yet, by means of the self same Prayer,
you are to procure the remedy, and to return into your selves. We are
furnished by Prayer, against all kind of inconveniences, yea and even against
the defects of Prayer it self. And therefore they do very well compare Prayer,
who say, That it is as the hand to the body, Note.
which is both an instrument for the whole body, and for it self also. For the
hand labors, to the end that the whole body, may be sustained, and for all
things which are necessary either to the body or the soul; and so it does also
labor for it self. For if the hand be sore, the hand cures the hand; if the
hand be foul, it washes it; if it be cold, it warmeth it; in fine, the hand
is fit for all things: and just so it is, in the case of Prayer.

CHAP. III. That we are much bound to God, for having made that thing so easy
to us, which on the one side is so Excellent, and on the other so Necessary.
IT is but reason that we consider, and ponder here, the great, and singular
favor which our Lord God has done us, in ordayning, that Prayer, being in it
self a thing so excellent, and so high, and being yet so very necessary,
forasmuch as concerns us; he has yet withal, made it so easy, as to place
it in the hand, or power of us all; and we may use it, at all times, and in all
places, if we be disposed. Apud me ^ratio, Ps. 41.^.
Deo vitae meae: Prayer is at hand with me; to the end I may make it to my God,
who gives me life, says the Prophet David. Those gates of the mercy of God,
are never shut, but they stand open to all; and at all times, we shall ever
find him at leisure, and desirous to show us favor, yea and even soliciting
us, to ask it of him.

It is an excellent consideration, which is usually brought to this purpose. If
Almighty God should give leave, for once only in the Month, that all such as
would, might enter into his presence to speak with him; and that then, he
would give them glad and grateful audience, and would grant their suites:
without doubt, it ought to be highly esteemed, since it would be highly
esteemed if any temporal King should offer it. But then how much more is it
fit, that we value it, as we ought, coming from the hand of God: especially
since he offreth it, and inuiteth us to it, not only for once in the month,
but for every day, yea and many times in the same day. Vespere, and mane, and
meridie, narrabo, Psalm. 54.18.
and annunciabo, and exaudiet vocem meam, says the Prophet embracing all
times, by this speech of his. At night, in the morning, at midday, and in the
evening, I will relate, and represent my troubles and my miseries to Almighty
God: and I am full of confidence, that whersoeuer and whenever I shall resort
to him, he will hear me, and do me favor. God is not weary to have us ask of
him, as me^ use to be: because he grows not poor by giving, as they use to
do. For man how much more he gives to another, so much the less remains to
himself, so that he takes from himself, what he gives to them, and he
impouerisheth himself, as much as he enricheth them.

And from hence it is, that men grow weary and disgusted, when they are
pestered with suitors; and if they give twice, or thrice, with a good will,
they will yet be weary, against the next time, and either they give no more, or
else they do it, in such a fashion, as that it may be the last. But God as the
Apostle S. Paul says, Ad Romans 10.12.
Est dives in omnes qui inuocant illum: he is infinitely rich, and since he
grows not poor by giving, he is not disgusted and grows not weary in being
asked, although all the world in every minut of time should be making suites. For
he is rich toward all, and desires to enrich us all, without leaving to be as
rich as he was before. And as his riches are infinite, so also his mercy is
infinite toward the redress of all the miseryes of us all. And he desires,
that we should beg often, and that we should ever be resorting to him.

It is reason therefore, that we acknowledge, and show all gratitude, for so
great a benefit and favor; and that we serve our selves well, of such a large
and profitable leave; procuring to be very assiduous, in the use of Prayer.
For, as S. Augustine says, Ps. 65.20.
upon these words, Benedictus Deus qui no^ amouit orationem meam and
misericordiam suam a me: you may hold for certain, that if our Lord do not
take the use of Prayer from you, as little will he take from you his Mercy. To
the end therefore, that our Lord may not divide his Mercy from us; let us
procure that we never leave the use of Prayer, nor divide it from our selves.

CHAP. IV. Of two Kinds of Mental Prayer.
LEAVING a part Vocal Prayer, which is an Exercise so holy, and so much
frequented by the Church of God, I will now, only treat of that, which is
Mental, whereof S. Paul the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 14.
when he writes to the Corinthians; Orabo spiritu, orabo and mente; psalla^
spiritu, psallam and mente. I will pray, I will sing, and I will cry out, with
my spirit, and with my heart. Two Kinds there are of Mental Prayer. The one is
common, and plain; the other is most especial, extraordinary, and of
particular privilege, with indeed may be said rather to be received, the^ to
be offered, or made; for so those ancient Saints, who were well versed in
Prayer, did use to express themselves. S. Dionysius the Areopagite, Dionys. l.
2. de Divine. nominib.
says of his Master Hierotheus, Quod erat patiens diuina: Whereby he meant to
say, that he did not so much operate, as receive that, which was given him by
Almighty God.

There is a very great difference, between these two kinds of Prayer. For the
former, may be taught, in some sort, by words; but we are not able to teach
the later, Apot. 2.17.
because words are not able to declare it. Quia nemo scit, nisi qui accipit.
It is a kind of hidden Manna, whereof no body knows, what it is, but he who
tastes it. Yea, and even he, cannot declare how it is, neither does himself
understand, how it grows. Cassian notes very well and brings for this purpose,
Cassian. collat. 9. Abbatis Isaac. c. 3.1^
a sentence of S. Antony the Abbot, which he calls celestial, and divine;
Diuina, caelestis, and plusqua^ humana sententia: Non est perfecta oration, in
qua se Monachus, vel hoc ipsum quod orat, intelligit. It is no perfect Prayer
(says this Saint) when one remembers himself, or understands exactly what
he prays. This high, and sublime, rich Kind of Prayer, does not permit to him
who prays, that he consider then, what he is performing; nor, that he make
reflection upon what he is doing, or (to speak more properly) what he is, not
so much doing, as suffering.

As here below it happens many times, that a man will be so absorpt, Note.
and inebriated (as it were) with a business, that he remembers not himself,
nor considers, where he is; nor makes reflection upon what he thinks; nor
observes, in what sort he thinks it. And just so, in this perfect Kind of
Prayer, a man is so taken, and absorpt in God, that he remembers not himself,
nor knows not how that is, nor by what way it comes, nor by what way it goes;
nor cares he then, for any Inventions, nor Preambles, nor Points; nor considers
he whether this, or that, be fit to follow, in hi Prayer. This arrived to the
foresaid S. Anthony, by the relation of Cassian, who put himself to Prayer in
the evening, and continued therein, till the Sun, of the day following,
struck his eyes; and he complained of that Sun, for rising so early, and
taking from him, that other light, which our Lord, interiorly bestowed upon him.

Bern. in ser in Dominie am infra^octa. Epiphan.
S. Bernard says of this Kind of Prayer: Rara hora, and breuis mora. This
hour comes but seldom, and when it comes, the time seems short, wherein it
lasts. For how long soever it be, it seems to have passed, as soon as a breath
of wind would do. S. Augustine feeling this kind of Prayer in himself, says
thus to God: Aug. Confess. lib. ^0. cap. 40.
Aliquando intromittis me in affectum, multum inusitatum, introrsus, ad nescio
quam dulcedinem, quae si perficiatur in me, nescio quid erit, quod vita ista
non erit. Sometimes thou drawest me, into an interior, and most unusual
affection of mind; to a sweetness which is beyond all expression; and which, if
it might be continued and perfected in me, I know not what that felicity might
be, which would not be contained, in such a life as this.

In this most special kind of Prayer, and Contemplation, Note.
S. Bernard places three degrees. The first, he compares to Eating, the
second to Drinking (which is done with more facility and delight then Eating,
for there is no trouble in the chewing) and the third, in being Inebriated. And
he brings to this purpose, that of the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 91.
Comedite amici, and bibite, and inebriamini charissimi. He says first, come
Eat; secondly, come and Drink; and thirdly, come and Inebrietate your selves,
with this Love. This last, is the most perfect; And this, is rather to receive,
then to impart. Sometimes the Gardener draws the water, out of the Well, by the
strength of this arms; and sometimes, whilst he holds his hands, one by the
other, comes a shower from heaven, which sincks into, and softens the earth;
and the Gardener has then no more to do, but to let it come, and to address
it to the root of those trees, to the end that they may bring forth fruit.

So it is, with these two Kinds of Prayer. For the one of them, is sought with
industry, being yet assisted by Gods grace; but the other is ready made to the
hand. In the first, thou go laboring, and begging, and feeding upon that
very beggary. But the second, does furnish thee, with a full table, which God
himself, has prepared for thee, to free thee from all hunger; a table, full
of riches and abundance: Introduxit me Rex in cellaria sua, says the Spouse;
Cant. 1.3.
And I say the Prophet, says: Laetisicabo cos, in domo orationis meae: I will
recreate and regale them, Isa. 56.7.
in the house of my Prayer.

This Kind of Prayer, is a most particular gift of God, which he bestows
upon whom it pleases him. Somtymes, in payment of those services, which they
have done him; and of the much, which they have mortified themselves, and
suffered for his love. And sometimes again, without any relation to any
precedent merits of theirs. For, in fine, it is a most free, and liberal grace
of his own; and he communicates it, to whom he will, according to that of the
Gospel, Matt. 20.15.
Non licet mihi quod volo facere? Shall not I perhaps, have power to dispose of
my own goods, as I lift? But this Kind of Prayer, is not a thing which we are
able to teach.

And so there are some Authors who are reprehended, and even prohibited,
because they would needs teach, that, which could neither be taught, nor
learned; and reduce that to Art, which is above all art; as if they could
infallibly place a man in state of Contemplation. Which Gerson does well
reprehe^d, Gerson.
in a book which he wrote against Rusbrokius, in these words: Thou haste plucked
of the flower, from the root. For as the flowers plucked from the root, and
carried in the hand, do quickly wither, and loose their beauty; so do these
things, which God communicates to the soul, after an internal manner, in
this high and rich Kind of Prayer. For in procuring to draw them out of that
place, and to declare them, and communicate them to others, they loose their
luster, and their splendour.

And this do they, who will needs declare and teach, that which cannot be
declared, no nor so much as understood. Those Anagogies, those Transformations
of the Soul, that silence and annihilation, that union without medium, that
deep bottom of Taulerus; for what does it serve to speak of these things;
for if thou understand them, I do not; nor do I know, what thou would say.
Nay, in this case, we are taught, and that very well, that there is this
difference, belonging to this divine Science, from others; That before we can
attain to other Sciences, we must first understand the Terms; but in this,
thou shall not understand the Terms, till first, thou have attained to the
Science. In other Sciences, the Theorick does precede the Practicke; but in
this, the Practick must precede the Theoricke.

Nay I say moreover, that not only this Prayer cannot be taught, or declared by
words, but not so much as your self are to desire to raise, or place your
self in his kind of Prayer, unless God himself, do raise you to it, and
place you in it. For this would be a great presumption and pride; and you
should so deserve, to loose even that Prayer, which you have already; and so
remain void of all. Introduxit me in cellam vinariam, Cant. 2.4.
says the Spouse in the Cauticles. That vocation of God, to draw the soul
into his secret retiring-place, to treat so familiarly with it, and the
bringing it, into his Cellar of wine, so to satisfy it, and inebriate it with
his love, is a most particular guifte of God. The Spouse, did not presume to
enter; but her fellow Spouse, took her by the hand, and drew her in. That
raising of ones self, to the Kiss of his mouth, is not a thing which thou
can, or ought pretend, unless he raise thee up; for it would be a great
presumption.

And so we see, that the Spouse, aspireth not so high. She is more bashful,
and humble then so; but she beseeches her fellow Spouse, that he will
vouchsafe to give her such a Kiss. Osculetur me, Cant. 1.1. Bern. ser. 52. ex
paruis.
osculo oris sui. As if he had said (as S. Bernard speaks) I cannot by any
strength of mine own, arrive to this Love, and to this Union, and to so high
Contemplation, if he vouchsafe not to give it. It is he, who by his goodness and
most gracious liberality, must sublyme us, to this Kiss of his mouth, to this
most high Prayer, and contemplation, if he be pleased, that we may have it.
This is not any such thing, as that we may presume to teach it, nor wherein we
may, or ought to undertake.

CHAP. V. How the holy Scripture does declare to us, these two Kinds of Prayer.
THESE two Kinds of Prayer, whereof we have spoken, the Holy Ghost does
admirably declare, in the 39. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus. Ecclesiast. 39.6.
He says there, of the Wisema^, which the Church interprets by the word
Just: Cor suum tradet ad vigilandum, diluculo ad Dominum qui fecit illum, and
in conspectu Altissimi deprecabitur. He first places ordinary Prayer, by
saying that a man rises early in the morning, which is a time much celebrated
in Holy Scripture, as being fit for Prayer. Mane astabo tibi. Praeueni in
maturitate, and clamaui. Psa. 5.5. Psa. 118.147.148. Psa. ^2.^.
Praeuenerunt oculi mei ad te diluculo, vt meditarer eloquia tua. Ad te de luce
vigilo. He says, ad vigilandum; because he goes to be attentive, and
watchful; not to sleep, or to make a kind of a pillow of his Prayer. Cor suum
tradet; He delivers his heart up to Prayer; He is not there, with his body
alone, having sent his heart away, about other business, which the Saints do
call, Cordis somnolentia. A drowsy and dull heart, is a great impediment to
Prayer; for it diminishes that reverence, which is necessary for him, who
treats with God.

Now what is that which causes this reverence, in the just person? Ad Dominum,
qui fecit illum, and in conspectu Altissimi deprecabitur. To consider, that I
am in the presence of God, and that I go to treat with that sublyme Majesty;
this makes me remain in Prayer, with attention and reverence. Let us now
observe, what Prayer it is, which he makes. Aperiet os suum in oratione, and
pro delictis suis deprecabitur. He will open his mouth in Prayer, and will
begin, desiring God to pardon his sins; and with being penitent, and
confounded for them. This is that Prayer, which we, for our parts, are to make;
To bewail out miseryes and sins, and to beg Gods mercy, and pardon for them.
We must not content our selves to say, I made a general Confession of my life,
at the beginning of my conversion, and then I entertained my self some days,
in bewailing and repenting my self of my sins: For no reason will permit,
that we should forget our sins, though we have confessed them; but we must
still procure to carry them before our eyes, according to that of the Prophet,
Et peccatum meum contra me est semper: and my sin is ever before me. Psa.
51.4.


S. Bernard, upon these words, Lectulus noster floridus, Bernard ser. 46.
super Cant. ^^.15.
says very well. Your bed, which is your heart, is still offensive, and of ill
savor; for you have not yet taken utterly away, the ill smell of those vices,
and vnmortifyed affections, which you brought from the world. And will you then
presume, to inuit the Spouse, to repose in it? Note.
And dare you treat of other higher exercises of Love, and union with Almighty
God, Psa. 6.7.
as if you were already perfect? Deal first, in clearing, and washing well
your bed with tears; Lauabo per singulos noctes lectum meam, lachrymis meis
stratum meum rigabo; And then be dilligent, in adorning that bed of yours, with
the flowers of virtues, and so you may induce the Spouse to come to it, as the
Spouse in the Canticles, invited hers. Deal first about the Kiss of his
feet, by humbling your self, and by much lamenting your sins; and then
about a Kiss of his hands, which is, by offering good works to God, and by
procuring to receive from his holy hands, all true and solid virtue. And as
for that third Kiss of his mouth, which is that most high Union, leave that
for such time, as when our Lord shall vouchsafe to raise you to it.

It is related of a very spiritual Father, that he remained twenty years, in
the practice, Doctor Arac^.
and exercises of the Purgative way; but we do instantly grow weary, and will be
rising up in all have, to that Kiss of the mouth, and to the Exercises of the
Love of God. A body had need of a deep foundation, for the raising of so high a
building. And moreover, here is, in the Exercises of the Purgative way (besides
many other helps and benefits, whereof we shall speak afterward) this one, of
being a great remedy, and a medicine very preservative, Tract. 8. c. 21. and p.
2. Tract. 7. c. 4.
against falling into sin. For he who goes continually in actual
detestation of him, and in being wounded and confounded, for having offended
Almighty God, in time past; will be very far, from committing new sins in the
present time. And on the contrary part, the Saints have observed, and delivered
unto us, Note.
that the cause why some have fallen, who seemed to have been very spiritual,
and men of Prayer, and peradventure were so indeed, has been for want of this
Exercise: and because they gave themselves in such sort, to others, and to
certain sweet and gustfull considerations, that they forgot the Exercise of
the knowledge of themselves, and the consideration of their sins, and so they
came to be to secure, and not to be so wary, and timorous, as they ought; and
by these degres, they came to fall. Because they forgot so soon, their own
baseness, they fell from that height, where they conceived themselves to be.
It will therefore be fit for us, that our Prayer be employed for long time, in
the bewayling of our sins, as the Wiseman says; Luc. 14.10.
till our Lord reach us forth his hand, and say to us, Amice, ascend superius.

Let us now cast an eye, to see what kind of thing, that high, and most
excellent Prayer is, which our Lord does give, when he is pleased. The Wiseman
says presently, Eccl. 39.8.
Si enim magnus Dominus voluerit, spiritu intelligentiae replebit illum. If he
will (for this is no right of inheritance, but a grace which is merely
gracious, and of great liberality) thou shall be sometimes in Prayer, and it
will happen to thee, to have a beam come from heaven, and a flash of lightning,
whereby thou art showed the way to understand things truly; and thou do grow
to prize, and value that which before thou did not understand. This is the
gift of Prayer. How often had you passed such, or such a Truth, and never
reflected upon it, as then you do. The holy Scripture calls it, a Spirit of
Intelligence, because it seems to consist, but of one single, and simple
apprehension; so quiet, and settled is a man, with such a light as this. It
happens to one here, as when he chau^ceth upon some exquisite, and curious
Picture, to be looking upon it long together, without stirring so much as an
eye, and without any discourse of mind; but with a guste, with a suspension,
and with a great admiration, and the eye is never satisfied with beholding it.
Of this sort is this kind of Prayer, and this high sublime Contemplation. Or,
to say better, this Conte^plation, has somewhat of the manner of that, which
the glorious souls enjoy in heaven, by the vision of God.

The felicity of glorious souls, consists in the Vision and Contemplation of
God; and in heaven we shall be all absorpt, and ouerflowed, by seeing, and loving
God, for all eternity, with one simple Vision of that Majesty, enjoying his
presence, and his glory without use of discourse, and without being ever weary
of beholding him. Nay for ever, that Song of ours, and that divine Manna, will
be new unto us; and still we shall be taken, as it were, with new admiration. In
this very manner, is that high and perfect Prayer, which is called
Contemplation, when our Lord is pleased to bestow it. For the man is never
satisfied with beholding and contemplating God, and without any discourse or
weariness, but only with one simple sight.

The Scripture says, Replebit illum, Apoc. 14.3.
because this grace is so copious, and superabundant, that it ouerflowes, and
cannot be comprehended, in such a small vessel. And it adds instantly, Note.
that which follows upon this, Et ipse tanquam imbres, mittet eloquia
sapientiae suae; and in oratione confitebitur Domino. From hence grow
instantly, those Colloquiums will God. This is the proper time, for treating
with his divine Majesty, when the soul is moved, and instructed, and sublymed,
by that celestial light, and wisdom. And so B. Fa. Ignatius says, P. N.
Ignatius lib. Exercit. spirit. in repetit. 1. and. 2 Exercit. primae ^ebdom^dae.
that this is the time, when the Colloquiums are best made, Occurrente nobis
spirituali motu, ad Colloquia veniamus. Let that word be well noted. When first
we have helped our selves, by the discourse of the powers of our mind, in
Meditation, and consideration of the mystery; and when that Meditation, is
grown already to have inflamed our heart; and when we find our selves thoroughly
moved to it; then is the time of Colloquium, and of familiar treaty with
Almighty God, and of our suits, and negotiatio^s with him. For the Prayer which
springs from that heart, which already is touched by Almighty God, is the
Prayer which he hears; and which finds a good dispatch, at the hands of his
majesty. For as S. Augustine says, When God moves a man to ask any thing of
him, it is an evident sign, that he means to grant that which is asked. This
is that most excellent Prayer, which God gives to whom he will. Si enim
Dominus magnus veluerit, Aug. l* de verbis Dom. ser. 5. and 29.
spiritu intelligentiae replebit illum. If our Lord, who is great, and
powerful, will; we may easily use this high, and aduantagious kind of Prayer.

But if our Lord will not be pleased, Note.
to raise us up to so high Prayer as this, we must not (says S. Bernard)
afflict our selves, or be dismayed; Bern. ser. 46. super Cant.
but we must be well contented to live in the exercise of virtue, and with the
happiness of being conserved by our Lord, in his friendship, and grace; and in
that he suffer us not, to fall into sin. Vtinam detur mihi pax, bonitas,
gaudium in spiritu Sancto; misereri in hilaritate; tribuere in simplicitate;
gaudere cum gaudentibus; flere cum stentibus, and his contentus ero. I would to
God, our Lord were pleased to give me peace, goodness, joy in the holy Ghost;
mercy, simplicity, and charity with my neighbors, for with this would I
content my self. Caetera sanctis Apostolis, virisque Apostolicis derelinquo.
Ps. 103.18.
Those other high Contemplations, I leave to the Apostles and Apostolical men:
Montes excelsi ceruis, petra refugium herinacijs. Those high mountains of
contemplatio^, let them be for such as do, 1. Cor. 10.4.
with the swiftness of Hearts and Roes, run at full speed to perfection; I,
who am no better then a mere hedg-hog, full of faults and sins, will betake
my self to the holes, and concauities of that Rock, which is Christ our Lord;
to hide my self in his wounds, and to wash away my faults, and sins, with
the blood which flows out from thence; and this shall be my kind of Prayer.

But now, if the glorious S. Bernard content himself with the only exercise of
virtue, and with grief and contrition for sin, and do leave this other most
excellent Prayer for Apostolical me^, and for those great Saints, to whom our
Lord is pleased to communicate the same; it will be agreeable to all reason, that
we also be content therewith; and that this be our exercise in Prayer, to be
wounded with grief, and confounded with the shame of our sins; and to attend
to the mortification of our passions; and to the rooting up of vice, and
vicious inclinations; and to overcome all repugnances, and difficultyes, which
may offer themselves to us, as impediments in the way of virtue. And as for
that other most excellent, and most aduantagious kind of Prayer, let us leave
it, till such time as our Lord may be pleased to call, and raise us to it.

Yea, and also even then, when we conceive our selves to be called to it, we
had need to very cautelous, Note.
and well advised; for in this there has been much abuse, and error.
Sometimes a man will think that God does call him to this Prayer, by, Blosius
in speculo spirit. cap. 11.
I know not what kind of delight, and sweetness, or facility, which he finds in
the exercise of the love of God; whereas indeed, God does not call him to it;
but it is the man himself, who mounts, and will needs intrude himself,
because the devil deceaues, and blindes him, to the end that he may leave the
desire of obtaining that, whereof he has most need, and so, upon the whole
matter, he may do nothing, and neither profit in the one, nor other kind. There
is a great master of spirit, who says thus very well. As a Man would show
himself to be of little wisdom, if he, whom the King had commanded to
assist and serve him at his table, should presumptuously sit down at the same
table, without the commaundment, or so much as leave of the King; so does he
very ill, and indiscreetly, who delivers himself all over, to the sweet and
delightful rest of Contemplation, not being evidently called to the same, by
God himself. And S. Bonauenture, does herein give an excellent good advice,
and says: Bonauent. de processu religionis. c. 20.
Let a man exercise himself in that which is profitable and secure; which is,
in extirpating of vices, and ill dispositions, and in acquiring true and solid
virtue. For this is a very plain and safe way, wherein there can be no deceit;
but so much the more, as one shall endeavor to perfect himself in
mortification, humiliation, and resignation, so much the more shall he please
God, and deserve more in his sight. And as for these other exquisite and
extraordinary ways, there are (says S. Bonauenture) may errors committed,
and many illusions of the devil embraced by occasion thereof. For, many times,
one thinks, that, to be of God, which is not of God; and that, to be some great
matter, which is nothing; and therefore these latter, are to be examined by
those former; and not those, by these. This is the general doctrine of the
Saints, as shortly we shall see.

CHAP. VI. In which the same doctrine, is more declared and confirmed.
FOR the better declaration, and confirmation of this Doctrine, Greg. li. 7.
mor. c. 27. Bern. ser. 46. supra Cant. Isidor. li. 3. ca. 15.
the Saints, and Masters of spiritual life do here observe, That for the
obtaining of this Prayer, and high Contemplation, whereof we have spoken, there
is need of great mortification of our passions; and that a man be very well
grounded in the mortal virtues; S. Tho. q. 184. art. 3. and Caiet. in Geu.
32.30.
and that he exercise himself long in them; and if not, they say it is in
vain, for a man to pretend to enter into Contemplation, and to make profession
thereof. Oportet (say they) vt prius sis Jacob luctans, quam Israel Deum videns,
ac dicens, Vidi Deum facie ad faciam. It will first, be necessary, that thou be
a strong, and stout wrastler, and that thou overcome thy passions, and
perverse inclinations if thou desire to arrive to that intimate union, with
Almighty God. Blosius says, that he who pretends to atriue to some very
eminent degree of divine love, Blosius in tabula spirituali. addie. 1.
and yet procures not, with great diligence, to correct and mortify his
vices, and to drive from himself, all inordinate love of creatures, is like a
man, who being laden with lead, and iron, and withal being bound, hand, and
foot, will yet needs clyme up, to some very high tree.

And therefore they advise such as are Masters in matter of spirit, that
before they treat of Contemplation with them whom they instruct, they must
treat of the way, how to mortify all their passions very well; and how to
acquire the habits of Virtue, of Patience, of Humility, of Obedience; and that
they exercise themselves much herein. This they call the Active Life, which
must go before the Contemplative. And for want of this method, many, who would
not walk by these steps, but would needs pervert the order, and clyme up
easily to Contemplation, do find themselves, after many years of Praeyer, to be
very void of virtue, and to be impatient, harsh, and proud; and that if you
touch them a little in this Kind, they are ready, through impatience, to break
our into passionate words, whereby they well discover their imperfection and
immortification.

This is very well declared by our Father General, Euerardus Mercurianus,
Euerardus Mercurianus.
in a letter which he wrote about this subject, in these words: Many who did
more wnat discretion, then abound with true desire of proceeding, in the way of
spirit, having heard that there is another more high exercise of Prayer, of the
love of God, of certain Anagogicall Acts, and of I know not what kind of
Silence; would needs mount up to the Exercise of the unitive way, before their
time; having heard men say, that this Exercise was more heroical and perfect;
and that Vice, is better overcome thereby, and Virtue also obtained more easily,
and more sweetly. And because they rose to this, before their time, they lost
much time; and made no way; and at the end of many years, they found
themselves as quick in their passions, and unchanged in their ill affections;
and as great friends of delight, and ease, as if they had never entered into any
conversation, or communication with almighty God. And they have been as
stiff, in pursuit of their own will, and as hardly have been drawn, to
submit their judgment, when their Superiors were minded to dispose of them,
contrary to their own liking and dictamen, as if it had been the first day.
And the reason of this is, because they would needs fly, before they had wings;
and they would needs find out certain near ways, and would not walk by the
steps which they were to tread. They would not ground themselves first, in
mortification, nor in the practice of virtue; and so it is no marvel, if
without a foundation, they could not raise a good house. They built upon sand,
and so they have failed, when there was most need.

To the end that it may appear, how true, and universal this doctrine is, you
shall understand, that this which here I have delivered, is usually taught by
holy writers, when they speak of three parts, or three kinds of Prayer,
according to those three Ways, which they call Purgative, Illuminatiue, and
Unitive. Which is a doctrine, drawn our of Dionysius the Areopagite; Dionysius
Areopagita. Gregory Nazianzen.
and from him it was taken by S. Gregory Nazianzen. and by all the rest of
them, who have treated of spiritual matters. They say, and they all agree in
this, That before there be any treating of this high, and most complete kind of
Prayer, which carries correspondence with the Unitive Way, we are ever to
handle that, which belongs to the Purgative, and Illuminatiue Way. It is
necessary for us first, to exercise our selves in grief, and repentance for
our sins; and in rooting up our vices, and ill affections; and in acquiring
of true Virtues, by imitating Christ our Lord, in whom they shine. If we should
pass forward, without this, we should go on, without a ground, and so at last,
we should fail, like him who would needs pass up to the highest Class in
learning, without having grounded himself in the lowest; or who would clyme as
high as the last step of the ladder, without touching upon the first.

CHAP. VII. Of the ordinary Kind of Mental Prayer.
LAYING aside, that particular, and extraordinary Kind of Prayer, since we
cannot teach it, nor declare what it is, nor in what manner it grows, neither
is it in our power to compass it; nor does God command us to attain it; nor
shall we yield any account to him, for the want thereof: we will now fall to
treat of that ordinary kind of Mental Prayer, which may, in some sort, be
taught, and obtained by endeavor, and advise, being first assisted therein, by
the grace of our Lord.

Amongst other favors, and benefits which our Lord has done to the Society,
this has been a very great one, that he has given us, the kind of Prayer,
which we are to hold, approved by the Sea Apostolic, in that book of the
Spiritual Exercises, Libro de los Exercities espirituales de N. B. P. Ignatio
approbado.
composed by our B. F. Ignatius, as appears by that Breue, which is placed in
the beginning of the said book. Wherein Pope Paul the third (after he had
caused them to be examined, with great exactness) does approve and confirm
them; declaring them to be very profitable, and useful; and he much exhorts
all faithful Christians to exercise themselves therein.

Our Lord God, did communicate this Kind of Prayer to our B. Father, and he
communicated the same to us, who are of the same Order, which our Lord had
communicated to him. And so we are, to have great confidence in God, that by
this way and means, which he has found out for us, he will help us, and do us
favor; since herby, he gained our B. Father, and his companions; and since
that time, many others. And there, did our Lord communicate, the way and trace
of the Society, to our B. Father, as himself said; and we are not to seek out
other ways of Prayer, which are extraordinary; but to procure to mould our
selves, according to that form, which we have, from him, like unto his true,
and lawful Children.

In this Exercise of the three Powers, Note.
which is the first of the Exercise; our B. Father does teach the manner, which
is to be held in Prayer, throughout all the rest of the Exercises. And it is,
that whatsoever point we shall take in hand, we must go exercising the three
powers of our soul, the Memory, the Understanding, and the Will. The memory,
is first to place before the eyes of our understanding, that point, or mystery,
upon which we mean to pray. Then we enter with our understanding, discoursing,
meditating, and considering those things, which may help us most, toward the
moving of our Will; and then lastly the affections of the same Will, must
follow. Now this third, is the principal thing, whereupon we are to stay. For
this, is the end of the Meditation, and the Fruit, which must be drawn, out
of all those considerations, and discourses of the Understanding. All I this
say must be ordained, to move the Will, to a desire of that which is good, and
a detestation of that which is bad. And therefore, is the name of the three
Powers, given to this first Exercise, because it is the first, wherein this
manner of Prayer is taught; for otherwise, these three Powers of the soul, are
to be employed in all the other Exercises following, as well as in this.

This kind of Prayer, which here our B. Father teaches, and which the Society
uses, is not subject to any singularity, nor has it any thing in it, which
may carry any proportion to illusions, as some others have. But it is a Kind,
which is very plain, and much used by the ancient Fathers; and very conform
to man's nature, which is discursiue, and rational, and which gouernes it self
by reason; and is persuaded, convinced, and subdued by it; and consequently it
is most easy, most fruitful, and most safe. So that we are not to remain in
our Prayer, like persons who had given over our selves; or as if we were
extraordinarily illuminated, without doing any thing on our part, for this
would be a great error and abuse: But we are to call upon God, by means of
the Exercise of our powers, and we are gently, to cooperate with him; because
God is pleased, to require the cooperation of his creatures; and this is that,
which our B. Father teaches us, in his book of the spiritual Exercises.

Those other kinds of Prayer, which take away all discourse, and which use
certain negations, with certain silences, and are taken out of Mystical
Theology, are not usually to be taught, no nor so much as to be sought, Cap. 4.
and 8.
as was said before. And new beginners who have not proceeded far, in the
knowledge of their Passions, and in the practice of Virtue, being directed into
these particular ways, are made subject to illusions, and deceytes. And when
they think they have gained much upon themselves, they find by experience,
that all their passions remain entire, which by means of that sweet bayte,
and guste of Prayer, lay a while, as if they had been asleep, but afterward
they awake, with much danger to the owners. Besides, that by these particular,
and singular kinds of Prayer, there is created in men, a kind of stiffnes, and
closnes to their own Judgment, which is a great disposition, toward a man's
being deceived. And therefore our B. F. Ignatius, did apprehend it much; and he
said, that ordinarily, such persons have a touch of this.

I say therefore, that the first thing which we are to do in Prayer, in any
Point which we shall take in hand, must be to place, before our memory, that
point, or mystery, upon which we mean to make our Prayer; then we must enter
into Meditation, by discoursing with the Understanding, upon the
particularityes of that mystery, and then come in, the affects of the Will. So
that the Memory first propounds, and then instantly enters Discourse, and
Meditation of the Understanding; for this is the ground, from whence all those
acts and Exercises, are to flow, which we produce in Prayer; and in the virtue
and strength of this, all the rest is performed.

Now the reason of this is clear, in good Philosophy. For our Will is a blind
kind of Power, which cannot stir a foot, unless it be guided by the
Understanding. Nihil volitum, Note.
nisi praecognitum. This is a common maxim of the Philosophers, The Will
cannot desire that thing, which has not already passed by the Understanding;
which is as the Page with a torch in his hand, who goes before, to give light
to the Will, and guides it, and discovers to it, what it is to love, or what
to hate. And so S. Augustine says, Inuisa diligi posse, incognita nequaquam.
Aug. li. 10. de Tri. c. 1. Greg. ho. 36. super Euangel.
And S. Gregory says: Nemo potest diligere, quod prorsus ignorant. Well may we
love the thing we have not seen, but that whereof we have no Knowledge, we
cannot love; For the object of our Will, is some Good apprehended, or
understood. For therefore, do we like, or love any thing, because we apprehe^d
it as good, and worthy to be loved; and on the other side, we do therefore
abhor, and fly from any thing, as judging and apprehending it to be ill, and
worthy to be abhorred. And so, when we desire, that any man should change his
will, and purpose, we persuade him with reason, and we procure to convince his
Understanding, that the thing which he desires, is not convenient, nor good;
and that the other thing is better, and more convenient; that so he may forsake
the one, and embrace the other. So that the act, and discourse of the
Understanding, is the foundation and ground, of those other acts, and
Exercises, which we make in Prayer; and therefore is Meditation so necessary.
Which point we will declare yet further, in the Chapters following.

CHAP. VIII. Of the necessity of Meditation.
Hugo de Sancto Vict. tra. de laud orationis.
HVGO of S. Victor says, that Prayer cannot be perfect, if Meditation do not
either go before it, or with it. And this is also the doctrine of S. Augustine,
who says, That Prayer without Meditation, is but a tepide kind of thing. This
they prove very well; for if a man do not exercise himself in knowing,
Augustine.
and considering his misery, and weakness, he will go in error, and will not
be able to ask in Prayer, that which is fittest for him; and when he asks,
it will not be with such fervor, as were convenient. There are many, who, by
reason that they know not themselves, and consider not their faults, do go on,
in the wrong way, and do presume of themselves in certain things, which they
would not do, if they knew themselves; and so they treat in their Prayer,
about certain things, which are very different from those, whereof they have
most need. If therefore you will know how to pray, and to beg of God, what is
sit for you, see you exercise your selves, in the consideration of your own
faults, and frailtyes. And by this means you shall know what to ask; and by
understanding, and considering your great necessity, you will ask it with
fervor, and as you ought, as poor needy beggars use to do, who well know, and
feel their necessity and misery.

S. Bernard, Bern. ser. 1. de sancto Andrea.
(treating thus, that we are not to go flying, but walking toward perfection,
Nemo repent fit summus; ascendendonon volando, apprehenditur summitas scalae,)
says, That we walking, and rising toward perfection, are to be upon these two
feet, Meditation and Prayer. Ascendamus igitur, velut duobus quibusdam
pedibus, Meditatione and Oratione; Meditatio siquidem docet, quid desit;
Oration, ne desit, obtinet. For meditation points us to what we want, and Prayer
preuailes to obtain it; Illa viam estendit, ista deducit. Meditation shows us
the way, and Prayer guides us in it. Meditatione denique, agnoscimus imminentia
nobis pericula, oratione euadimus. Finally, by meditation we know the dangers
which threaten us, and by Prayer we escape and free our selves. From hence it
is, that S. Augustine says, Augustine.
that Meditation is the beginning of all good. Intellectus cogitabundus, est
principium omnis boni. For he who considers how good God is in himself; Note.
and how good and merciful he has been to us; how much he has loved us; how
much he has done, and how much he has suffered for us; will quickly enkindle
himself, in the love of so good a Lord. And he that considers well, his own
faults, and miseries, will soon grow humble, and hold himself, in small
account. And he that considers, how ill he has served God, and how grieously
he has offended him; will esteem himself worthy of the greatest punishment.
And thus, by Meditation, we grow to enrich our souls, with all virtue.

For this cause, does the holy Scripture recommend Meditation so much to us.
Blessed is the man, who meditates day and night, Psa. 1.3.
in the law of our Lord, says the Prophet David. Et erit tanquam lignum, quod
plantatum est secus decursus aquarum, quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo
Such a man as this, is like a tree, planted near to the streams of water,
which will give much fruit. Psa. 118.2.
Beati qui sorutantur testimonia eius, in toto cord exquirunt eum. These are
the men, who seek God with their whole heart; and this is that, which makes
them seek him. And this is also that, which the Prophet begged of God,
toward the keeping of his law, Da mihi intellectu^ and scrutabor legem tuam,
Psa. 118.34.
and custodiam illam in t^to cord moo. And on the contrary side, he says.
Psa. 118.92.
Nisi quod lex tua meditatio mea est, tunc forte perijssem in humilitate mea.
If it had not been, that my usual meditation was upon the law, perhaps I had
perished in my humility; Hierome.
that is in my difficulties, as S. Hierome shows. And so one of the greatest
praises, which the Saints ascribe to Meditation, and Consideration, or rather
the greatest of them all, is this, That it is a great helper on to all virtue.
Soror lectionis, nutrix oration nis, directrix operis, omniumque pariter
perfectio, Gerson.
and consummatrix existens.

By one contrary, a man comes to know the other, best. One of the principal
causes, of all those mischiefs which are in the world, is want of
Consideration, according to that of the Propher Ieremias, Iere. 12.11.
Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia nullus est qui recogitat cord. The
cause why the whole earth is in such spiritual desolation, and that there are
in it, so many sins, is because there is scarce any one, who enters into
himself, and makes it his business to meditate, and reuolue the mysteries of
God, in his heart. For who is he that would presume to commit a mortal him, if
he considered that God died for sin? And that it is so great an evil, as
that it was necessary that God, should become man, to the end, that he might
satisfy for it, according to the rigor of Justice? Who would presume to sin,
if he considered that for one mortal sin, God punishes a man with
Hellfire, and that for ever? If men would put themselves to think, Mat. 25.41
and to ponder well that word, Discedite a me, maledicti, in ignem aeternum,
that same Eternity, that forever, without all end; and that as long as God
shall be God, he is to burn in the fire of Hell, what man is that, who in
exchange of a momentary delighte, would make choice to embrace such eternal
torment?

S. Thomas of Aquine, was wont to say, In hist. Ordin. S. Dominici. p. 1. li.
3. c. 37.
that it was past his understanding, how it was possible, that a man living in
mortal sin, could tell how to laugh, or take any contentment. And he had
great reason to say so. For that sinner, knows for certain, both that if he
should then die, Note.
he should go instantly, and for ever remain in Hell; and withal, that he
has not any security of continuing in his life, Damocles apud Cicer. Tusc. 5.
one moment. There was one who had entertained himself in banquets, and in
choice music, and in all kind of ioylity; but because a naked sword was
placed over his head, hanging up, but by a single thread, he grew all into
trembling for fear, of when the sword might fall; and nothing could give him
guste. What then shall become of him, who is threatened, not only with
temporal, but eternal death, which depends upon a little-little thread of
life? Since a man dies suddenly sometimes, and at an instant; and he goes well
to bed, and the first time he awakes, is to see himself in the flames of hell.

A good servant of God, was wont to say to this purpose, That in his opinion,
there were to be but two kinds of prisons, in any Christian Common wealth.
Note.
The one of the Inquisition, the other for Madmen. For either a man belieues,
that there is a Hell, made for such as sin, or no. If he believe not this, let
him be carried to the Inquisition, for an Heretic. If he believe it, and yet
nevertheless will remain in mortal sin; let him be carried to the house of
Madmen; for what greater madness can there be, then this?

There is no doubt, but that if seriously men considered this, it would be a
strong bridle to restrain them from sin. And for the same reason, does the
devil procure, with so much diligence, to hinder us from this Consideration,
and Meditation. The first thing that the Philistines did to Sampson, Iud. 16.21.
when they had taken him, was to pluck out his eyes; and so, this is the first
thing which the devil procures to do, to a sinner. Since he cannot take his
Faith from him, he procures that he may believe, as if he believed not. Vt
videntes non videant, Matt. 13.13.
and audientes non audiant, neque intelligant. He procures that a man may not
consider that, which he belieues, nor reflect upon it, any more then if he
believed it not. He binds up his eyes; which comes to the same reckoning for
him, as if he were blind. For as it serves to no purpose for a man to open his
eyes when he is in the dark, because he shall be able to see nothing; so (as S.
Augustine says) it will profit thee nothing, to be in the light, Aug. in Psalm.
25. prope finem.
if thine eyes be shut; for such a one will see as little, as that other. For
this it is, that Meditation, and Mental Prayer, is of so much importance,
because it opens our eyes.

CHAP. IX. Of the great Benefit and Profit, which we are to draw from
Meditation; and how we are to use it, to the end to profit by it.
IT will be of great profit to us, that in time of Prayer, we exercise our
selves, in the affects and desires of our Will, of which part we shall shortly
treat. But it is very needful withal, that these affects and desires, go very
well grounded in reason, and in truth; because man is a rational creature, and
will be guided by reason, and by the way of Understanding. And therefore, Note.
one of the principal things, to which we must ordain, and address
Meditation, must be, that we may remain very soundly vnbeguiled, and fully
possessed, with the knowledge of those things, which are really true; and
perfectly convinced, and resolved, concerning what is best for us. We use to
say, when one is reduced to lead an orderly and good life, that he is
vnbeguiled. This vnbeguiling, is therefore to be one of the principal fruits,
which we must procure to gather from Prayer. And this point, must be much
noted, because it is of very great importance, in this matter. And especially,
in the beginning of a spiritual life, it is necessary that a man exercise
himself much in this; to the end that he may go on, well grounded, and
possessed, with a firm belief of things, which really are true.

To the end, that we may better draw this benefit from Meditation, and that it
may be of much profit to us, it will be necessary that it be not superficially,
nor cursorily made; nor yet after a dull, and dead fashion; but with life, and
with much attention, and rest of mind. You are to Meditate, and consider at
large, and with great quietness, the shortness and frailty of this life; the
vanity of the things of this world; and how the arrival of death, makes an end
of them all; that so you may despise all worldly things, and place your whole
heart, upon that which is to last for ever. You are to consider, and ponder
often, what a vain, and idle thing, the estimation and opinion of men is,
which makes such fierce war upon us. For it neither gives any thing to you,
nor takes any thing from you, nor can it make you, a whit better, or worse.
Grow you thus to despise it, and make no reckoning at all thereof. And the same,
is to be done in the rest. And by this means, a man goes Vnbeguiling himself,
by little and little; and to be convinced, and resolved upon that which is for
his good; and he grows thus to become a spiritual man. Thren. 3.2^.
Sedebit solitarius, and tacebit; quia leuauit se super se. He goes lifting
himself above himself; and is procuring to have a heart truly generous, which
despises all things of this world; and he grows to say with S. Paul, Propter
quem, omnia detrimentum feci, and arbitror vt stercora, vt Christum
lucrifaciam. Phil. 3.^^.
That which before I held for gain, I now hold for loss; yea and even for
dung, that I may gain Christ our Lord.

There is a great deal of difference between Meditating and Meditating, and
between knowing and knowing. Note.
For the wise man, knows a thing after one fashion; and the simple and
ignorant man, after another. The wise man knows it, as it is indeed; but the
simple man knows only the exterior, and appearance thereof. If an ignorant
person find a precious stone, he likes it for the splendour, and exterior beauty
thereof, and for nothing else, because he knows not the value of it. But the
wise Lapidary, when he meets with such a-one, he desires it much; not only
for the splendour, and exterior beauty, but because he well understands the
value, and virtue thereof. Now this is the very difference, between him who
knows how to Meditate, and consider spiritual things, and divine mysteries;
and him who knows it not. For this later kind of man, does but look upon
things superficially, and as it were upon the skin; and although he like them
well, for the luster and splendour, which he discerns there, yet he is not
much taken, with a true desire thereof. Whereas he who knows how to Meditate,
and ponder those things well, grows vnbeguiled, and well resolved. For knowing
the true value of the treasure which is hidden, and of this precious pearl,
which at the last, he has found; he despises all the rest, in comparison
thereof. Abijt, Matt. 13.46.
and vendidit omnia, quae habuit, and emit eam.

This difference, does Christ our Lord declare to us, in the holy Gospel, in
the history of that woman, who was subject to a bloody flux. The holy
Evangelists do relate, Matt. 9.20.
how the Redemer of the world, going to reuine, and recover that Daughter of
the Prince of the Sinagogue, there went so much people, as to make a press
about him. Luc. 8.43.
A certain woman saw him pass, who had been subject to a bloody flux
twelve years, and she had wasted all her goods upon Physicians, and gotten no
health, in exchange, but rather grew worse and worse. And with a desire which
she had, to recover health, she brake through the midst of that people, and
with great confidence, and faith, said within herself; Si tetigero tantum
vestimentum eius, salua ero. If I can but touch the skirt of his garment, I am
safe. She approaches, she touches, and instantly that spring of blood was
dried up. Christ our Lord, looks back, and says, Quis me tetigit? Who is
that, which has touched me? S. Peter, and the rest of the disciples, answered;
Praeceptor, turbae te comprimunt, and affligunt, and dicis, quis me tetigit?
Master the troops press upon you, and do you say, who has touched me?
Tetigit me aliquis, nam and ego noui, virtutem de me exijsse. I mean not so,
says Christ our Lord; but I mean, that some body has touched me, not after
the fashion of other folks, but in a more particular manner; For I find that
Virtue is gone out of me.

Yea, that indeed was the business; this was indeed, to touch Christ our Lord;
and this is that, of which he asked. For as for the other kind of touching by
chance, and in that vulgar manner, there is no great account to be made thereof.
Here then consists, all the substance of the matter, in touching Christ our
Lord, and his holy mysteries, in such sort, as that we may feel the fruit,
and virtue of it, in our selves. And for this purpose, it imports much, that
we go to our Meditation with attention; and that we ruminate, and take things
in sunder, at good leisure. The meat with is not chewed, is neither bitter nor
sweet, and therefore the sick man swallows the Pills down whole, to the end
that they may not be offensive to him. And for the self same-reason, does not
sin, nor death, nor the last Judgment, nor the eternal torments of Hell,
seem bitter in the mouth of a sinner, because he cheweth not these things;
but he swallows them whole, and takes them upon trust, and in gross, as they
come. And for the self same reason also, does the mystery of the incarnation,
passion, and resurrection of Christ our Lord, and the rest of the benefits of
Almighty God, give to many, little delight, or gust; because they do not chew,
nor ruminate, nor ponder these things as they ought. Do you but show, and
break this grain of mustard seed, and pepper, and you shall quickly see, how
it will bite, and fetch the tears from your eyes.

CHAP. X. Of other benefits, and profits which there are, in the use of
Meditation.
ANOTHER great benefit and profit there is, S. Tho. 2.^ q. 82. art. ^.
as S. Thomas says, in Meditation; and it is, that true Devotion springs from
thence; a thing so important in spiritual life, and so much desired by all
them who walk that way. Devotion is no other thing, but a Promptitude and
readiness of will, toward all that, which is good. And therefore a devout
man is he, who is ready and disposed for all goodness. And this is the
general doctrine of the Saints. S. Thomas says moreover, that there are two
causes of this Devotion, the one is extrinsecall which is God, and that is the
principal. The other is intrinsecall on our part, which is Meditation. For
this prompt and ready will, toward the actions of virtue, does grow from the
consideration, and Meditation of the Understanding; and this is that, which
next after the grace of God, may be truly said to kindle and blow the fire in
our heart.

So that true Devotion and fervor of spirit, Note.
does not consiste in the sweetness and sensible guste, whereof some have
experience, and sense in Prayer; but in having a will, which is prompte and
ready pressed, toward all those things which concern the service of Almighty
God. And this is the devotion, which continues and lasts, whilst the other
comes quickly to an end. For that, does but consist of certain affects of
sensible devotion, which rise from a quick desire, which one has, of any
thing which is desirable, and amiable. And many times it proceeds from a man's
natural complexio^, in that he has a sweet disposition, and a tender heart,
which is quickly moved toward softness, and tears; and when this kind of
devotion is once dropped down, the good purposes, are as soon dried up. This
is but a tender kind of love, which is grounded in gustes, and consolations;
and as long as that guste, and devotion lasts, the man will be very diligent, and
punctual; and he will be a friend of silence, and recolection. But when that
devotion is ended, there is an end of all. Whereas they, who are so grounded in
Truth by means of Meditation and consideration; and are convinced, and
disabused by solid reason; these are the men, who continue and persevere in
virtue: and although those gustes and consolations fail them, yet they are
still the same, that they were before: because the same cause and reason lasts,
which at the first induced, and moved them to it.

This is a masculine, and strong kind of love, and by this Touch of trial, the
true servants of God are seen: and not in those gusts, and consolations. They
are wont to say, that our passions are like certain little dogs, which stand
barking at us; and in the time of spiritual consolation, they have their
mouths muzled up. And make account that God does cast certain bits of bread,
before every one of them, and with that, they are quiet, and crave nothing: but
take you away that bread of consolation, and then one of them, will begin to
bark, and the other of them will be as sure to follow, and then is the time to
see, how every one does carry himself. They also compare these gustes, and
consolations, to moveable goods, and chattels, which are soon spent: but
solid virtues, are as freehold, or land of inheritance, which continues and
lasts, and so they are of more price.

From hence grows a Truth, whereof we take experience many times, and it is
worthy of consideration. Note.
We see some persons, who on the one side, have great comforts in their Prayer;
and afterward, in temptations and other occasions of sin, we see them weak,
and fallen. And on the contrary part, we see others, who suffer great dryness
in Prayer, and know not what belongs to any spiritual consolation, or guste;
and yet we find these last, to be strong, when they are tempted, and far from
falling. The cause of this, is that, which we were saying before. That the
former sort of men, did ground themselves in gusts, and inward feelings; but
the latter, laid their foundation upon reason, and were disabused, convinced,
and possessed with the real truth of things; and with that, they last, and
persevere in those things, which formerly they did resolve.

So that one of the means, and that a very good one, which usually we give, to
make men persevere, in those good purposes which they conceive in Prayer, Note.
and to put them in execution, is; That men must procure to conserve in memory,
the motive and reason, which caused that good desire, and purpose in them,
formerly; for that which moved them before, to desire it, will help them
afterward to conserve, and put it in execution. Nay there is more in this,
then what is said. For when a man goes thus vnbeguiling, and co^uincing
himself, in Prayer, although afterward he remember not particulerly the
medium, or reason which moved him then, yet in virtue of his having been
vnbeguiled before, and of the resolution which then he took, being convinced
by truth and reason he continues firm and strong, to resist the temptation
afterward, and to persevere in virtue.

Therefore does Gerson, Gerson p. 2. alphab. 34. litera M. and de sollicitudine
religiosa. p. 41. alpha. 6.37. lit. A.
esteem so much of Meditation. For being consulted about, what exercise might
be more useful, or profitable to a Religious man, who lives recolected in his
Cell, either reading, or vocal Prayer, or some work of the hand, or else to
attend to Meditation; he answered, that (saving the duty which they owe to
Obedience) they were best attend to Meditation. And he gives this reason
thereof; That although by means of Vocal Prayer, or reading of some spiritual
book, a man, for the present, may peradventure find greater profit, and
devotion, then by means of Meditation; yet in giving over to pray vocally, or
laying the book aside, that devotion may quickly be at an end; whereas
Meditation does profit, and dispose men well, for the future. And therefore he
says, That it is fit, that we accustom our selves to Meditation; to the end,
that although the sound of words, and the sight of books may fail us; yet
Meditation may be our book, and so we may not want true devotion.

CHAP. XI. Of the manner, which we are to hold in Prayer, and of the Fruit we
are to gather thence.
CONCALVIT cor meum intra me, Psalm. 38.4.
and in meditatione mea exardescit ignis. In these words, the Prophet David
teaches us, the manner which we are to hold in Prayer, according to the
explication of many Doctors, and Saints, who interpret this place, Hieron.
Ambros. Greg. a. 23 mor. c. 5. interlin. and alij.
of the fire of Charity, and the love of God, and our neighbor; which was
kindled by the Meditation of heavenly things, and did burn in the breast, of
the Royal Prophet. My heart says he, grew into heat, and was all kindled
within me. This is the effect of Prayer. But how got he this heat? How did that
fire come to kindle it self, in his heart? Will you know how? It was by means
of Meditation. Et in meditatione mea exardescit ignis. This is the means, and
the instrument, for the kindling of this fire. So that as S. Cyrill of
Alexandria says, Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
Meditation is as the steel which gives against the flint, to the end that
fire may be produced. By discourse and Meditation of the Understanding, you are
to strike upon the hard steel of your heart; till such time as the love of God
may be kindled in it; and a desire be produced of humility, of mortification,
and the rest of the virtues; and you are not to give over, till you have
kindled, and bred this fire.

Although Meditation be very good, and necessary, yet the whole time of Prayer,
is not to pass away in discourse, and consideration of the Understanding;
neither are we to dwell in that; for this would be rather study, then Prayer.
But all the Meditations and considerations which we are to have, must be taken,
but as a means for the awaking, and kindling these affects, and desires of
virtue, in our heart. For the sanctity and perfection of a Christian life, does
not consist only in good thoughts, nor in the intelligence of holy things, but
in sound, and solid virtue; and especially in the acts, and operations thereof;
S. Tho. 1.2. q. 3. art. ^.
wherein, as S. Thomas says, the last perfection of virtue does consist; and so
we must principally employ our selves, and insist upon the procuring of this,
in our time of Prayer.

This is therefore to be our first principle in this matter. Note.
Yea, and even the Philosopher says (which is alleged by Gerson) Inquirimus
quid sit virtus, Gerson super Magnificat. alphab. 86. litera D.
non vt sciamus, sed vt boni efficiamur. We go inquiring, and searching after
the knowing what virtue is; not to the end that we may be more learned, but
that we may become good, and virtuous. Though the needle be necessary to sow
withal; yet it is not the needle, which sticheth two things together, but the
thread. And so should he be very indiscreet, who would pass the needle in and
out, without thread, for this should be, to labor in vain. And yet this very
thing they do, who in Prayer, attend only to meditating, and understanding, and
little to loving Meditation is to be as the needle, which is to enter first;
but it must be, to the end, that the thread of love, and the affection of our
will, may follow after; whereby he must join, and unite our selves, to Almighty
God.

Our B. F. Ignatius, does put us in mind hereof, after a very particular manner.
After he had placed the Points, which we are to meditate, with some very short
considerations upon them. he then says, these words: And I am to apply all
this to my self, to the end that I may reap some fruit thereby. In this the
Fruit of Prayer does consist, that men may know how to refer, and apply that
which they meditate to themselves; every one, according as he has need. Born.
sermon. 23. super Cantion.
The glorious S. Bernard says very well, that as the Sun does not heat every
one whom it illuminates; so Knowledge, and Meditation (althouh it teach that,
which is to be done) yet does it not move all men, nor breed an affection in
them, to do that which they are taught. One thing it is, to have notice of
great riches, and another to possess them. That which makes men rich, is not
the having notice of riches, but the possessing them. So is it (says he) one
thing to know God and another thing to fear and love him; and the knowing many
things of God, does not make us true Saints, and spiritually rich; but the
loving and searing of God. He brings also another good comparison to this
purpose; That as he who is hungry, shall help himself but a little, by placing
before himself, a large table full of exquisite and choice meats, if he eat
none of them; so he who uses Prayer, shall be little the better for having a
sumptuous, and curious table, set before him, full of excellent, and choice
considerations; if he do not feed thereupon, by applying them to himself, with
his Will.

That we may descend a little more to particulers, Note.
I say, That the thing which we are to draw out of Meditation, and Prayer, is
to be, Holy affections and desires, which are framed first interiorly in the
heart, and afterward are put in practice, in due time. The Blessed S. Ambrose
says, Ambros. in Ps. 128. super illud Et meditabar in praeceptis tuis. Ezech.
1.8.
That action is the end of Meditation. Meditationis praeceptorum caelestium
inten^io, vel finis operatio est. Those holy and Mysterious beasts (which the
Prophet Ezechiel saw) amongst other conditions of theirs, had wings, as he
says, and under them, they had the hands of a man. Et manus hominis, sub
pennis eorum; to give us to understand, that the flying, and discoursing with
the Understanding, must be directed to working. We must therefore setch from
Prayer, affects and desires of humility; despising our selves, and desiring to
be despised by others. Desires of suffering pain, and troubles, for the love
of God; and being glad of such, as at the present, lie upon us. Desires of
poverty of spirit, wishing that the worst things of the house may be for us;
and that something may be wanting to us, even of those which are necessary.
Grief, and contrition for sins; and firm purposes, rather to burst, then to
sin again. Gratitude for benefits received, and true intiere resignatio^
into the hands of God. And finally, a desire to imitate Christ our Lord, and
our Master, in all those virtues, which shine so brightly in his life. To this
must our Meditation be addressed and ordained; and this is the fruit, which we
must draw from thence.

Upon this it follows, Note.
That since we take Meditation, and the discourse of our Understanding for a
means to move our Will to these affections; and that this is the end of this
business; we must so far use Meditation, and the discourse of our
Understanding, as shall be fit for this end, and no further. For the means are
to carry a proportion, and to receive their measure from the end; and so when
we find our Will moved, and mollified with some good affection to any virtue,
as namely to grief for sins, contempt of the world, love of God, desire to
suffer for his sake, or the like, we must presently cut off the thread of the
discourse of the Understanding, as a man would draw a Bridge, from before a
passenger; and we must detayne our selves, and pause upon that affection, and
desire of our Will, till such time as we be satisfied, and till we have drunk
it deeply down, into our souls.

This is a very important advise; P. N. Ignatius lib. Exercitiorum spiritual.
addit. 4.
and our B. Father, does place it in his book of spiritual Exercises, where
he says; That as soon as we have found that devotion, and feeling which we
desire, we are then to pause, and to deteyne our selves therein, without having
anxiety of passing toward any thing else, till we remain fully satisfied.
Just so, as the Garduer, Note.
when he will water a piece of ground, as soon as the water is entered in upon
it, he deteynes the thread of the current, and gives it means to soake, and
imbrue it self in the in tralls of that dry soil; and till that be
sufficiently done, he suffers not the water to pass away. So when the water of
good affections and desires, begins to enter in to the soul, which is as
earth without water, according to that of the Prophet, Psa. 142.0.
Anima mea sicut terra sieve aqua tibi, we are to deteyne the current of the
discourse, and Understanding, and to remay ne, enjoying that motion and
affection of our will, as long as we can; till such time, as our heart may be
bathed, and imbrued therewith, and so we may remain sully satisfied. The B.
Saint John Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
brings another good comparison, to declare this. Have thou seen (says he)
when the little lamb, goes to seek the breast of his da^me? what does it but
stir, and seek, here and there, and now takes the tet, and then leaves it.
But when once the stream of milk comes clear, the lamb is presently at a
pawse, and does enjoy the milk at ease. So is it in the case of Prayer. For
till that dew come from heaven, the man goes discoursing here and there. But
when once that heavenly dew descends, we are presently to pawse, and to enjoy
that delight, and sweetness.

CHAP. XII. Of how great importance it is, to deteyne our selves, in the acts,
and affections of our Will.
IT is of great importance, do teteyne our selves, and to make a stand, in the
acts and affections of the Will. And the Saints, and Masters of spiritual
life, do esteem of it so much, as to say, that in this consists, good and
perfect Prayer; yea and that also, which they call Contemplation; when a man no
longer is seeking incentiues of Prayer, by Meditation, but stands inioying that
love, which he has soght and found; and does repose therein, as in the end of
his inquisition, and desire: saying with the Spouse in the Canticles, Inueni,
quem diligit anima mea; Cant. 3.4.
tenui cum, nec dimittam. I have found him whom my soul loves; I have him,
and I will hold him fast. And this is also that, Cant. 5.2.
which the Spouse says in the same place, Ego dormio, and cor meum vigilat; I
sleep, but my heart is well awake. For in perfect Prayer, the Understanding is
laid, as it were to sleep, because discourse, and speculation being left,
the Will is both watching, and even melting, with the love of her fellow
Spouse. And he, likes this sleep of hers so well, that he commands it to be
nourished in her, and that she may not be awaked, tell she will her self.
Cant. 3.5.
Adiuro vos filiae Jerusalem percapreas, ceruosque camporum, ne suscitetis,
neque euigilare faciatis dilectam, donec ipsa velit. In such sort, that
Meditation, and all those other parts, which they touch of Prayer, be ordained,
and addressed to this Contemplation; and are, as it were, August. de seala
Paredisi.
the ladders, whereby we clyme up to it. So says S. Augustine, in a book,
which he calls the ladder of Paradise: Lectio inquirit, meditatio inuenit,
oration postulat, contemplatio degustat. Reading seeks, Meditation finds,
Prayer desires, but Contemplation enioyes, and gustes, that which was sought,
desired, and found. And he brings that of the Gospel, Matt. 7.7.
Quaerite and iuuenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis. Seek by reading, and
you shall find by meditating; knock by Prayer, and it shall be opened unto you,
by Contemplation. And the Saints observe, and Albertus Magnus does allege it,
Albertus magnus l. de adherendo I^eo ca. 9.
that this is the difference between the Contemplation of Faithful Catholics,
and that of heathen Philosophers; That the Contemplation of the Philosophers
was wholly addressed toward the perfecting of the Understanding, Note.
by the knowledge of such truths as might be known; and so it did end in the
Understanding; for this is the end thereof, to know, and know more, and yet
more, then that. But the Contemplation of Catholics and of Saints (whereof now
we treat) does not rest in the Understanding, but passes on to move, and
rectify, and enkindle, and inflame the Will, with the love of God, according to
that of the Spouse: Cant. 5.^.
Anima mea liquefacta est, vt loquutus est. My soul did even melt, as soon as
my beloved began to speak. And S. Thomas treating of Contemplation, notes
this very well, S. Tho. 2.2. q. 180. art. 7.
and says: That howsoever Contemplation does essentially consist in the
Understanding; yet that the last Perfection thereof, is in Love, and in the
affection of the Will; so that the chief intent, and end of our Contemplation,
is to be the affect of the Will, and the love of God.

In this sort (says S. Augustine) did Christ our Lord teach us to pray, Aug.
lib: de orando D^um ca. 10. qu^^ est Epistola 121. ad Probum. Matt. 6.
when he said in his Gospel, Orantes autem, nolite multum loqui; when ye pray
talk not much. S. Augustine says also: Aliud est sermo multus, aliud
diuturnus affectus; absit ab oratione multa loquutio, sed non desit multa
precatio* One thing it is to speak much, and to discourse, and flourish much
with the Understanding; and another thing it is to deteyne our selves much in
affects of the Will, and in the acts of Love. That which he mentions first,
which is to talk much, we are to procure to decline, and avoid in Prayer. Et
negotium hoc, plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur; and this business of
Prayer (says the Saint,) is not a business of much talk, nor shall we in
Prayer, negotiate so well with Almighty God, by sigures, nor plenty of
discourse, not delicacy of conceits, as with tears, and sighs, and groans, and
profound desires of the heart, according to that of the prophet Ieremias: Neque
taceat pupilla oculi tui. Tren. 2.28. Hieron. in Psa. 50.
Let not the apple of thine eye be silent. S. Hierome, upon these words, asks
the question, how the Prophet could say, That the apple of the eye must not be
silent. Is not the tongue (says he) that which speaks? how then can speech be
used, by the apple of the eye? The Saint answers thus. When we shed tears in
the sight of God, it is then rightly said, that the apple of our eye cries out
to him: for howsoever we speak not a word with our tongue, with our heart we
may cry out to God. So says S. Paul, Ad Gal. 4.6.
Misit Deus spiritum filij sui in corda vestra, clamantem, Abba pater. And in
Exodus God said to Moses, Quid clamas ad me? Exodus 14.15.
Why do thou cry out to me? and yet he spoke not a word, but only, in his
heart he prayed, with so great fervor and efficacy, that God said to him, why
do thou so cry out, before me? Let us also thus cry out to God, in Prayer,
with our eyes (Neque taceat pupilla oculi tui) with tears, with sighs, with
groans, and with the deep desire of our hearts.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein satisfaction is given to their complaints who say, that
they cannot, nor know not how to Meditate, nor discourse with their
Understanding.
HERBY we shall easily answer, to a very common complaint of some, who afflict
themselves with saying, That they know not how to discourse in Prayer because
they meet with no considerations which they can dilate; and that they know not
how to extend the Points, but that instantly the thread is cut off.

There is no cause, why any body should be in pain for this. For (as I have
said already) this business of Prayer, consists more in the affects, and
desires of the Will, then in the discourse, and speculation of the
Understanding. Nay the teachers of spiritual life, do advise here, that we
must take care, that the Meditation of the Understanding, be not too much;
because this uses to give great hinderance to the motion, Note.
and affection of the Will, which ought to be the chief. And especially, when
one deteyneth himself in certain considerations, which are curious and
subtle, the Will is hindered so much the more. The reason hereof is natural.
For it is clear, that in a fountain, which makes but one channel of water,
and has many pipes, which conduct and carry it several ways; how much more
water runs by one of them, so much the less, will run by the other. Now the
power of the Soul is bounded, and limited; and how much more water runs by
the pipe of the Understanding, so much less will run, by that of the Will.

And so we see by experience, that if the soul be in devotion, and
tenderness, and that the Understanding will offer then to range abroad, by any
curiosity and speculation, the heart does instantly grow dry, and the devotion
decays, because all the water is run into the pipe of the Understanding, and
therefore that of the Will remains dry. And so says Gerson, Gerson p. 3. de
monte contempl. alph. 73. c. (...). and sequent.
that it grows from hence, that they who are not so learned, are sometimes,
yea and very often, more devout, and more happy in Prayer, then they who are
learned; because they leake less, toward their Understanding part; not
employing nor distracting themselves in speculations, or curiosityes; but
instantly procuring with plain and clear considerations, to affect and move
the Will. And those humble, and homely reflections do move them more, and work
greatet effects upon their minds, then more high and curious conceytes do,
upon the mind of others. As we see in the the person of that holy Cook, Tract.
^. c. 8.
(of whom I spoke else where) who from the material sire which he used so
much, took occasion to be still thinking of the eternal sire of hell; and
this he did with so great devotion, that he had the gift of tears, in the
midst of all his business.

And this which follows must be much noted. For, so the affect, and desire,
Note.
be very high and spiritual, it matters not a whit, though the conceyt and
consideration, be mean and common. We have expetience enough of this, in holy
Scripture; where the Holy Ghost declares to us very high, and sublime things,
by common, and plain considerations, upon these words, Psalm. 54.7.
Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbae, and volabo, and requiescam? Who will
give me the wings of a Dove, that I may fly up and rest? Ambr. ser. 70.
S. Ambrose asks why the Prophet, desiring to fly up, and reach to the
highest, should desire the wings of a Dove, rather then of some other bird,
since there are other birds who are speedier of the wing, then the Dove? And he
answers, that the Prophet did it, because he deemed the wings of a Dove were
best for one that meant to fly high, toward perfection, and to obtain the
gift of perfect, and high Prayer; that is to say, that harmless, and plain
people of heart, were sitter for it, then these sharp and curious
Understandings, according to that of the Wiseman, Et cum simplicibus
sermocinatio eius. Pro. 31 32.
They are humble and plain people of heart, to whom God loves to communicate
himself.

So that no man is to be troubled, in regard that he is not able to discourse,
nor sinde Considerations, nor dilate the points of his Meditation. Nay rather
they say, and with much reason, that it is better for them, and that their lot
is fallen into fairer and richer ground, to whom Almighty God does stop the
vein of superfluous speculations, and does open that of the affection; to the
end, that with a peaceable and quiet understanding, the will may repose and
rest in God alone, employing all her love, and joy, upon that sovereign Good.
If our Lord do you so great favor, as by the means of one plain and simple
consideration, or with only thinking how God made himself man, Note.
and that he was borne in a stable; and laid in no better then a manger, and
that he lodged himself upon a Cross, for you; to inflame you in the love of
his divine majesty, and in a desire to humble, and mortify your selves for his
sake; and if you can employ the whole hour, and many hours in this; much
better, and more profitable Prayer it is, then if you had made many discourses,
and considerations, which were very curious, and sublyme. For thus you employ,
and deteyne your selves in the best, and most substantial part of Prayer, and
that which is indeed the end and fruit thereof. Whereby the error of some is
easily understood, who when they find not out certain considerations, wherein
they can deteyne themselves long, do not think that they make good Prayer, and
when they meet with store of matter of that kind, they think it is excellent.

In the Cronicles of S. Francis, it is recounted, how the holy man Brother
Giles, said thus to S. Bonauenture, who then was the General of his Order:
Great mercy did God show to you, learned men, and great means did he give you,
wherewith to serve and praise his divine Majesty; but we ignorant and simple
people, who have* no parts of wit or loarning; what can we do, which may be
pleasing to Almighty God? S. Bonauenture answered; If our Lord did no other
favor to man, then that he might be enabled to love him; this alone were
sufficient to oblige him to do God greater service, then all the rest put
togoather. The holy Brother Giles replied thus: And can then, anignorant person
love our Lord Jesus Christ, as well a learned man? Yea (says S. Bonauenture,) a
poor old simple woman, may perhaps love our Lord better, then a great Doctor
of Divinity. The holy brother Giles rose instantly up, with great fervor, and
went into that part of the Garden, which looked toward the Town; and with a
strong voice cried out, O thou poor, thou ignorant, and simple old woman, love
thy Lord Jesus Christ, and perhaps thou shall grow greater in heaven, then
Brother Bonauenture. And he remained rapt in Extasis, as he used to be, without
stirring from that place, in three hours.

CHAP. XIV. Of two directions which will be of much help to us, for the
procuringe to make good Prayer, and to reap much Fruit thereby.
TO the end, that we may make our Prayer well, and gather that Fruit thereby,
which is fit; it will help us much, Note.
if we understand, and go always upon this Ground. That Prayer is not the end,
but the means which we are to take for our profit, and perfection: So that we
must not enter upon Prayer, as meaning to make that our last design. For the
perfection of our souls, does not consist in having great consolation, and
sweetness, and Contemplation; but in obteyning a perfect mortification, and
victory over our selves, and over our passions, and appetites; reducing our
souls (as much as possibly we can) to that happy state of Original Justice,
wherein they were created, when our sense and appetite was wholly subject and
conform to reason, and reason to God. Now we are to take Prayer, for the
means of attaining to this end.

Iron is made soft, between the Anuile and the fire, to the end that they may
work it, and double it, and do with it what they list; and just so it is to be
in Prayer. To the end that we may not find mortification very difficult and
offensive, but that we may be able to break our selves of our own will, and
to be content with trouble, as occasion is offered; we had need come to the
anuile of Prayer, and there with the heat and fire of devotion, and by the
example of Christ our Lord, out heart goes softning it self, that so we may
work, and mould it toward any thing that shall be fit for the greater service,
and glory of God.

This is the duty of Prayer, and this is the Fruit, which we must reap from
thence. And for this purpose it is, that our Lord is wont to give consolation,
and gust in Prayer; not to the end that we may stay there; but that we may fly
on, by the way of virtue, toward perfection, with the greater alacrity, and
speed.

This is that which the holy ghost meant to give us to understand, in that
which happened to Moses, Psa. 118.32.
when he came down from speaking with Asmighty God. The holy Scripture says,
That he came forth with great splendour in his face; Exodus 34.2^.
and it notes, that the same splendour appeared, after the manner of horns, in
which the strength of beasts does consist: to give us to understand, that we
are to draw strength from Prayer, whereby we may work well. The same Truth, did
Christ our Lord teach us, by his example, in the night of his Passion,
resorting to the help of Prayer, once, twice, and thrice; to provide himself
so, for his combat, which then he found to be at hand. Not that himself had
any need thereof, as S. Ambrose note; but to give example to us. Ambrosius.
Lucae. 6. Luc. 22.43.
And the holy Gospel says, that an Angel appeared, who gave him comfort; and
he rose from Prayer, so full of strength, that insta^tly he said to his
disciples, Surgite, eamus, ecce appropinquauit, Mate. 26.46. Isa. 53.7.
qui me tradet. Rise up, let us go, and meet our enemies, for behold he
approaches, who will betray me. He makes offer of himself, and delivers
himself up into their hands: Oblatus est quia ipse voluit. All this serves,
but to teach us, that we must take Prayer, as the means to overcome those
difficultyes, which present themselves, in the way of virtue.

Chrysosteme. Note.
S. John Chrysostom says, that Prayer is a kind of tempering, and tuning the
Violl of our heart, that so it may make good music, in the ears of Almighty
God. Our business therefore in Prayer. must be, to moderate, and tune the cords
of our passions, and affections, and of all our actions; to the end that they
all, may stand well with reason, and with God. And this is that which we are
saying daily; and which we also here others say, in their sermons, and
spiritual exhortations, that our Prayer must be Practical: That is, it must
be addressed to working, and must help us to make those difficultyes smooth,
and those repugnances weak, which object themselves to us, in a spiritual
life. And for this reason, the holy Ghost called it Prudence; Scientia
Sanctorum Prudentia. Pro. 9.10.
For Prudence is addressed to working; to show the difference of this, from the
science of learned men, which only consists in knowing. And so the Saints
affirm, that Prayer is the general, and most efficatious remedy, against all
our temptations, and all other necessityes, and to all the occasions, which may
be offered. And this is one of the chief commendations, which belong to Prayer.

Theodoret. Note.
Theodoret relates in his religious History, of a holy Monk, who said, that
Physicians cure several diseases of the body, every one with a several
remedy, nay, that many times for the cure of one disease, they apply many
remedies; for in fine remedies fall short, and their virtue is lymitted, and
abridged. But Prayer, is a remedy both universal, and full of efficacy,
against all necessityes, and to resist all temptations, and bad encounters of
the enemy, and to obtain all virtue; and to apply unto the soul, an infinite
good, which is God. For upon him it takes hold, and in him it rests, and so
they call Prayer, Omnipotent. Omnipotens oration, cum sit vna, omnia potest. And
Christ our Redeemer, against all temptations, gave us this remedy of Prayer.
Vigilate and orate, vt non intretis in tentationem. Matthew. 26.41.
Watch, and pray, lest you enter into temptato^.

The second advise, which will also serve us much, for the execution of that
which has been said, is, That as when we go to Prayer, we must be provided of
the Points, whereupon we mean to meditate; so also we must forthinke the
Fruit, Chap. ^^.
which we desire to drawfrom thence. But some will say, how shall we know what
Fruit we are to draw, out of Prayer, Note.
before we begin to make it? We desire that you would declare this to us,
more at large. Content. Did we not say even now, that we must go to Prayer in
search after a remedy of our spiritual necessityes, and to obtain the victory
of our selves, and over our passions, and evil inclinations; and that Prayer,
is the means which we are to take for our reformation and amendment? Well
then; before any man enter into Prayer he is to consider thus with himself, at
good leisure. What is the greatest spiritual necessity, that I am subject too:
What is that, which hinders my proceeding most, and makes most war against
my soul. And this is that, which we are to think of before; and to place it
before our eyes, and to insist upon it; to fetch the remedy thereof, out of our
Prayer. And the providing and preparing of the Points of our Meditation must be
addressed to that purpose. I will give you an example.

I find in my self, a great inclination to be valued and esteemed, and that
men should make much account of me; and that human respects use to transport
me much; and that, when any occasion is offered, whereby my self to be
undervalued, I feel it, and I am troubled much, and perhaps somtymes, I make
show thereof. This me thinks is that, which makes stiffest war against me, and
that which most hinders my proceeding in spirit, and the peace and quietness of
my soul, and makes me fall into the greatest faults.

Well, if your greatest necessity consist in this, remedy must stand in
ouercoming, and rooting up this imperfection. And this is that which you are to
carry in your mind, and that which you are to place before your eyes; and to
take it to heart, and to insist upon it, that so you may obtain it by Prayer.
And so it is an error, for one to go ordinarily to God, in Prayer, as by
chance; to take hold of that, which shall there present it self, (like a
Woodman who would shoot at the Heard, let the arrow light where it will)
leaving that a part, whereof he stands in greatest need. But the truth is,
that we must not go to Prayer, to take that which comes, but to procure that,
which is for our purpose.

The sick man, when he goes into the Apothecaryes shop, Note.
lays not hold upon the first drugge he finds; but upon that whereof he has
need, for his infirmity. There is one man, who is full of pride up to the very
eyes, another of impatience, another of stiff Judgment, and self conceit, as
is daily seen when any occasion is offered, and he takes himself daily in the
manner; and yet he goes upon. Prayer, to flourish, and make fine conceyts; and
he lays hold upon that which first comes in his way, or which gives him most
gust; picking here, and there.

This is not the way to gather Fruit. A man is always to observe well, what
it is which he needs most, and to procure the remedy, since he goes to Prayer
for that end. S. Ephrem brings to this purpose, Ephrem. exhort. ad Relig^osos
de arinatura spirituali l. ^. page 260.
the Example of that blind man in the Gospel, who came calling, and crying
out, to Christ our Lord, that he would have mercyon him. Consider (says he)
how Christ demanding of him, what it was that he desired? the blind man did
instantly represent his greatest necessity, and that which gave him most pain,
which was his want of sight; and of that, he desired to be deliueted: Luc. 18.
Dominus vt videam. Does he perhaps demand any other of those things, Marc.
10.51.
whereof yet indeed he might have need? Did he say perhaps, Lord give me some
clothes, for I am poor? He asks not that; but, laying aside all other
things, he resorts to the thought of his greatest necessity. So are we (says
he) to do in Prayer, considering whereof we have most need, insisting, and
perseuering in the demand thereof, till we obtain it.

To the end that there may be no excuse in this, it is to be noted. That
howsoever it be true, that when he who goes to Prayer, and pretends to produce
desires of the particular virtues which wants most, is ordinarily to procure,
that the Points, and matter upon which he will meditate, may carry some
conueniency, and proportion thereunto; to the end that the Will may be the more
quickly moved (and that with greater constancy and fervor) to the producing of
those desires; and so, may the more easily obtain the Fruit, which he
expects; yet it is also fit to be understood, that whatsoever Exercise a man
makes, and whatsoever Mystery he meditates, he may yet apply it, to that which
he needs most. For Prayer is as the Mana of heaven, which savors to every
one, as himself will. If you would have it savor of Humility, or of the
Consideration of sin, or death, or of the passion of our Lord, or of benefits
received; if you will draw from hence much grief, or Confusion for your
Offenses, it will savor of any of these things. It will also savor of
Patience, if that be the thing, which you would strive to get; and so in the
rest.

CHAP. XV. How it is to be understood, that in Prayer we are to take some one
thing to heart, whereof we have greatest need, wherein we must insist till we
obtain it.
I Will not say for all this, that we must ever attend to one, and the same
thing in Prayer. Because howsoever our greatest particular necessity may be the
want of humility, or the like, yet we may well employ our selves in Prayer,
upon the acts and exercises also of other virtues. An occasion presents it
self to you of co^forming your selves to the will of God, in all that which he
shall dispose, and ordain concerning you; deteyne your selves in it, as long
as you can; for this will be a very good Prayer, and very well employed, and
will no way blunt the lance; wherewith you mean to take Humility, but will
rather sharpen the point thereof.

It comes to your mind, to make a great act of acknowledgment, and gratitude,
Note.
for the benefits which you have received from God, as well in general, as
particular; deteyne your selves also herein, for it is great reason, that we
should daily thank our Lord for the benefits which we have received; and
especially, for having drawn us to the state of Religion. It occurs to you to
make an act of detestation of your sins, and of much grief for having
committed them; and of firm purpose rather to die a thousand times then to
offend God any more: deteyne your selves herein; for it is one of the best, and
most profitable acts, which you are able to exercise in your Prayer. It comes
into your mind, to make an act of great love of God, and of zeal, and great
desire of the salvation of souls, and to endure any trouble for them; deteyne
your selves also herein; and here you may also well deteyne your selves in
desiring favor of Almighty God, not only for your own souls, but for your
neighbors, and for the whole Church; For this is one, and that a very
principal part of Prayer. In all these things, and in the like to these, we
may well deteyne our selves, and it will be a very profitable Prayer. And so we
see, that the Psalms, which are a most perfect kind of Prayer, are full of very
different affects. For this reason, Cassian, and the Abbot Nilus said, that
Prayer was like a field full of plants, or like a garland wrought, Cassianus
Col. 9. c. 7. Nilus. Genesis 27.17.
and wouen with variety of flowers, of different smells: Ecce odor filij mei,
sicut odor agri pleni, cui benedixit Dominus.

There is yet another benefit belonging to this variety; that it procures our
Prayer to be more easily made by us, and consequently that we may continue, and
persevere longer in it. For continual repetition of the same thing, uses to
make men weary; whereas variety delights, and entertaines. But that which I
would say is this. Tract. 7. c. 3. and 9. tract. 8. c. 7. Note.
It imports very much, toward our profitting in spirit, that for some time,
we take to heart, the procuring of some one virtue, whereof we find our selves to
stand in most necessity; and that principally we insist upon that, in Prayer;
beseeching our Lord earnestly, to bestow it upon us; and actuating therein very
often, both for days, and months; and that we may ever carry it before our
eyes, and even riuetted in our hearts, till we obtain it. For after this
manner, are the businesses, even of this world, dispatched. And so they use to
say, by way of Proverb: Lord deliver me, from having to do with a man, who
has but one business.

The glorious S. Thomas says, S. Tho. 2.2. q. 83. ar. 14. arg. 2.
that the Desire uses to be so much stronger, and more efficacious, as it
resolves more earnestly, upon the obteyning of some one thing. And to this
purpose, he brings that of the Prophet, Vnam petij a domino, Psa. 26.4.
hanc requiram. One thing I have begged of our Lord, and the same I will still
desire, til I obtain it. He who prete^ds to acquire any Art, or Science, does
not study one thing to day, and another to morrow, but he prosecutes that one
which he desires to learn. And so he, who pretends to acquire any virtue, must
principally exercise himself, for some time, therein; applying thereunto his
Prayers, and all his other spiritual Exercises till he obtain it. Note S.
Tho. 1.^. q. ^5. ^rt. 1.
Especially since (according to the doctrine of S. Thomas) all the moral
virtues, have great connection with one another, and they go together, and are
interlaced in such sort, that he who possesses one of them, in perfection,
shall have them all. And so, if you obtain true Humiliy, you shall obtain
therewith, all the virtues. Pluck Pride wholly out of your heart by the roots,
and plant therein a most profound Humility; for if you obtain it, you shall
have withal, much Patience, and much Obedience; and you shall complain of
nothing; and any trouble will seem small in your sight; and all, will be thought
too honorable and easy for you, in respect of that which you deserved. If you
have Humility, you will also have much Charity toward your brethren, esteeming
them to be all good, and only your self, stark naught. You will have much
simplicity of heart, and will not lightly pass your judgment upon any other;
but will feel your own^ miseryes, and faults so much, as that you will not
think of other folks. And after the same manner, we might go discoursing upon
other virtues.

For this reason also, Note.
it is a very good course, to apply your particular Examen, to that, which you
direct your Prayer too, and so to join one, with the other. For in this sort,
all our Exercises, being bent one way, at once, much business will be done.
Cassianus.
And Cassian proceeds yet further: For not only in our Examen, and the most
retired kind of Prayer, will he have us insist upon that, whereof we have most
need; but also that we should many times in the day, lift up our spirit to our
Lord, for that purpose, with iaculatory Prayers, and sighs, and groans of our
heart; and that we also shall do well, to add other pennances, and
mortifications, and particular devotions, to the same end, as I shall show else
where, more at large. Tract. 7.^.9.
For if this be the greatest necessity which I have, if this be the greatest
Vice, or evil inclination, which reigns in me, and which makes me fall into
the greatest faults; if, upon the rooting up, and ouercomming of this vice, and
obteyning the contrary virtue, depends the ouercoming and rooting up of all
Vice, and the obteyning of all virtue; all diligence and labor shall be but
well employed, in this business.

S. Chrysostom says; Chrisost. tract. de oration^.
That Prayer is as a fountain, in the midst of an Orchard, or Garden,
without which fountain, all is withered and dry; but with it, all is green,
and fresh, and flourishing. Our soul must be watered, by this fountain of
Prayer. For this is that, which must keep the plants of all virtue, in
continual freshnes and fertility, as Obedience, Patience, Humility,
Mortification, Recollection, and Silence: But as in a Garden, Note.
or Orchard, there uses to be some one tree, or dainty flower, which is more
esteemed and regarded, and to which the water is conducted with more care, then
to the rest; and although water should be wanting to others, it must not be
wanting to it; and although there want time for tending the rest, there will
not want time for it: just so it must be in the Orchard, and Garden of our
soul. It must all be watered, and conserved, by the spring of Prayer; but yet
still, you are to have an eye to some one principal thing, whereof you are in
greatest need, and to that you must chiefly resort; and for that, there must
never want any time. Chap. 11.
And as at the going out of your Garden, you lay hold of that flower which
contents you most, and you go out with it, in your hand; so also in Prayer, you
are to lay hold of that, whereof you have most need, and to gather it, as a
Fruit from thence.

Hereby sufficient answer is given to that which usually is asked: If it be
good for a man to draw that fruit from Prayer, which is agreeable to the
Exercise, whereupon he meditates? We have already said, that although a man
must ever have a particular eye, upon that whereof he has most need; yet with
all, that it is good for him, to exercise himself, and to actuate in the
affects and acts of other virtues, agreeable to the mystery which is meditated.
But yet a point of great importance is to be observed here; That those affects,
and acts which we shall make and exercise in Prayer, about those virtues, which
occur to us, in conformity of that which is meditated, are not to be passed
over superficially, or cursorily; but at great leisure, Note.
and by making a quiet stand upon them, till such time as we satisfy our
selves; and till we feel, that it sticks, as it were, by the very ribs of our
soul; and is, after a sort incorporated thereunto. And this we are to do,
although it cost us the whole hour, as was said before. For one of these
affects, and acts continued after this sort, is much better, and does profit us
more, then to make many acts of several Virtues, and pass them over, in a
posting manner.

One of the reasons, why some do not profit so much in Prayer, is because they
are faulty in this point, and go leaping and skipping on the acts of several
virtues, saying within themselves; here an act of Humility comes well in, and
then they make an act of of Humility, and then away; then they think it is to
the purpose, if they make an act of Obedience, and then they make an act of
Obedience; and shortly after of Patience; and so they go running, like a Cat
over the coals; so lightly, that although there were fire, it would do them no
hurt. Therefore when they rise from Prayer, all is forgotten and lost, and they
remain as tepide, and vnmortifyed as before. Auila e^ 75. in Audi-filia.
Doctor Auila reprehendeth them, who being about one thing in Prayer, as soon
as any other thing, does offer it self, they instantly give over the former.
And he says, that usually this is a fraud of the devil, who by inducing them,
like some Pie, to skip from one branch to another, depriues them of the Fruit
of their Prayer.

I say, it imports much, that we deteyne our selves, Note.
in the affects and desires of virtue, till such time as our souls be even
imbrued therewith. As if you will actuate about contrition, or grief for sin,
you are to stay therein, till you find a great detestation and horror of sin,
according to that of the Prophet; Iniquitatem odio habui, Psa. 118.163.
and abominatus sum. For this will make us depart from Prayer, with firm
purpose, rather to undergo a thousand deaths, Note.
then to commit one single mortal sin. And so does S. Augustine note very
well, that to conceive horror against some sins, as Blasphemy, the murthring
of a man's father, and the like, is easily done; for men seldom fall upon such
crimes: but it is to be endeavored concerning other more usual offenses,
whereof the Saint affirms, that Consuetudine ipsa viluerunt: By custom men
have lost the fear, and horror which is fit; and therefore men easily fall
into them. In the same manner, if you will actuate, and exercise your selves in
Humility, you must deteine your selves, in the affect and desire of being
meanly esteemed, and despised, till at last your soul may go drinking up, and
be imbrued with this affection, and desire; and so all these fumes, and frothes
of pride, may go diminishing, and decaying. And the same is to be done, in
exercising the affects, and acts of other virtues.

Hereby it does easily appear, how much it will help toward our good, that we
take to heart, and insist, and persevere in the demand of some one thing, after
the fashion which we have declared. For if this affect, and desire of being
despised, and held in mean accounte, or any other like affect, might continue
in us, one hour in the morning, and another in the evening, and as much in the
day following, and diverse other days after that; it is plain enough, that it
would work another manner of effect in our heart; and our souls would receive
another manner of impression, and incorporation of that virtue, then if we
should pass it, lightly over. Chrysostom.
S. Chrysostom says, that as no one shower of rain, nor watering by the
hand, will suffice for any soil, how fruitful soever it may be, Note.
but there will be need of many showers, and many waterings; so also will it be
necessary, that our soul may have many wateringes of much Prayer, to the end
that it may be bathed, and imbraed therewith. And he brings, to this purpose,
that of the Prophet, Septies in die laudem dixi tibi: Psa. 11^.164.
Seven times a day did the Prophet David water his soul, with the stream of
Prayer; and he deteyned himself much, in the same affects, repeating the same,
over and over, many times, as is to be seen abundantly in the Psalms. And in
one alone, he repeateth the same thing, seven and twenty times, Et in eternum
misericordia eius; Psalm 135. Psalm. 150.
proclairing, and exalting the mercy of our Lord. And in five only verses, of
another Psalm, he awaketh, and inuiteth us, to praise God, an eleauen several
times.

And Christ our Lord, did, by his own example, instruct us in this kind of
Prayer; and in perseuering about the same thing, as we see in his Prayer of the
Garden, Matt. 26.44.
for he was not contented to make that Prayer, to his Eternal Father, only
once; but he renewed it the second, and the third time, repeating the self
same words, Eumdem sermonem dicens. Yea, and the holy Gospel says, Lucae.
22.43.
that at the end, he prayed more at large, then he had done before: To teach
us, that we are to insist, and persevere in Prayer, about some one, and the same
thing; repeating it, and replying more then once. For by this means, and by
perseuetance therein, we shall come, to attain that virtue, and perfection,
which we desire.

CHAP. XVI. How we may be able to deteyne our selves much in Prayer, about the
same thing: and the way and practice of a very profitable kind of Prayer is set
down; and that is, to descend to particular Cases.
IT remaynes, that we deliver the manner which we are to hold herein; to the
end that we may be able to deteyne our selves in Prayer, a long time together,
in desire of one, and the same virtue, since it is of so great importance, as
has been said. The plain, and usual means which is wont to be given for
this purpose, is to procure to continue the self same act, and affect of will,
or to reiterate it, and repeat it again, like one who gives a push to a
wheel, that it may not stand; or like one who still is casting fresh wood into
the fire; helping our selves for this purpose, of the same first consideration,
which in the beginning, did move us to this affect, and desire when we find
that it is apt to cool, and saying with the prophet; Conuertere anima mea in
requiem tuam, Psa. 114.7.
quia Dominus benefecit tibi. A wake thou, O my soul, and return to thy
repose and rest, and consider how much it imports thee, and how great reason it
is, that thou should serve our Lord, to whom thou owe so much.

When the first consideration does not serve to move us, we must serve our
selves of some other, or else pass on, to some other Point. And for this
purpose, we are ever to carry diverse Points provided; to the end that when one
of the^ is dispatched, and that already it seems to move us no more, we may
proceed on to another, and yet another, which may, by refreshing, affect, and
move us, to what we desire. And further we must do in this, as in the case of
corporal food, which (to avoid that fastidiousnes, which is usually caused by
continuing long to eat of the same meat) we are wont to dress, Note.
and disguise in several manners; and thereby it seems new, and gives us a
new kind of guste. Even so, to the end that we may continue a long time in
demand of the same thing in Prayer, which is the very food and sustenance of
our soul, it is a good way, to dress it, in different ma^ners. This we may do
some times, by passing, from one consideration, to another: or from one Point
to another, as we said even now. For every time that a man moves himself, and
actuates upon the same thing, by a different reason, or consideration, it is
like dressing it, after another fashion, and it grows to be like a new dish of
meat.

Again, Note.
although there should be no new reason, or consideration at hand, yet the
affect and desire of the same virtue, may, in it self, be dressed several
ways. As if one pretend to get Humility, some times he may be deteyning his
mind, in the knowledge of his own misery and weakness; despising and
confounding himself for that. At other times, he may entertayne himself in a
desire to be disesteemed, and despised by others, not making any account of the
opinion, and estimation of men; but holding it all to be mere vanity. At other
times, he may be giving himself confusion, and shame, to see the faults,
wherein he daily takes himself; and to ask both pardon, and redress of them,
at the hands of God. At other times, he may do it, by admiting the goodness of
God, which endures him; whereas yet sometimes, we can hardly endure, even our
very selves. At other times by giving him thanks, for not suffering us to fall,
into more grievous crimes. And by this variety, and difference of Acts, that
fastidiousnes (which usually is caused by continuance of the same thing) may be
avoided; and it may grow to be of facility, and guste, to continue, and
persevere in the acts, and affects of the same virtue, by means whereof, it
grows to take deeper root, and more entire possession of the heart. For as the
Fyle, every time that it passes upon the Iron, carries somewhat with it; so
every time that we produce any act of Humility, or other virtue, some part of
the contrary vice, is diminished, and discharged thereby.

Besides this, there is another means to make us persevere, in desire of the
same thing in Prayer, Note.
many days together, which is both very easy, and very profitable; and this
is, by discending to particular cases. The teachers of me^ in the way of
Spirit, do note, that we must not content our selves, to draw from Prayer, a
general Purpose to serve God; or only to proceed in virtue, and to be perfect,
at large; but that we must descend in particular, to that wherein we know or
conceive, that we may most please, and serve our Lord. Neither yet, are we to
content our selves with, conceauing any general desire of any particular
virtue, as namely to be humble, to be obedient, to be patient, or to be
mortifyed, because this kind of desire, or rather velleity of any virtue, is
intertayned thus in general, even by vicious men. For as virtue is truly
beautiful, and honorable, and of great use, not only for the next, but even
also for this life; so it is an easy thing to love it, and to desire it, in
such a general manner. But we, when we meditate upon that virtue which we
desire, must descend to particular cases.

As for example; if we pretend to obtain a great Conformity with the will of
God, we must descend to conform our selves, with his will, in particular
things; as well in sickness, as in health; as well in death, as in life; as well in
tentation, as in consolation. If we pretend to obtain the virtue of Humility,
we must also descend to particulers, by imagining such cases, as may be
presented, or which use to offer themselves, for our being despised, or
disestemed; and so, in the rest of the Virtues. For these are those
particulers, which are usually most felt, and wherein the difficulty of the
virtue does most consist; and whereby a man is best discovered, and proved; and
these are also the means, whereby virtue, is best obtained.

We must also procure to begin to make our first instances, by those things,
which are of the lesser sort, and more easy; and we are afterward to rise to
the more hard, wherein we think we should have more difficulty, if the
occasion were offered; and so to go adding somewhat, and rising up by little,
and little, from the less, to the greater. And we must actuate in the
particulers, as if we had them present with us; and that, so long, as that
nothing which concerns the Virtue to which we pretend, may present it self to
us, to which we may not boldly make head, and so the field remain ours. And
when any real, and true occasions do occur, we must first employ our selves in
them, disposing our selves to manage them well, and with profit, every one,
according to his state. A good servant of God, did also add this advise, that
in Prayer we should propound something in particular, concerning such, or such
a Virtue, which we should act that day. So low as this, do they say, that we
must descend in Prayer.

This is one of the most profitable things, Chap. ^4.
which we can exercise in Prayer; for it must be Practical, that is to say,
addressed to action, which may help us to work, according to that virtue
which we desire to obtain; and to explane the difficultyes, and to overcome
the repugnances, which may oppose themselves; and because it imports much,
that we make trial, and take essay, as it were, of our selves, before, as
soldiers use to do, who before they go to the war, use to try themselves in
tiltings, and torneys, and barriers, and incounters, and other such like
exercises, that they may be the better disposed, and dextrous toward a true
war. Cassianus col. 19. c. 16.
And Cassian does much commend this Exercise, for the vanquishing of Vice, and
Passion, and for the obteyning of Virtue. Yea, and Plutarch himself, Plutarch.
Epist. ad Pac. de tranquil. animi. Seneca. l. de consolatione. ad Heluiam cap.
5.
and Seneca also, amongst the Pagans, say, that ignorant men do not understand
how much it imports toward the appeasing of trouble, when it arriueth, to
employ the thought upon it, before hand.

They say it helps much, to bestow a man's thoughts in the considerations of
difficultyes, and troubles. For that, as he who imployes his mind upon soft,
and delightful things, makes himself effeminate, and loose, and good for
nothing; Note.
and upon the approach of any thing which is contrary and offensive to such a
one, he receives much disgust; and being accustomed to that base kind of
delicacy, he turns his back, and seeks a leaning-place for his heart, upon
certain agreeable, and delightful objects; so he who does accustom himself,
always to imagine sickness, banishment, imprisonment, and all those other
aduersityes, which may happen, will be better disposed, and provided for them,
when they come; and we shall grow to find, that these are things which give
more fear in the beginning, then they bring hurt in the end. S. Gregory
delivered this excellently well; Greg. ho^ 35. supe^ Euang.
Minus enim iacula feriunt, quae praeuidentur: The blow wounds not so deeply,
when you were expecting it, and had half swallowed it before it came, as when
it surpriseth you, upon the sudden.

The example for this purpose is excellent, which we read of our B. F.
Ignatius. When once he was sick, Li. 5. (...). 8. vitae P. N. Ignatij.
the Physician willed him that he should not give place to sorrow, nor to
pensive thoughts. Upon this occasion, he began to think attentively, within
himself, what kind of thing might happen to him so unsavory, and untoward, as
to afflict, and trouble the peace, and rest of his soul. And having passed the
eyes of his consideration, over many things, one only occurred, which stuck
nearer to him then the rest, and it was, If perhaps the Society should come to
be dissolved. He proceeded on, to examine himself, how long the affliction,
and pain were likely to hold him, in case such a thing as that, should happen.
And it seemed to him (so that it should happen, without his fault) that within
one quarter of an hour, wherein he might recollect himself, and be in Prayer,
he should be delivered of that disquiet, and should return to his accustomed
tranquillity, and peace of mind. And he yet added further, that he would hope
to hold that quietness and tranquillity, although the Society should be
dissolved, and defeated, even as a grain of salt, is, in the water. This is a
very good, and a very profitable kind of Prayer.

The Apostle S. James, ^^c. 5.13.
in his Canonical Epistle says: Tristatur aliquis vestrum, oret: when you
feel your self in affliction, or discomfort, resort to Prayer, and there you
shall find comfort and remedy. And so did the Prophet David; Psa. 76.4.
Renuit consolari anima mea; memor fui Dei, and delectatus sum. When he found
himself discomforted, he remembered God, and raised up his heart to him; and
presently his soul was filled with this joy and consolation; This is the will
of God, so he will have it: which is the contentment of all contentments.

Now, as after the arrival of the occasion of trouble, it is very good and
expedient, to resort to Prayer, for the bearing of it well; so also does it
much importe, to take this remedy, by way of prevention, and preservative, to
the end that afterward, it seem not new and hard, but gentle, and light. S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ho. de auaritia.
that one of the principal causes why the Holy Job, continued so firm, and
constant in all his aduersityes, and troubles, was, because he had provided
himself for them, by way of imagination, and premeditation, and actuation upon
them; as upon a thing which might happen, according to that which himself
relates, Quia timor quem timebam, euenit mihi; and quod verebar, Job. 3.25.
accidit. But now if you be not provided for it before hand, and if eue^ in the
bare desire, you find difficulty; what will become of you, in the work it
self? And if yet, whilst you are in Prayer, and when you are far from the
occasion, you find not heart, and courage enough in your self, to embrace such
an action, and occasion, and contempt, and trouble as is on foot; what will
become of you, when you are gone from Prayer, and when the difficulty of the
occasion and action is at hand? And when you are removed from the meditation
and consideration, of the example of Christ our Lord, which gives you breath,
and heart? When you are sometimes in Prayer, you are carried to the desire of
such occasions as those, and yet when the occasion is offered you fail; what
will become of the business, Tho. de Kempis.
if even in the time of Prayer, you desire it not? If he who purposes, do
often fail, how sure will that other man be to fail, who late, or never will
so much as purpose?

By this means, we give a man very copious matter, to continue, and persevere
in Prayer, concerning the same thing, and with the same affect or desire, many
hours together, and many days. Note.
For the particular cases which may occur to us, and to which we may descend,
are without number; and to be able to make head to all, will find us work
enough, to do. And when you shall arrive to think, that you find strength
enough in your mind for all, and that you can perform it with a good will; do
not yet conceive, that your business is already brought to an end. You have
yet a long way to go. For there is a great deal of difference, between doing,
and saying; and between the desire, and the deed. It is clear, that the deed,
is far more difficult, then the desire. For in the deed, or work, the object
it self is present; but in the desire, there is nothing present, but the
imagination of the deed. And so it happens to us many times, that in Prayer,
we are full of fervor; and it seems to us, as if nothing were able to stand
in our way. And yet afterward, when the occasion is offerred, and that it calls
us to put our hand to work, we find our selves far, from what we thought.

It suffices not therefore, that you find those good desires in your selves;
but you must procure, that they may prove so full of efficacy, that they may
extend, or reach to the very work; for this is the true touch of Virtue. And
if you see that your deeds agree not with your desires, but that when an
occasion is offered, you discern your self to be another man, then when you
were in Prayer; be confounded with shame, to find that all goes away in bare
desires. Or rather confound your selves with shame, because those desires, by
all probability, were not true ones, but conceits, and imaginations; since so
poor, and so weak a thing, can put you afterward into disorder and disgust;
and can make you turn back, where you were before. And as the Smith, when his
work proves not well, returns yet once again to his Anuile, to redress and
accommodate it, that it may come right; so are you to return to this Anuile of
Prayer, that so you may beat your desires into a better mould; and give not
over, till your desire, and your deed shake, hands together; and so, as that
there be no more falling out.

Yea and yet, even when you shall arrive to this, Note.
that you conceive your self to bear the occasions which are offered you,
with virtue; do not yet make your self believe, that all the business is
brought to an end. For in the self same work, there are many degrees, and
steps, whereby to rise, before you can arrive to the perfection of that Virtue.
For first you must exercise your self to carry, with Patience, all the
occasions which shall be presented; for this is the first degree of Virtue.
Suffer things at least with Patience, if you cannot do it with Alacrity. And
for the performing even of this, there will be enough to do for some days, and
not a few. And when you shall have arrived, to bear al hard incounters with
Patience; yet much more way is to be made, for the attayning to the perfection
of Virtue. For (as a Philosopher says) the sign that a man has obtained the
perfection of a virtue, is when he performs the works thereof (prompte,
faciliter, and delectabiliter) with promptitude, with facility, and with
delight. Well then, consider if you perform the works of virtue, of Humility,
of Poverty of spirit, of Patience, and of the other virtues, with promptitude,
with facility, and with delight, or gust; and you shall see thereby, if you have
obtained that virtue. Consider if you be as glad of dishonor, and contempt,
as worldely men are wont to take delight, in honor, and estimation: which is
the Rule, that our B. F. Ignatius sets before us, C. 4. exam. 6.4. and reg. 11.
Summarij.
he having taken it first, out of the Gospel. Consider, if you be as glad, and
do take as much gust, in poverty of diet, and clothing, and lodging, and that
the very worst of the house be given to you, as the covetous man would be, of
full coffers. Consider, if you be as glad of mortification, and suffering, as
they of the world, use to be, of repose, and rest. If then, we be to arrive to
this perfection, in every virtue, we shall well have enough to do, for many
days, and peradventure years, although we did attempt, but some one of them.

CHAP. XVII. That in the consideration of these Mysteries, we are to go on, at
good leisure, and not to pass over them superficially: and of some means
which help therein.
IN the consideration of divine mysteries, it does also much importe, to dig
and sound toward the same thing, and not to pass cursorily, Note.
through them. For one mystery well considered, and pondered, will profit us
more, then many, which are looked upon with superficial eyes. Our B. F.
Ignatius, in his book of spiritual Exercises, P. N. Ignatius lib^
Exercitiorum spiritualium.
does therefore make so much account of repetitions, as that instantly after
every Exercise men are to make one Repetition, and sometimes two. For that
which a man finds not, the first time, by perseverance, he will find, Matt.
7.8.
the second. Quia qui quaerit inuenit, and pulsanti aperietur. Number. 10.^1.
Moses struck with his rod, upon the rock, and drew forth no water upon the
first blow; but he drew it forth, upon the second.

And Christ our Lord, did not cure, at a clap, one of those blind men in the
Gospel, but he went curing him, by little, and little. First he applied
spittle to his eyes, and asked him if he saw any thing. The patient answered,
that he saw certain things in gross, but that he distinguished not well, what
they were. Mark. 8.24.
Video homines, velut arbores ambulantes. The men seemed to him, but walking
trees. Our Lord returned to apply his hands to his eyes, and he cured him out
right; so that he saw distinctly and clearly. So does it use to be in Prayer,
when turning, and returning to the self same thing, one discovers more, then
at the first. As when a man enters into a dark room, at the first he sees
nothing; if he continue a while, he begins to see. Particulerly we must procure
to deteyne our selves still, in the consideration of things, till such time as
we may be very well vnbeguiled, and fully possessed of what is true; and well
convinced and resolved, upon the doing of what is fit. For this is one of the
chief Fruits, which we are to draw out of Prayer: and wherein it concerns us
much, to go well grounded, as we said before. Cap. 9.


As for the means, which are to help us, to consider and ponder these
mysteryes in this manner, if our Lord send down, some little beam of his
divine light, and open the eyes of the soul, it finds so much to consider,
and has so much, wherein to deteyne it self, that it can say with the
Prophet, Psa. 118.18.
Reuela oculos meos, and considerabo mirabilia de lege tua. Laetabor ego super
eloquia tua, sicut qui inuenit spolia multa. The second of these places,
declares the first. I will rejoice in the consideration of those misteryes and
meruailes, which I have found in thy law, as a man would rejoice, after he had
won a battle, and met with abundance of rich spoils.

With the blessed S. Augustine, and S. Francis, the whole days and nights did
pass at ease, in the Consideration of these two, or three words, Nouerim te,
and nouerim me. Let me know my self, and let me know thee. Deus meus, and
omnia. My God, and my all things. Which is a kind of Prayer, of great
conformity, with that, whereof the Prophet I say says, that it was used by
those Citizens of Heaven, who being suspended in the Contemplation of that
divine Majesty, are perpetually singing, and saying, and repeating, Sanctus,
Sanctus, Sanctus; Isa. 63.
Holy, Holy, Holy. The same, says S. John, speaking in the Apocalypse, of those
Mysterious beasts, Apoc. 48.
which stood before the throne of God: Et requiem non habebant die ac nocte,
dicentia, Sanctus Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus omnipotens, qui erat, and qui
est, and qui venturus est. And they had no rest, nether by day, nor night, from
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Omnipotent, who was, who is, and who is to
come.

But to the end that we may arrive to this, it is fit (forasmuch as is on our
part) that we use to deteyne our selves, Gerson 3. p. alphab. 76. litera D. and
alphab. 77. litera Z.
in the consideration of the mysteryes, still pondering, and sounding into the
particularityes thereof, and exercising our selves therein. Gerson says, That
one of the principal means which we can set down, and which will help us
most, toward the enabling of us to make Prayer well, will be, the very ordinary,
and continual Exercise thereof. It is no business this, which can be taught by
Rhetoric, and Figures; nor is to be learned, by only hearing many discourses,
nor reading many treatises of Prayer; but by putting the hand to work, and by
much practice thereof. When a mother will teach her child to go, she spends not
a whole hour in giving him lessons, about the fashion that he is to hold in
going; bidding him change the posture of his ^eete, now in this fashion, Note.
and then in that; but by putting him upon the exercise of it, she makes him
go; and so the child learnes, and knows, how he is to go.

Now this is the very means, whereby we are to learn this Science of Prayer.
And although it be very true, that for the obtaining of the guyft of Prayer, or
any other, which is supernatural, no labor of ours is sufficient, but it must
come from the gracious, and liberal hand of God; Prou. ^.
Quia Dominus dai sapientiam, and ex ore eius prudentia, and scientia; because
it is our Lord who gives wisdom, and prudence, and science proceeds out of
his mouth; Yet his divine Majesty is pleased, that we should exercise our
selves therein, as carefully, as if we were to obtain it only by that means.
For he disposes of all things sweetly; Sap. 8.1.
Attingit a fine vsque ad finem fortiter, and disponit omnia suauiter. And so
he disposes of the works of Grace, as well as of the works of Nature. And as
other arts and sciences, are obtained by practice, so is also this of Prayer.
By playing on the lute, a man learnes to play; by going, to go; and by
Praying, a man learnes to Pray. And so Gerson says, that the cause, why, at
this day, there are so few Contemplatiues, is through the want of this
practice. We find that anciently in those Monasteryes of Monks, there were so
many persons of great Prayer, and Contemplation; and now you shall have
difficulty, to find a man of great Prayer; and when you shall speak to men of
Co^templation; it seems to them, as if you were talking of Metaphisicks, or
Morisco's, which is not to be understood.

The cause hereof is, for that anciently those holy Monks did exercise
themselves much in Prayer; and the young men who entered into those Monasteryes,
were presently tasked, and instructed therein, and were made to practice it
much, as we read in the rule of S. Pacomius, and other Fathers of those Monks.
And so Gerson gives this advise, as very important, for Monasteries, That they
are to have amongst them, certain persons of spirit, who may be learned, and
of great practice in Prayer; and who may instruct young men from their very
entrance into Religion, how they are to exercise themselves in Prayer. And our
B. Father, 3. p. Constit. c. 1.12. and 4. p. c. 10.7.
took this Counsel so much to heart, and did leave it so well recommended in
the Constitutions, that not only at the first, in their houses of Nouitiate,
there should be some to instruct such as enter newly; but in all the Colleges
also, and Professed Houses of the Society, he commands, that there be a
Prefect over spiritual things, who may attend to this, and observe how every
one proceeds in Prayer, for the great importance, whereof he took that point
to be.

Another thing also, is to help us much, toward our continuance in this
exercise of Prayer, and to persevere in it much; and this is, to have a great
love to God, and to spiritual things. And so said the Royal Prophet; Quomodo
dilexi legem tuam Domine? tot a die meditatio mea est. Psalm. 118.97.
How much, O Lord, do I love thy Law? I am not satisfied with thinking on it,
all day and night. This is my only intertainment and delight. Et meditabar in
mandatis tuis quae dilexi. Psalm. 118.47.
So that, if we did love God much, we also would be glad to be thinking of him
day and night, and we should not want matter whereof to think. Oh with how good
a will, does the mother stand thinking of that Child of her womb, Note.
whom she tenderly loves? And how little need has she of discourses, or
considerations, to comfort herself, in the thought of him? If you speak but
one word of that Child, her very bowels are instantly in a commotion, and the
tears of joy, are streaming down from her eyes, without any more discourses,
or considerations. Do but begin to talk to a widow of her husband deceased,
whom she most dearly loved, and you shall see, how instantly she will sigh,
and weep.

Now if these effects can be wroght, by this natural kind of love; (why do I
say Natural love?) nay if we see that the furious love of some lost and
wretched creature, does carry him so absorpt, and inebriated upon the person
whom he loves, as that he seems unable, even to think of any thing else; how
much more should the supernatural Love of that infinite Goodness, and Beauty
of our Lord God, be able to produce these effects? For more powerful is grace,
then either nature, or vice. If God were all our treasure, our heart would
instantly fly up to him: Mat. 6.21.
Vbi enim est thesaurus tuus, ibi est and cor tuum. All the world thinks
willingly of him, Pro. 31.18.
whom it loves; and of that, wherein it takes delight. And therefore, the holy
scripture says, Gustauit, and vidit. Gustate and videte, Psa. 31.9
quoniam suauis est Dominus. The Gust may precede the seeing; but the seeing
causes more guste, and more love. And so S. Thomas speaking of this, S. Tho.
2.2, 9.160.7. ad. 1.
says: That Contemplation is the daughter of Love, because Love is the root
thereof. And he also says, that Love is the end of Contemplation; for by the
loving of God, a man is inclined to think, and contemplate upon him; and how
much more he contemplates, so much more he loves him. For good things have
this property, that when they are seen, they inuit to love; and the more we
se them, the more we love them; and the more do we joy, in continuing to see,
and love them.

CHAP. XVIII. It is showed after a practical manner, how it is in our power,
to pray ever well if we will; and to gather Fruit from thence.
THAT most excellent, and extraordinary Prayer, Cap. 4. and seqq.
whereof we spoke before, is a most particular guifte of God; which he
imparteth, not to all, but only to such as it pleases him. But this ordinary,
and plain Mental Prayer, whereof now we treat, our Lord denies to none. And
it is the error of some, that because they obtain not that other rich Prayer,
and Contemplation, it seems to them, that they cannot pray at all, and that
they are not fit, for this holy exercise; whereas yet even this, is a very
good, and very profitable kind of Prayer, and with it we may become perfect.
And if our Lord be pleased, to impart that other high Prayer unto us, this
inferior kind of Prayer is a very good, and a very proper disposition, for the
obteyning of it. I will therefore now declare how, with the grace of our Lord,
it is in our hand to make this Prayer, ever well, and to gather Fruit from
thence, which is a matter of much comfort.

By two means we may very well infer thus much, upon that which has been
said. The first is, because the manner of Prayer which our B. Father has
taught us, is to exercise therein the Three powers of our soul; placing, with
our Memory, before the eyes of our Understanding, the Point or Mystery, upon
which we mean to make our Prayer; and then to enter in, with out Understanding
it self, discoursing, meditating, and considering those things which may serve
most for the moving of our Will; and then are the affects and desires of the
Will it self to follow: and this third, we have already said, to be the chief
part, and Fruit, which we are to gather from Prayer. So that Prayer,
consists not, in that sweetness and sensible guste, which sometimes we feel,
and do experiment within our selves; but in the acts which we make, with the
powers of our souls. Now the doing of this, is ever in our power, though we be
never so dry, and discomforted. For although I should be more dry then any
stick, Note.
and more hard then any stone, yet would it be in my power (with the favor of
our Lord) to make an act of detestation, and grief for my sins; and an act of
the Love of God; and an act of Patience, and an act of Humility; and to desire
to be disgraced, and despised, in imitation of Christ our Lord, who would needs
be disgraced, and despised, for love of me.

It must here be also observed, that the business of making good Prayer, and
the Fruit thereof, does not consist, in that one make so much as these very
acts themselves, with guste, or sensible consolation; nor in that he feel
much, even of what he is doing; nor does the goodness and perfection of the
acts themselves, nor the merit which follows upon them, consist in this. This
I say, is to be noted much. For it uses to be an error, very common to many,
who discomfort themselves, as conceauing, that they do no good in Prayer,
because they feel not so much actual sorrow for their errors, and sins, or
so great affection and desire of virtue, as they would. But these feelings do
belong to the Sensitive Appetite; whereas the Will is a spiritual Power, and
depends not upon the other. And therefore there is no necessity, that a man
should feel his own acts, in such a fashion; but it suffices that they be
produced by the Will.

And so the Deuines, and Saints who treat of Contrition, and Grief for sin, do
thus comfort their pennitents: Who coming to make great account of the
greuiousnes of mortal sin, are discomforted, for not being able to dissolve
themselves in tears; nor to feel in themselves, that sensible grief which
they desire. For they could find in their hearts, that even their very bowels,
might split in their bodies, for sorrow of their sins. And those Authors say,
That True contrition and grief, consists not in the sensitive Appetite, but
in the Will. Let it trouble you to have sinned, because sin is the offense of
God, who is worthy to be loved abone all things; for this is true Contrition.
That other feeling, when our Lord shall impart it, do your receive it with
giving of thanks; and when he does not, be not troubled, for God exacteth not
that of you. For it is evident, that he is not to exact that of us, which is
not in our power; and that kind of feeling, which you would have, is a guste
and sensible devotion, which is not in your power. Therefore God expects not
that of us, but he expects, that which is in our power, which is, the sorrow
of our Will, which has no dependence upon that other. And the same is to be
said of the acts of the Love of God. Love you God above al things, with your
Will, for this is that strong and appreciatiue Love, and that which God
exacteth of us. That other, is a tender kind of love, which is not in our
power. The same is to be said of the acts of other virtues, and of all the good
purposes, which we have.

This truth is clearly seen by the contrary. For it is most certain, Note.
that if a man do, with his will, desire, and consent to a mortal sin,
although the same man, have no other feeling nor take no other guste therein,
yet he shall sin mortally, and shall deserve to be condemned for it, to hell.
By the same reason, he whose Will co^senteth, and desires that which is good,
although he have no other guste of feeling of it, shall please almighty God,
and merit heaven. Especially since God is more ready to reward virtue, then to
punish vice. Nay, many times, these acts, are more meritorious, and more
acceptable to God, when they are done, after that dry manner, without guste, or
sensible consolation; because they are more pure, and more durable, and a man
places in the^ more of his own stock, and he is at more cost (as a man may
say) then when he is carried on, by sensible devotion. And so it is a sign of
more solid Virtue, and of a Will more firm, and faithful, to the service of
God. For he, who without those helps of gustes, and spiritual consolations,
does make those acts; what would he do with them?

Father Auila says very well, M. Auila.
That God carries the other man, in his arms, as if he were a Child; but this
later, goes upon his own legs, like a man. Blosius says, That they are like
such as serve some Lord, Blosius in monil. spiritual. c. 3.
at their own charge. And it imports much, that we be accustomed to pray
after this manner. For the most usual kind of Prayer with many, is wont to be
in dryness; those other, are extraordinary favors. So that, as men, who go
by Galleys in deep seas, when the wind comes to fail them, do make their way
by the force of Oars; so they who mean to exercise themselves in Prayer, when
the prosperous wind of the illustrations, and favors of God, are wanting,
must procure to pass on, by the Oars of the Powers of their soul, which
still are helped by the favor of the Holy Ghost, though not always so
copiously, as at some times.

The second way, we may show thus. Cap. 14.
Prayer, as has been said, is not the end, but a means which we take for our
spiritual profit, and to obtain victory over our passions, and evil
inclinations; that so having smoothed the way, and removed all impedime^ts, we
may deliver or selves wholly up, into the hands of God. When those Cataracts
were stricken down, from the eyes of S. Paul's soul, by that light of heaven,
and that divine voice, which said, Ego sum Jesus quem tu persequeris, Act. 9.9.
I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; O how did he remain, all changed in heart?
how truly convinced, and resolved, and rendered up to the accomplishment of the
will of God? Domine quid me vis facere? O Lord, what will thou have me do? This
is the fruit of good Prayer. And we said before, that we must not content our
selves, Chap. 1^.
with drawing certain general desires, and purposes out of Prayer; but we
must descend to that particular, whereof we have greatest need; and we must
prepare, and provide our selves, to make good use of those occasions, which
may, and which use to be offered in that present day, and to proceed in all
things, with edification.

I say therefore, (applying the discourse to our purpose) that this, Note.
by the grace of our Lord, will ever be in our power to do; because we may
still be laying hold of those things, whereof we have most need. Let one of you
lay hold upon Humility, another upon Patience, another upon Obedience, another
upon Mortification and Resignation. And procure to go out of your Prayer, very
humble, and very well resigned, and indifferent, and very desirous to mortify,
and to conform your selves, in all things, with the will of God. And
especially procure, always to draw this fruit out of Prayer, that you may
live well that day, and with edification of others, every one according to his
estate. And so you shall have made your Prayer excellently well; yea and
better, then if you had shed many tears, and enjoyed much consolation.

So that we are not to put our selves in pain, for not being able to use much
discourse, or many considerations, nor to have other feelings and devotions;
because Prayer, does not consist in this, but in the rest. Neither yet are we
to make much account of those distractions, and flying thoughts, which use to
disquiet us in Prayer, against our will; whereof yet we do ordinarily complain.
When you reflect and observe, that you are distracted, lay present hold again,
Note.
upon your matter, and upon the Fruit, which you are to gather; and thereby you
shall supply, and reuerse the loss of time, which you have made by that
distraction; and you shall revenge your selves on the Devil, who has procured
to divert you, by impertinent thoughts. This is a very profitable advise for
Prayer. And, as when a man, who was traveling with others, laid himself down
to sleep, and his Camerado's passed on; but when he awaked, he made so much
haste to overtake them, that in a quarter of an hour, he dispatched that way,
which he was to have made in a whole one, if he had not fallen asleep: so when
you reflect, and return to your selves, from your distraction, in the last
quarter of an hour, you are to carry the matter so well, Chap. 14.
as to do therein, all that which you were to have done in the whole hour, if
you had continued in attention.

Enter presently into account with your self and say, What did I pretend to
negotiate with Almighty God, in this Prayer? what was the Fruit, which I had
prepared to gather thence? Humility? Indifferency? Resignation? Conformity with
the will of God? Well yet, I will not fail to fetch this Fruit, Note.
out of this Prayer, in despite of the Devil. And when perhaps you find, that
even the whole Prayer has gone amiss, and that you have not gathered the
Fruit which you desired, you must procure to do it, in the Examen of your
Prayer, Chap. 27.
whereof we will speak afterward; and thereby you are to supply, for the faults
which you have made in the Prayer it self, and so you shall ever gather Fruit
thereby.

CHAP. XIX. Of some easy means, or ways, whereby we may have profitable, and
good Prayer.
THERE are also other very easy ways, which will help us much, toward the
having of good Prayer; whereby also it will appear, that it is ever, in our
power to have good, and profitable Prayer; and that all, are capable of Mental
Prayer, and that there is none, who may not use it.

As for the first, it is very good to this purpose, which is advised by some
Masters of Spirit, who say, That we must not make our Prayer to be a matter of
fiction, or art; but we must do in that, as men do in business of importance,
who pawse to think what they are about; and how their business speeds, and
how it may be better done. So the servant of God, is plainly, and without
tricks, to deal with himself, Note.
in point of Prayer, and to say, How goes the business forward of the
spiritual profit, and of the salvation of my soul? For this is our business,
and we are not continuing in this life, for any other true reason, but only to
negotiate this affair. Let therefore the religious man especially, enter into
account with himself, and let him think thus, at great leisure. How goes my
soul on in this business? What fruit have I gathered in these ten, twenty,
thirty, or forty years, that I have been in Religion? What is that, which I
have gained, or acquired in the virtue of Humility, or Mortification? I will
see how the accounts do stand; and what I can answer to God, for all those so
great meaenes, and helps, which I have had in Religion, wherewith to thrive,
and increase the Principal, and Talent, which he gave me. And if hitherto I
have ill employed my time, and not known how to serve my self thereof, I will
remedy the fault from henceforth; and certainly, my whole life shall not pass
hereafter, as a great part thereof, has done hitherto.

In the same manner ought every one in his condition, with great playnenesse
and simplicity, and without all disguise, make a pawse to think in particular,
how it goes with him, in his place and duty; how he shall be able to discharge it
well, and according to the will of God; how he may carry his business like a
good Christian, and govern his house and family, in such sort, as that all of
it, may serve God. How he may make right use, and bear those difficulties with
patience, which his condition, or office carry with it. In this, he will find
enough to lament, and to amend. And this will be a very good, and a very
profitable kind of Prayer.

John Gerson tells of a servant of God, who was wont to say thus, many
times. Guliel. Paris.
It is now forty year since I have frequented prayer, with all care I could;
and I never found a better, nor a more brief, and compendious means, toward
the making of good Prayer, then to present my self, in the presence of God,
like an infant, or like some poor blind, naked, and abandoned beggar. We see
that the Prophet David, did use this kind of Prayer very often, calling
himself sometimes a sick man, at other times an orphane, at other times a
blindeman; and at others, a poor Creature, and a beggar. And of this, the
Psalms are full. And we know by experience, that many, who have used, and
frequented this kind of Prayer, have come, by this means, to be endued with
very high Contemplation. Do you therefore use it; and our Lord will be pleased,
that by this means, you shall obtain, what you desire.

The Prayer of the Beggar, Note.
is a very good Prayer. Consider, says Gerson, with how great humility and
patience the poor man stands expecting a little alms, Gerson de monte
contemplat.
at the rich man's door; and with what diligence he goes, where he knows,
there is any alms to be given. And as this poor and naked, forsaken creature,
stands before the richman, asking him alms, and hoping for the remedy of his
necessity, with great humility, and reverence; so are we to place our selves,
before God in Prayer, representing to him our Poverty, our necessity, and our
misery; and hoping for some remedy thereof, at the hands of his liberality and
bounty. Psa. 112.2.
Sicut oculi ancillae in manibus Dominae suae, ita oculi nostri, ad Dominu^
Deum nostrum, donec misereatur nostri. As the eyes of the slave, stand hanging
upon the hands of her Lord, expecting what he will bestow upon her; so are our
eyes to be hanging and depending upon our Lord God, till such time, as we may
obtain mercy of him.

We find in that story, which is recounted of the Abbot Paphnutius, who lived
in the most inward part of the desert, Pratum spiritual.
how that having heard of that loose woman Thais, that she was the snare and
perdition of many souls, and the cause also of many quarrels, and the death of
many; he did with desire to convert her, and draw her to God, take the habit
of a secular man, and money, and he went to the City, where she dwelt, and
converted her. And he took the occasion, from some words of hers, when (he
seeming to desire, that she would allow him some more private place) she said,
Thou art safe enough here, from the eyes of men, who cannot see the here;
From the eyes of God, indeed, thou can not hide thy self, how secret soever
the place may be. The story is large; but to come to that which makes to our
purpose.

The woman being converted, he conducted her to the wilderness, and did shut
her up into a cell; and made it fast with a seal of lead, leaving only an
ouerture, in a very little window which there was, to the end that daily they
might thereby, give her a little bread, and water. And Paphnutius, leaving her,
she asked him only, how she was to pray to God. To this, the holy Abbot
answered: Thou do not deserve to take the Name of God into that impure mouth
of thine, but the manner of thy Prayer shall be this: Thou shall put thy self
upon thy knees; and thou shall turn thy self toward the East; and thou shall
repeal these words many times, Qui plasmasti me, miserere mei; O thou who
made me, have mercy on me. In this manner she continued three years, without
ever presuming to take the name of God into her mouth; but always carrying her
many grievous sins before her sight, and demanding mercy and pardon for them
of our Lord, in those words which the Saint had taught her.

And this Prayer, was so acceptable to Almighty God, that the Abbot Paphnutius,
demanding of the blessed Saint Anthony, at the end of those three years, if he
thought that God had pardoned her sinners; S. Anthony called his Monks about
him, and required them, that every one should remain all the next night
following by himself, in Watching and Prayer; to the end that our Lord might
declare that to some one of them, which was demanded by Paphnutius. Being
therefore all, in Prayer, Paul the monk, who was the chief amongst the
disciples of S. Anthony, had a vision of a bed in heaven, adorned with most
precious furniture; and which was attended by four virgins. As soon as he saw
so rich an object, he instantly said within himself: This grace and favor
cannot be reserved for any other, then for my father S. Anthony. As he was in
these thoughts, a voice descended from heaven, and said, This bed of glory, is
not prepared for thy Father Anthony, but for Thais the sinner. And fifteen
days after, our Lord was pleased to carry her to enjoy that glory, or
celestial bed of state. Do you the while, content your selves, with making
this Prayer, and know that you deserve to make no other. And perhaps you may
please God more by this, then if you made that other, which you imagine.

In a certain spiritual Discourse which is a manuscript, made by a religious
Monk of the Carthusians, concerning spiritual Communion, he recounteth a
certain passage of our B. F. Ignatius, and his companions, which he affirms
himself to have understood, from a person worthy to have been believed. How
that, whilst they were traveling as they used to do on foot, with their
little bags, and such like necessaryes, under their arms; and going toward
Barcelona, there was a good honest man, traveling also in the same way, who
saw them, and took pity of them, and besought them, with great instance, that
they would give him their little bags; saying that he was lusty, and strong,
and would carry them well. And although they refused to do so, yet at last,
being importuned, they were content; and so, went on, their way, all together.
When they arrived at their lodging, the Fathers, every one of them, did procure
to find out his corner, to recollect, and commend himself to God, in Prayer.
That other honest man, seeing them do so, did procure a corner also for
himself, and cast himself down upon his knees, like them. And proceeding
afterward in their way, they asked him once: Brother, what do you use to do, in
that corner of yours? He answered. That which I do, is to say, O Lord these men
are saints, and I am but their beast. Look what they do, and that will I also
do. And this (says he) am I offering up to God. And the Story further says
that the good man did profit so much, by means of this Prayer, that he grew to
be a very spiritual person, and to be of high Prayer, afterward. Now who is
he, that cannot use this form of Prayer, if he will?

My self did know a very ancient Father of the Society of Jesus, and a very
great Preacher, whose Prayer, for a long time, was to say, with much humility,
and simplicity, to Almighty God: O Lord, I am but a beast, and know not how to
use Prayer, do thou teach it me, O Lord. With this he profited much, and grew
to have most high Prayer; that of the Prophet, Psalm. 72.23
being accomplished in him, Vt iumentum factus sum, and ego semper tecum. Do
you therefore humble your selves, and become, in the sight of, God, as if you
were but poor beasts, and our Lord will be with you. It does much import in the
sight of God, that one do humble himself; for great matters are negotiated,
and obtained in this manner, at the hands of his divine Majesty. And here the
Saints do note a thing of much importance; That as Humility is the means to
obtain Prayer, Note.
so Prayer must be the means to obtain Humility, and to go increasing in it.

And so they say, that when a man has made good Prayer, he ever goes a way
much humbled and confounded. Whereupon it follows, Greg. l. 2. in Ezech. hom.
17. Chrysostom. ho. 4. de poen. to. 5.
that when a man parts well contented from his Prayer, with I know not what
kind of vain complacence, and a close kind of estimation, and reputation of
himself; conceiving, forsooth, that he has profitted much, and that already
he is growing a kind of spiritual man, that Prayer deserves to be suspected.
And therefore, if you say that you are not able to draw many considerations out
of Prayer, nor to have any high Contemplations, let your course, be to humble
your self, and gather that Fruit from your Prayer, and you can have no
excuse, for not doing that; and even that will be a very good Prayer.

It is also a very good means, when a man is not able to enter Prayer, and
that he is in conflict with many thoughts, and temptations, to do that which
Father Auila does thus advise, M. Auila l. 1. Epist.
in one of his letters: Cast your selves at the feet of Christ our Lord, and
say; O Lord for as much as this distraction, Note.
and difficulty in Prayer, proceeds from any fault of mine, I am heartily sorry
for it; but forasmuch as is therein, of thy will, and of thy punisment, I have
justly deserved it, for my great sins past. And for my great negligence and
errors present, I do accept it with a very good will, and I am glad to receive
from thy holy hand, this cross, this dryness, this distraction, this
discomfort, and this spiritual desolation. This Patience, and this Humility,
will be a very good Prayer, and will please God more, then the Prayer which you
desired to have, Tract. 8. cap. 26.
as we shall afterward show more at large.

It is written of our Father Franciscus de Boria, P. Fran. de Borgia.
how when it seemed to him, that he had not had good Prayer, that day did he
procure to mortify himself more, and to go with more care, Note.
and diligence in all his works, thereby to supply the fault of his Prayer; and
so he Counsels us to do. This is a very good means to supply the fault of
Prayer, yea and it will be also a good means to make our Prayer good. S. Nilus
the Abbot; speaking of Prayer says, That as when we disorder, and discompose
our selves in the day, it seems that presently we shall feel the punishment
of it in our Prayer, for there, God shows us some hard countenance: so on the
other side, when we have mortifyed, and overcome our selves, in things of
difficulty, we do instantly also find it, in our Prayer; for our Lord is
pleased to reward us, with ready payment, Quidquid durum and asperum patienter
tolerabis, fructum laboris, tempore orationis reperies.

The Saint does thereupon, give a very good advise, Nilus de oratione c. 17. and
62. in bibliosanctorum Patrum. com. 3.
for the having of good Prayer, and of very good conformity, with that which we
have already said. Si orare desideras, nihil facias eorum quae orationi
aduersantur, vt tibi appropinquet Deus, and tecum ambulet. If you desite to
have good Prayer, do nothing which may be contrary to Prayer, and by this
means God will communicate himself to you, and do you many favors.

And generally, let all men understand, that the principal care which the
servant of God ought to have, Note.
is to cleanse and mortify his heart, and to keep himself free from all sin,
and to be very firm and resolute, not to commit one mortal sin, for the
whole world. Herein he is to ground himself well, whilst he is in Prayer and
to insist and actuate upon it, very often; for we have need to do so, as long
as we are in this miserable life. And upon this foundation, every man may build
as much perfection as he will. And therefore he has no reason to go up and down
with complaints, but to be very grateful to God, although he give him no other
kind, of higher Prayer. For Sanctity, consists not in having to gift of
Prayer, but in doing the will of God. Eccl. 12.13.
Deum time, and ma^data eius obserua: hoc est enim omnis homo. With this
saying, Solomon concludes that high sermon of Ecclesiastes. Note.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, for all man is but this. That is to
say: In this consists all the felicity of man; and by this he complyeth with
all his obligations; and with this, he may be holy, and perfect.

I will conclude, with assigning a means for good Prayer, which shall be of much
comfort for all men. When you do not find in your Prayer, that ease, that
attention, and devotion, and internal union which you wish, exercise your
selves, in having a great inclination and desire to it, and with this you shall
supply that which you conceive to be wanting to you. For our Lord God (as the
Saints affirm) is no less content, and satisfied, F. Barth. de los mart yris
Arche. Brachare^sis in suo compend di^ spirituali c. 19. fol. 250.
with that good desire, and will of yours, then he would be with your high, and
sublyme Prayer, Deus, non minus voluntate sanctoque desiderio laetatur, quam
sitota anima amore liquefacta, plene sibi iungeretur. This help, God taught to
the holy virgin Gertrude, and it is related by Blosius. He says, Blosin ^e. 2.
de n^ onilis spir itual.
that the Saint complaining of her wants, and that she could not in in Prayer,
raise her heart so high, as she desired, and as she thought she was obliged, she
was taught from heaven, that with God it was sufficient, if the man did indeed
desire, and wish, that he had a great desire of it, when yet perhaps he feeled
very little, or no desire at all. For just so great, is a good desire esteemed
to be, in the sight of God, as the man, would feign have it great. And he
says: That in a heart which has such a desire (that is to say) which has a
desire, and will, to have this desire, God dwells with a better will, then a
man would be glad to stay, amongst fresh, and odoriferous flowers.

God has no need of your high Prayer, he desirs nothing but your heart; to that
he looks, and he receyues the desires thereof, for deeds. And so, agreably to
this, it will be a very good devotion, and a very profitable consideration, when
we find our selves tepide and dry in Prayer, Note.
to consider how many servants of God there are in Prayer over the world, at
the very same time perhaps shedding tears, and peradventure blood, and we may
imagine our selves, to be with them; and not only with them, but even with the
Angels, and other celestial spirits, loving and praising God. And we may
remit our selves to that which they do; and supply thereby, the want of that
which we cannot do our selves; repeating many times with our harrs, and with
our mouths, those words: Cum quibus, and nostras voces, vt admitti iubeas
deprecamur, supplici confessione dicentes, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus etc. O
Lord that which they say, I say; and that which they do, I would ^aine do; and
just as they praise and love, so would I feign bless, and praise, and love
thee. And sometimes it will be also good, that we remit our selves, even to our
selves, as we were at some former time, when we conceive our selves to have
been in good Prayer, saying: O my Lord, that which I did then, and as then I
offered my self wholly to thee; so do I offer my self now: and as then I
grieved for my sins, so do I grieve now; and as then I desired Humility,
Patience, and Obedience, in the same manner, O Lord, do I crave, and beg it of
thee now.

But above all, it is a most singular good practice, to unite our works with
those of Christ our Lord, and to supply our faults and imperfections by the
merits of his most sacred Passion; as well in that which concerns our Prayer,
as in our other actions; offering to the eternal Father, our Prayers, in union
of the love and seruour, wherewith Christ our Lord did pray to him, and praise
him here on earth; and our Fasts, in vnio^ of those Fasts, which he made,
beseeching him that he will be pleased to supply our Impatience, with the
Patience of Christ our Lord; our pride with his Humility; and our Malice, with
his Innocence. Blosius c. 9. institu^. spiritual.
This practice (as Blosius relates) was revealed by our Lord to some dear
servants of his, to the end, that we may so make our works of much worth, and
merit, and relieve our poverty, by his means; through the infinite treasure,
of the merits of Christ our Lord.

CHAP. XX. That we must content our selves with this Prayer, whereof we have
spoken; and not go with complaint, and grief, for not being able to obtain
that other Prayer, which is more high.
ALBERTVS Magnus says, that the true humble man, Albertus magnus de adhaerendo
Deo.
does not presume to lift up his heart, to a desire of that high and rich
Prayer, and of those extraordinary favors, which our Lord does use, Note.
sometimes, to communicate to his dear servants. For he esteems so little of
himself, that he holds himself unworthy of all favor, and spiritual
consolation. And if at any time, without any desire of his, our Lord do visit
him, with any comfort; he receives it with fear, acknowledging that he
deserves not those visitations; and that he knows not, how to profit by them,
as he ought. And if we had true Humility, we would content our selves, with any
of those kinds of Prayer, whereof we spoke. Nay rather, we should hold it for a
particular favor of our Lord, that he leads us, by the way of Humility. For
thereby, we shall conserve our selves; and by that other way, we might perhaps,
grow lightheaded, and so be lost.

S. Bernard says, Bern. ser. 5. quadrag.
that God does carry himself toward us, as the Fathers of this world do,
toward their little children. That when the Child asks bread, Note.
they give it him with a good will; but when the Child asks for a knife,
wherewith to cut his bread, they will not give it him; because they see it is
not necessary, and that perhaps, it might do him hurt, by cutting his fingers.
But the father takes the knife, and cuts the bread, that so the child may
neither be put to any trouble, nor made subject to any danger. in this forte
does our Lord proceed. He gives you the bread, already cut; and will not give
you those gusts, and consolations, which are in that most high Prayer; because
perhaps, you would cut your selves; and they would do you hurt, by making you
wanton, and guiddy, and to hold your selves for spiritual persons, and to
prefer your selves before others. Our Lord does you a greater favor, in giving
you the bread already cut, then if he gave you the knife, wherewith to cut it.
If God, with your Prayer, give you a great resolution, and strength, rather to
die, then to commit sin; and if he keep you, through the whole course of your
life, without committing a mortal sin, what better Prayer, and what better
Fruit can you desire, then this?

This is that answer, which the Father of the Prodigal Son gave to his
elder brother. Who seeing that the Younger was received with so much feasting
and joy, was deeply offended with it, and already was refusing to enter into
his Fathers house, saying to this effect; So many years are now past, since I
serve you, and have ever been subject to your commandments, and obsequious
to your person, and you have never bestowed upon me, so much as a Kid, to the
end that I might make merry with my friends. And as for that other, who has
dissipated your state, and been disobedient to your self. you have killed the
fat calfe, and made him a sumptuous banquet, with great music, and joy. The
Father makes this answer. Luc. 15.^^.
Fili, tu semper mecum es. My son, know that I do not this, as loving the
other, more then you: You are ever remaining in my house, and with my person.
It will also be reason, that you know and esteem worthily, of that which I do
for you. Is it perhaps a small grace and favor, which I do you, in continuing
you ever, about my self?

The same I say in your case. Does it seem a trifle, for our Lord to keep you
ever with himself, and in his house? It is a greater matter, for our Lord to
give you the gift of perseverance, and to keep you, from ever parting from
him, and falling into sin; then if, after you were fallen, he should lend you
his hand, as he did to the Prodigal Son. It is more for him, to keep you,
from breaking your head, then if he should heal it, when it were broken. If
then our Lord, with this Prayer which you have, do give you this, of what can
you complain? If with this Prayer, he give you great promptitude toward al
things which concern his service, and great indifferency, with intiere
resignation toward all the orders of Obedience, what can you desire more? If
with this Prayer, God conserve you in Humility, and in his fear, and in
walking warily, and in preserving your selves from occasions, and out of the
dangers of sin, what reason have you to sigh for more? This is that Fruit
which you were to gather out of Prayer, if it were never so high and sublyme.
And when, our Lord were pleased, to give you many gusts and comforts in it, to
this end you were to address the^ all.

Now this is that, which God does work in this plain, and ordinary Prayer. He
gives you the end, and the Fruit, without those extraordinary means of
eleuations, and gusts, and consolations; as they find by experience, who
persevere in it. And therefore we are to give, for this, double thanks to our
Lord. For, on the one side, he frees us from the danger of vanity, and pride,
which we might be subject to; and on the other side, he gives us that Fruit,
and profit of Prayer, which is most complete. The holy Scripture says, of the
holy Patriarch Joseph, That he spoke to his brethren, with hard, and sharp
words, Genesis 42.7. and 25.
and yet withal that he filled their sacks, full of corn; and commanded his
Steward, to treat them well. And so does our Lord carry himself many times
toward us.

We will never understand, as we ought, wherein Prayer, does indeed consist. Or
to speak more properly, we will never understand, as we ought, wherein our
spiritual profit and perfection does consist, which is the End and Fruit, to
which our Prayer is ordained. And so, many times, when it goes ill with us, we
think it goes well; and when indeed it goes well, we are apt to think, that
it goes ill. Draw you, out of Prayer, that which we have said; and especially
to proceed well that present day, and with edification, Chap. 15.
as was touched before; and you shall have made good Prayer; though whilst you
were praying, you were as dry as a stick, and as hard as a stone. And if you
gain not this, you have not made good Prayer, though you were streaming down
tears, all the while, and although you had been elevated up, to the third
heaven.

Henceforward therefore, do not complain of Prayer, but turn your complaints
against your selves, and say, It goes ill with me, in point of Mortification.
It goes ill with me in point of Humility; Note.
in point of Patience; in point of Silence, and Recollection. This indeed, is a
just complaynt, because it is to complain against your selves; for you do not
that which you ought, and yet it is in your own power. But that other course,
of going, in complaynt against Prayer, seems to be a kind of complaining
against God, because he gives not that kind of way, and quietness, and comfort,
which you could desire. This I say, is no good complainte. It is no word, this,
which may induce our Lord to mercy, but rather provoke him, to wrath, and
indignation, as the holy Judith, said to them of Bethulia. Non est iste sermo,
Judith 8.11.
qui misericordiam prouocet, sed potius qui iram excitet, and furorent
accendat. And it is worth the considering, how contrary we are in this, to
reason. For I find not, that we complain of not being willing to mortify, nor
humble, nor amend our selves; Note.
which yet is the thing that we have in our power. But we go complaining of
that, which is not in our power, but runns upon the accounte of Almighty God.
Endeavor you to mortify, and overcome your selves, and herein do that, which
belongs to you, and trust God with that which belongs to him. For more desire
has he, of our good, then we our selves. And if we do that which belongs to
us, we may rest secure enough, that, for his part, Tract. 8. Ca. 24. and seqq.
and vide supra Cap. 5. ad finem ex B^rmardo.
he will not be wanting, to give us that which is fit for us. We will speak
more largly of this point, when we treat of Conformity with the will of God;
where we will procure to give more express satisfaction, to this complaint,
and temptation.

CHAP. XXI. Of the causes of Distraction in Prayer, and of the Remedies.
THIS is wont to be a very ordinary complaint, and therefore the Saints do
generally treat thereof, and especially Cassian. Cassianus coslat. ^. 8.7.
They say, that distraction in Prayer, may rise from one of three causes. The
first, our own carelessnesse, or negligence; because we go scattered in our
own thoghts, Note.
and we set little guard upon our heart; and make little recolection of our
senses. He who lives in this manner, has no reason to wonder, how he comes to
be be distracted in Prayer, and why he can make no way in it. For it is clear,
that the images, and figures, and representations of those things which he
suffers to enter in, are to disquiet and molest him afterward in Prayer.

The Abbot Moses says well, Collat. 10.
That although it is not in the power of a man to keep himself from being
surprised with thoughts, yet, that it is in his power, either not to admit
the^, or else to drive them away. And he adds further; that it is in great
part in our power to correct and mend the quality of those thoughts; and to
cause that they may be holy, and good, and that those others which are
impertinent, and vain, may grow by little and little to be forgotten. For if
he give himself to the spiritual Exercises of Reading, Meditation, and
Prayer; if he employ himself upon good and holy works, he will be sure to have
good, and holy thoughts. But if, when he spends the day, he do but feed his
senses with vain, and impertinent things; his thoughts will not fail to be of
the same quality.

To this purpose he brings a comparison, and it is also brought by Saint
Anselme, and S. Bernard. Collat. 1. cap. 18.
These Saints affirm, that the heart of man is like a Millstone, which is ever
moving; Note.
but it is in the hand of the Miller, who rules it, to choose whether it shall
grind wheat, or oats, or any other grain; for that which they cast before
it, it will grind. And so the heart of man, cannot be without thinking upon
somewhat, which it will grind; but by your industry, and diligence, you may
make it grind what corn you will, wheat, or rye, yea or earth it self; for in
fine, whatsoever you cast before it, that will it grind. In conformity
therefore of this, if you mean to be recolected in Prayer, you must procure, as
you converse, to carry you heart recollected, and to keep the gates of your
senses close. For our Lord takes pleasure to treat with souls, which are, as
Gardens shut.

And so, it was a common saying of those ancient Fathers, and it is alleged by
Cassian. Cassianus collat 9. Abbatis Isaac. c. 1.^.
Quales orantes volumus inueniri, tales nos, ante orationis tempus, preparare
debemus; ex praecedenti enim statu, men's atque animus, in supplicatione
formatur. We must go back again, to begin our course, and procure to be, when
we are out of Prayer, Note.
such as in Prayer we desire to be. For of the same state and temper, which the
heart shall have out of Prayer, the same it will also have in Prayer. Qualis
liquor vasi infunditur, taliter redolebit; and quales herbas in horto cordis
tui plantaueris, Bonauen^* de profecta, religiosi li. (...) 58,
talia semina germinabunt, says S. Bonauenture. Such as the liquour is, which
you power into the vessel, such will be the smell^ and such as the herbs
shall be, which you plant in the garden of your heart, such will the fruit, and
seed be, which is produced thereby.

And because it is an usual, and natural thing, for a man to think much of
that, which he loves; if you desire to keep your heart firm, and stable in
time of Prayer, and that your thoughts of vain, and impertinent things, may
grow into oblivion, and to an end; you must mortify your love thereof,
despising all earthly things, and you must lodge your hearts in heaven. And how
much the more you shall profit, and increase in this; so much the more shall
you increase, and profit in stability, attention, and devotion in Prayer.

Secondly, Distraction uses to grow, from the temptations of our enemy the
Devil. S. Basil says, Basil. ser de renunciatione saeculi and spirit.
perfect. Cassian l. 10. ca 10. and Nilus 44. and 47. de oratione.
That the devil, seeing our Prayer to be the means whereby all good comes to
us, procures by all ways possible, to hinder us, and divert us therein; to the
end, that, having deprived us of this succor, he may the more easily find
entrance into our souls, for his temptations and deceits. He carries himself
toward us, as the Captain of Holofernes did, for the taking of the City of
Bethulia, Note.
which defenced it self against him. For he brake the Conduites whereby water
was conveyed into the City. And so the devil does procure, Judith 7.6.
with all diligence, to disorder, and break in us, this Aqueduct of Prayer,
whereby the water of grace, and of all spiritual good is derived into our
souls. Climacus gra. 18.
And S. John Climacus. says, that as upon the ringing of the bell, Faithful
Christians and Religious men, do visibly assemble themselves to make Prayer,
and to praise our Lord; so our enemies who are the devils, do also associate
themselves inuisibly, to tempt, and hinder us from Prayer.

In the Pratum spirituale, De Abbat. Marcell.
it is recounted of one of those Fathers of the desert, that rising one night
to Prayer, and singing of Psalms, as his custom was, he heard the sound of a
trumpet, which was like the sign of giving a battle. And the holy old man
being troubled at it, and wondering from whence that noise might come, into so
sollitary a place, where there was no war, nor no soldiers; the Devil
appeared to him, and said, that although he thought that there was no battle
toward, yet indeed there was; and that the trumpet showed that the devils
were about to begin it, against the servants of God; and that if he desired to
be free from it, he should return to take his rest, and if not, that he was to
look to himself. But he, confiding in our Lord, did enter into his Prayer,
and continued in it.

One of the things whereby the excellency, and great importance of Prayer may be
particulerly well descerned, is the watchful and cursed eye which the devil
carries toward it; and the continual war, which he makes against it, Nilus
ca. 44. and 47. de oratione, and ca. 100 and seqq. refer. aliqua Exempla circa
hoc in biblio. Sactorum PP. Tom 3.
as the holy Abbot Nilus notes very well. There be other good works, which
the devil is better content to pass withal, and to endure. He will permit
sometimes, a fast, a discipline, and a hayrecloth, but a time of Prayer he
cannot endure; but by all possible means, he procures to hinder it.

From hence it grows, that when we are in Prayer, we suffer many times more
temptations, then in any other action of ours. It seems that then, the whole
troop of thoughts set upon us, and sometimes they are so filthy, Note.
and so wicked, as if we went not so much thither to pray to God, as to be
molested and vexed, with all kind of temptations by the Devil. For things
which before did never present themselves to us, nor never passed by our
thoughts, in our whole life, do offer themselves to us in Prayer; as if they
kept themselves of purpose for us, against that time. And since the Devil
knows, that Prayer is the redress of all our miseryes, and the beginning, and
fountain of all our spiritual good, and an efficacious means for the
obteyning of all virtue, it puts him to much pain, and he imployeth all the
power he has to hinder it. And so the Saints are wont to call Prayer,
Tormentum Daemon^m, and flagelluns Daemonum. The torment, and the scourge of
the Devil.

This very thing ought to be a cause, and motive to us, to make us more to
esteem, and more diligently to frequent the use of Prayer: and so much the
more, because the Devil, out of a mere envy which he bears us, seeks to
hinder us. S. Thomas of Auila and other grave Authors affirm, Thomas Abulensis.
that for this very reason, our Holy Mother the Church who is governed by the
Holy Ghost, and knows well, that the custom of our enemy, is to tempt, Note.
and make all the war he can upon them who are in Prayer; has ordained, that
at the beginning of every one of her Canonical hours, this verse be said:
Deus in adiutorium meum intend: Psalm. 69.2.
Domine ad adiuuandum me festina. Where we desire favor of our Lord, that he
will enable us to pray as we ought, Note.
and defend us from the ambushes, and temptations of our enemies.

Thirdly, these vain thoughts, and Distractions, do sometimes grow upon us in
Prayer, without any fault of ours, and only out of our very infirmity and
weakness. For we are so frail, and miserable, and our na^^re does remain so
totally disordered, and decaye^ by sin, and especially our imagination, that
we can scarce say a P^ter noster, but diverse thoughts will be offering at us,
according to the complaint of S. Bernard. For this, it will be a good remedy,
that we take for the subject of our Prayer, the consideration of that thing,
which makes us suffer, and so to humble our selves, by the knowledge and sense
of our own great misery. For this Humility, and this knowledge of our selves,
will be a very good Prayer: though yet besides, we will speak of some other
remedies, which are given by the Masters of spiritual life, and other holy
men.

CHAP. XXII. Of other remedies, for the making us reman^e with attention, and
reverence, in our Prayer.
THE blessed S. Basil, Basilius (...) regulis breuioribus 201. and 300. and in
constiuetionibus ad solitario^.
asks how a man may grow to have a firm, and attentive heart in Prayer; and
he answeareth, that the most efficacious means for this, is to conside^, that
he is in the presence of God; and that God is looking how he prays. For if
here, a man standing before a Prince, and speaking with him, do carry himself
with great respect, and reverence; and do apply great attention to what he
does, and to the manner and fashion which he holds therein; and should esteem
it for an act of great ill-manners in himself, to turn his back toward the
Prince, yea or yet to use any impertinent discourse with him: what shall that
man do, who attentively considers, that he stands in presence of the Majesty
of God; and that he is looking on; and that not only upon the exterior, but
upon the most secret, and internal part of his heart. Who (says he) is that
man, that shall presume to divert his eyes, and his heart, from that which he is
doing; and shall adventure to turn his back to God, and pass his thoughts,
in that place, toward impertinent things?

That great Monk Jacob, as Theodoret recounts, does use this following
consideration, to show what a great irreuerence this would be, Theodoret. in
historia Sanctorum Patrum c. 21. August. super Psa. 85.
and it is also alleged by S. Augustine. If I (said he) were the servant of a
man, who is also of the same nature with my self; and at the time when I were
to serve him, should leave to bring him his dinner, through the will which I
might have to be talking with some fellow-seruant of mine; my Master might
reprehend, and punish me, with just reason. And if being before a Judge, to
complain of some body, who had done me wrong, I should leave him, even as the
word were in my mouth; and should turn my back toward him, and stand talking
with others who were there; do you not think, that he would take me, to be a
rude fellow, and command me to be cast out of the Tribunal, where he were
giving sentence? Now this is that which they do, who going to treat with God in
Prayer, do yet distract themselves, by thinking of impertinent things. Our B.
Father prescribes also this help, which follows, Ignatius lib. exercitiorum
spiritualium
in one of the Additions, or Aduertisements, which he sets down for Prayer.
Where he says, that immediately before we enter into Prayer, we should, for the
space of a Pater noster, lift up our spirit to heaven, and consider that the
same God is present with us here; and that he is looking upon us, and that so,
we should begin our Prayer, with great humility and reverence. And we are to
procure, that this Presence of God, be not lost by us in the whole time of our
Meditation, Psa. 18 1^. Chrysostom. super illud Psalm. 4. Miserere mei, and exaudi
orationem meam.
according to that of the Prophet: Et meditatio cordis mei, in conspectu tuo
semper.

S. Chrysostom says: Make account that when you go to Prayer, you are entering
into that celestial Court, where the king of glory is seated, in heaven, which
is allimbrodered with stars, and that King environed with innumerable angels
and Saints, and that they all stand, 1. Cor. 4.9.
beholding us, according to that of S. Paul: Spectaculum facti sumus mundo and
angelis and hominibus. Bernardus. Climacus in scala spirituali gradu. 4.8.18.
S. Bernard counsels how we are to carry our selves herein. Veniens ad
Ecclesiam, pone manum tuam super os tuum, and dic: Expectate hic cogitationes,
malae intentiones, and affectus cordis, and appetitus carnis: tu autem anima
mea, intra in gaudium Domini Dei tui, vt videas voluptatem Domini, and visites
templum eius. When thou shall enter into the Church, and recolect thy self
toward Prayer, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and say: Stay you here at the
gate, you disordered thoughts, and appetites; and thou O my soul, enter into
the joy of thy Lord, that thou may see, and do his holy will.

S. John Climacus, says; That he who when he is in Prayer considers in good
earnest, that he is standing in the presence of God, is a firm and constant
pillar, which cannot be moved. And he relates, how that seeing, at a certain
time, a Religious man, who was more attentive then the rest, in the singing of
Psalms, and that especially, at the beginning of the Hymns he seemed, by the
manner and countenance which he held, as if he had been speaking with another,
he desired him afterward, that he would tell him, what the matter was. The
monk made him this answer: At the beginning of the divine Office, I am wont
to recollect my heart, and thoughts, with great care; and calling them before
me, I use to say; Venite adoremus, and procidamus, and ploremus ante Dominu^
qui fecit nos, Psa. 94.6.
quia ipseest Dominus Deus noster, nos aute^ populus eius, and oues pascuae
eius. Come let us adore and prostrate our selves, let us weep before our Lord;
because he is our Lord, and our God, and we are his people, and the sheep of
his pasture. All these considerations are very profitable, and good, to make us
pray with reverence, and attention.

Others give this remedy; to put our selves before the B. Sacrament, if we be
in place where we may do it. Or if not, to be as near the B. Sacrament as we
can, and there to lodge our heart. It is also good, to have an eye upon holy
Images. Others help themselves by looking up to heaven. It is also very good,
to quicken a man, when he is subject to distractions, and dryness, in Mental
Prayer, Note.
to cast out some Iaculatory Prayers, and to speak vocally to God;
representing our weakness to him, Isa. 58.14.
and thus demanding remedy thereof, Domine vim patior, Mark. 10.47. Luc. 18.^8.
responde pro me. O Lord answer thou for me, for I suffer violence. That
Blind man of the Gospel, although Christ our Lord seemed to dissemble the
care he had, and did pass wide of him; and although the people bad him hold
his peace; yet be never gave over to cry out, but raised his voice, so much the
more; and exclaimed saying, Jesus filij David miserere mei, JESUS the Son of
David, have mercy on me. Iudi. 13.9.
Confirma me Deus in hac hora. Strengthen O Lord, and confirm this heart of
mine, in this hour; to the end that it may be able to think of thee, and to
be firm, and constant in my Prayer.

A holy woman gave this Counsel. S. Angela de Pulgin. ca. 58. and 26.
If you cannot speak to God with your heart, fail not to speak often to him,
with your mouth; for that which is spoken so frequently, does easily give heat,
and fervor to the heart. And this Saint confesses of her self, that somtymes,
through failing to use vocal Prayer, she lost that which was mental, through
her being so pressed and hindered, now and then, by sloth, and sleep. This also
is our own case. A man now and then, forbeares to speak in his Prayer, out of
very sloth, and being half a sleep; whereas if he would speak, he might
awake, and revive himself, for Prayer.

Gerson says, That it is a good remedy against Distractions, Gerson.
to have the Meditation well prepared, and the Points distinguished for Prayer.
Note.
For thereby, when one is distracted, and reflects upon it, he has already his
Point, which is certain and determined, to his hand, to which he may retire.
And if that prove not with him, he may instantly pass to another of those
Points, which he had prepared, and returns the more easily, to spin on the
thread of his Prayer. And we find by experience, when we examine our selves,
that many times the cause of our being distracted, and that we go wandering, up
and down to diverse things, is because we have not our Points well provided,
and known, upon which we may make our Prayer, and so we want a place, to which
we may retire our selves.

Moreover, not only the advice, which now I give, but that also which follows,
is very necessary, to the end that we may go well prepared for Prayer. Ignatius
l. Exercit. spiritualium notabile 3. hebdomadae. 4.
And so our B. Father does recommend it to us, in very serious words. Magnopere
iuuabit, ante ingressum Exercitij, tractanda puncta comminisci, and numero
certo praefinire. It will greatly help, says he, if before we go to prayer, we
recapitulate the points whereupon we are to meditate, and do appoint a certain
number of them. And we read of him, that himself used this method; and that,
not only in his beginnings, but afterward also, when he was an old man. Note.
And he prepared his Exercise over night, and went to rest, with that care upon
him. I relate this, to the end, that no man may think, that this diligence is
only to be used by Nouices. Yea and although a man do already know the
exercise well, as having meditated upon it at other times, nevertheless, it
will be very well done for him, to prepare himself again. For those words
whereupon we pray, being usually of the holy scripture, and therefore dictated by
the Holy Ghost, the very reading them, with a quiet and reposed mind, will
raise a new attention, Bonauent. in informat. nouitiorum. p. 1. c. 4. Cum
euigilas, statim omnes cogitationes tuas abijce de cord tuo, and ^ffer Deo
primitias cogitationum tuarum. Climacus c. 21.
and devotion, to meditate, and profit by them, so much the more.

Again, it will be of much help, if presently when we awake, we give no place
to other thoughts, but think of the Exercise which we are to make; preparing
our selves for Prayer, by some consideration, accommodated to that which we are
to meditate. Cassian, S. Bonauenture, and S. John Climacus, do hold this, for a
very important advise. And they say, that the order of our Prayer, and
consequently the disposition of the whole day after, does much depend heerupon.
And S. John Climacus does observe, that whereas the devil does well see, that
this particular is of much importance; he is therefore very diligent, and
sollicitous, in watching, when we chance to wake; to the end, that instantly he
may take up his lodging with us; and so, gather the first fruits of the whole
day. And he says, that there is amongst those malign spirits, one, whom they
call the Precursor, who has the office to watch, and set upon us by night, at
the time when we first awake, out of our sleep, yea and a little before we are
fully awake, when a man is scarce returned entirely unto himself; that so he
may represent certain deformed filthy things to our mind, or at least, things
impertinent; thereby taking the possession for the whole day; for he conceiues,
that the heart will be his, who is first possessed thereof.

For this reason, it will import us much, that we be full of caution, in giving
no place to our enemy, but that instantly, when even we have scarce opened our
eyes, the memory of our Lord, may be already planted in our hearts, before any
other thought be lodged there. Whereof our B. Father, Ignatius li. exercitiorum
spiritualium addit 2. prioris hebdomadae. and addit. 5. secundae hebdomadae.
and in 1. modo or^di.
does also advise us: and he adds moreover, that the same guard, is, after a
sort, to be held by us, over our selves, when we are to make Prayer, at any
other hour, by recollecting our selves a little, to think, Whither go I, and
before whom do I purpose to appear? and by recapitulating briefly the mystery
whereupon you are to meditate, like one who tunes the instrument, before he
plays. And our B. Father said, that generally the making of good Prayer, and
gathering store of Fruit thereby, did in great part depend upon the
observation of these, and the like aduises, which he calls Additions. And our
selves do very ordinarily find the truth of this, by experience; and that when
we go well prepared, and take care to follow these directions, our Prayer
proves very well; and if not, otherwise.

The holy Ghost says, by the Wiseman; Ante orationem praepara animam tuam, and
noliesse quasi homo, qui tentat Deum. Eccl. 18.25.
Before Prayer prepare your selves for it, and be not like the man who tempts
God. S. Tho. 2.2. q. 97. ar. 3. ad 2. Bonauent. in opusculo cui titulus est,
Regula nouistoru^ ca 2.
S. Thomas and S. Bonauenture, note, upon these words, that to go to Prayer,
without preparation, is to tempt God. For to tempt God, say the Deuines, is to
desire any thing without employing the usual, and necessary means, of
obtaining it. As if one should say, I will not eat because God can, and will
sustain me, without eating. This should be a tempting of God, and a demanding
of a miracle, without necessity. As Christ our Lord said to the devil, Note.
when he took him up, to a pinnacle of the Temple, and persuaded him that he
should ^ast himself down, and that God would command his Angels to take and
carry him, in the palms of their hands; For our Lord answered thus. Matt. 4.7.
Non tentabis Dominum Deum tuum. Thou shall not tempt thy Lord, and thy God, I
may go down by a ladder; this other is a tempting of God, and a demand of a
miracle without necessity. Since therefore the preparation of our selves to
Prayer, is so principal, and so necessary a means, to the thing it self,
that the Wiseman says, That to resolve to have Prayer, without this
preparation is a kind of tempting of God, and a pretending, to have him show
miracles with you, our Lord is well pleased that we have good Prayer, and that
we perform it with much attention, and reverence; but yet he desires that we
should have it, by the ordinary means, whereof we have spoken.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a matter of great consolation, for them who are molested, and
distracted in Prayer.
FOr the comfort of such as are molested with this temptation, Basil. in
constit. monasticis. ca. 2.
S. Basil notes, that in Prayer, we only then offend God by these
distractions, and thoughts, when a man, with his will, and after reflection
made upon what he does, is distracted, and caryeth himself with little
reverence, and respect. Note.
He who puts himself to Prayer, and therein does purposely think of his
study, or of his office, or of his business, Chrysostom. ho. 17. in varia loca
Matt. 10.2.
does well deserve that God should not help, but punish him. And here that
comes well in, which S. Chrysostom says, Tu non audis orationem tuam, and
Dominum vis audire precem tuam? With what reason can thou expect, that God
should hear thee, when thou do not so much as hear thy self?

But on the other side, when a man does morally what he can, and yet is
distracted, through weakness, and cannot have so much atte^tion, as he desires,
but does as it were forsake his heart, and fly abroad, according to that of the
Prophet, Cor meum dereliquit me; then our Lord is not offended with him; Psa.
39.13.
but rather is moved to compassion, and mercy, because he well knows our
infirmity, and weakness. Quomodo miseretur pater siliorum, Psa. 102.13.
misertus est Dominus timentibus se; quoniam ipse cognouit sigmentum nostrum.
As a Father who has a Son, sick of a frenzy, suffers with him, and is much
afflicted, when he hears, that for every word that he speaks of sense, he
talks idly afterward; so our most merciful, celestial father, does pity,
and has compassion of us, when he considers that the weakness, and infirmity
of our nature is so great, as that when it imports us most to to be speaking,
in our wits, we fly out into a thousand absurd thoughts.

And so although a man feel no devotion and find no juice in Prayer, but much
dryness, and combat of imaginations, and thoughts; and although he continue
so, all the time of his Prayer; yet that very Prayer, leaves not to be very
grateful to our Lord God, and of great value, and merit, in his divine
presence. Nay it uses many times, to be more grateful, and meritorious, then
if a man had passed through it, with much devotion, and consolation; in regard
that he has endured, and suffered that difficulty, and trouble in that Prayer,
for the love of God. Note.
Neither does the same Prayer, leave to obtain grace and favor, wherewith to
serve our Lord better, and to increase more in virtue, and perfection, although
he feel it not then. As it happens to a sick man, who feeds upon some meat
of substance; and although he take no delight, nor feel no taste therein, but
pain and torment; yet he gets strength, and grows thereby toward a
recovery.

By that which is said, Note.
it may be easily seen, how great an error, and how grievous a temptation it
is, for a man to give over his Prayer, because he finds it subject to great
variety of thoughts and temptations. Only it is needful, to be well
advertised, that upon this occasion, and under color of I can no more,
tepidity and sloth do not enter in; and that we be not facill and remiss,
Tract. 8. ca. ^0.
to be carried away with all winds; and to suffer our thoughts to go
wandering, and our imagination to be where it lists, as afterward I shall touch
more at large; but that we perform, all that which is to be done on our part;
procuring with great care, and diligence to have an eye, and to drive away
those thoughts, Genes. 15.^1.
as the holy Abraham did the birds, which descended over the Sacrifice. But
doing (as is said) that which morally is in our power, there is no cause, why
we should trouble our selves.

We read of S. Brigit, Refere Blosius ca. 3. mouit. spiritual.
that when she was tired in her Prayer with many temptations, our Blessed Lady
appeared to her, and said: Thus the Devil being envious at the good of me^,
procures, as much as he may, to give them difficultyes and impediments, when
they are in Prayer; but thou O Daughter, with whatsoever temptation, and how
wicked soever, thou be molested in that Exercise, and though it seem to thee
that thou can not possibly drive it away; yet procure thou nevertheless, to
continue as well as thou may, in that good will of thine, and in those holy
desires; and this shall be a very good, and a very prositable Prayer, and it
shall be of great merit in the sight of God. We have already spoken, else where,
of a very good means for the restoring of that which we may seem to have
lost, by our distractions.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Temptation of Sleep, and from whence it comes, and the
remedies thereof.
THE temptation of Sleep, which is another kind of distraction, may sometimes
proceed from a natural cause, as by want of sleep, much wearynes, ill
weather, excess of age, excess of eating, or of drinking, although it should
be but of water. Those ancient holy Fathers of the Desert, did relate, how God
showed to them in spirit, that there were certain Devils, who did set
themselves upon the necks, and heads of Monks, and made them sleep. And
others who put certain singers into their mouths, and made them yawne. At
other times, this grows from our sloth, and negligence, when a man is in
Prayer, in some such composition of his person, as may give occasion to Sleep.
Cap. 22.
The chief remedy for this, is that which was said before, concerning
attention; and to remember that we are in the presence of Almighty God. And, as
a man who is in the presence of some great Prince, will not presume to sleep;
so we, who consider that we stand before the majesty of God, and that he is
beholding us, ought to be much confounded in ourselves, when we sleep in
Prayer.

It is also a good remedy to stand on foot, without leaning; and to wash our
eyes with cold water; and some use to carry a wet napkin about them, if they be
much oppressed with this temptation. Some help themselves, by looking up to
heaven; and by making Prayer, where there is much light; or else to pray in
presence of the B. Sacrament, in company of others; or to take a discipline
before Prayer, whereby they may remain, both awake, and devout. Others, whilst
they are Praying, give themselves some kind of little pain, whereby they
keep themselves awake; and when they pray alone, they spread their arms, into
the form of a Cross. It helps also for this, to speak, and say some Vocal
Prayers, whereby a man may be stirred up and much revived, as we said before. It
is good to serve our selves of these, Cap. 22.
and such other remedies, beseeching our Lord, that he will cure this infirmity
of ours.

Cesarius, in his dialogues, Caesarius li. 4. dialog. c. 29.
does recount of a Religious man of the Cistercian Order, (who used to sleep
many times in Prayer,) that there appeared to him Christ our Lord, being
crucified, with his back turned toward him; and then he said, Why art thou so
negligent and slothful? Thou do not deserve to see my face. Of another he
recounteth there, Caesarius lib. 4. c. 18.
that God did give him a more sharp reproof, because being in the Quire at
Prayer, and sleeping as he used, a crucifix came to him from the Altar, and
gave him such a blow upon the cheek, that he dyed of it the third day after.
All this, gives us well to understand, how much this negligence and tepidity
dipleaseth God. The tepid, and negligent Religious man (as Casarius says) does
provoke God, Apoc. c. 3.^6.
as if it were to vomit; according to that of the Apocalypse: Because thou art
tepide, I will cast thee out of my mouth.

Of S. Romualdus the Abbot (who was the founder of the order of Camaldula,
Romualdus Abbas.
) it is related by Petrus Damianus (speaking of the Prayer which his Religious
men did make) that it was, in the account of that Saint, so great a fault to
sleep in Prayer, that he permitted not such a one to say Mass that day; for
the little reverence wherewith he had remained, in the presence of our Lord,
whom he was to receive.

CHAP. XXV. How much it imports us to take some extraordinary time, for the
giving of our selves to Prayer.
AS the men of this world, besides the ordinary, and daily refection of their
bodies, have their extraordinary Feasts, and banquets, wherein they exceed
their common course; so also is it very sit, that besides our daily Prayer, we
should also have our spiritual feasts, and banquets; where our souls may not
eat by so strict measure, as at other times; but may be filled by the
abundance, and sweetness of the grace of our Lord. Nature it self teaches
this. For we see, that the ground is not content, with the dew which falls,
night by night; but it requires sometimes, that it should rain a whole week,
or two, without ceasing; and all is little enough, to the end, that it may
remain so well imbrued, with water, as that the succeeding Wind, and Sun
may not dry it up. So also it is fit for our souls, that, besides the ordinary
dew of every day, they may have some set times, wherein they may procure to
fill themselves so well with virtue, and with the very juice of devotion, as
that the Sun, or Wind of future business, and temptations, or the other
accidents of the world, may not serve to dry them up. And so we read of many
Saints, P. Franciscus Arias p. 2. del aproue chamiento espiritual. tract. 5. de
la oration. cap. 7.
and Prelates of the Church, that leaving their employments, and business,
they did often recolect themselves, for some time, in retired places; so to
give themselves the more to Prayer, and divine Contemplation. We read of the
holy Abbot Arsenius, that he had for a custom, to take some day in the week,
for this purpose, which was the Saturday; at which time he continued from the
evening thereof, till the next day morning, in Prayer.

This is very important, not only for the advancing, Note.
and improuing our selves more in virtue, and perfection, but even for the not
returning backward. For so great is the weakness and misery of man, and the
inclination which we have to ill; that although sometimes we begin our
spiritual Exercises with feruout, yet we instantly go decaying, by little and
little, and unsaying that, which we professed before. Like water, which how
high soever it boil, yet by retiring it from the sire, it does presently, by
little and little, return to the natural coldenes. So do we return instantly
to our tepidity, and slacknesse; which we seem to have more rooted in us, and
more connaturall to us, then water has to coldenes. Sensus enim, and cogitatio
humani cordis, in malum prona sunt, Gone. 8.21.
ab adolescentia sua, says the Holy Ghost. Quoniam nequam est natio little,
Sap. 1^.10.
and naturalis malitia ipsorum For as we are nothing, so we are still returning
to our nothing.

To this may be added, that since we are so full of employments, some of us in
studies, others in particular ministeries, others in Offices and exterior
business; we have so much the more need, of this particular kind of
Recollection. Note.
For although our business be good, and holy; yet as the knife is dulled by
being daily used, and, from time to time, it is necessary to give it a new
edge; so we grow daily dull, and be forgetting our own spiritual profit,
whilst we set forward, that of others. Even the Philosophers could tell us,
that, Omne agens, agendo repatitur. Every agent, does even by doing, suffer,
and part with somewhat of his own; and every man finds this by experience in
himself. It does therefore importe us very much, to recollect our selves at
certain times, and to untie our minds from all other employments; to redress
this loss, and to repair that, which is decaying daily in us, and to recover
new forces for the future. For we are yet more obliged, to help our selves
then our neighbors, 3. p. tract. c. 4.1.8.
and Charity well ordered begins at home.

This is also to be done, with great care, since it imports so much, even for
the very End, of helping our neighbors. For a most certain thing it is, Note.
that from our own greater spiritual profit, does also grow the greater
spiritual profit of our neighbors. And therefore, that time is not lost to
them, which any man takes for himself; but rather they shall grow rich, by it.
It is like the letting of land lie fallow for this year, to the end that it
may fructify so much the more, the next. Father Auila said, that it was like
the moulding of a stone, M. Auila.
to the end that it may be made able to grind. And so a ma^s being to much in
business, is so far from being any reason, why he should not recolect himself,
as that for the same very cause, and so much the more, as a man is employed,
and much embarked in ministeryes, and businesses, in so much the more necessity
he is, of resorting to this remedy. They who go sailing far by sea, have need
to take Port many times, to refresh themselves, and take in necessary, and new
provisions. And so they, who go embarked in business, and ministeries, and
employments with their neighbors, and who are in so many dangers, and
occasions of sin; have need many times, to make recourse to to the Port of
solitude and recolection, that so they may take in new and necessary
provisions; and dress up, and provide themselves, of what is sit.

In the holy Gospel, we have an excellent example of this. The Evangelist S.
Mark, recounteth how the Apostles went full of business, in the employments
which they had, concerning their neighbors; in such sort as that they had
scarce time to eat, so great was the number of people which was offered to
them. They went to give account, to Christ our Lord, of that which passed
heerin; and he said to them, Come a part into the desert, and repose awhile?
Recollect your selves a while, in the solitude of the desert. If then the
Apostles had need of repose, and recolection, and that our B. Savior himself
did counsel it to them, how much more need thereof have we?

They who treat of Prayer, say very well, that Prayer is that to the soul,
which repose and sleep is to the body. And so, the holy scripture calls it
sleep: Cant. 5.2.
Ego dormio, and cor meum vigilat. Adiuro vos filiae Jerusalem, Cant. 8.4.
ne suscitetis, neque euigilare faciatis dilectam, donec ipsa velit. And
declaring this more at large, they say, of the body, that when it reposeth by
corporal sleep, it rests and recouereth new force and strength, and so the
soul, reposing in the sleep of Prayer, recouereth also fresh breath, and
life, wherewith to labor, Note.
in the service of Almighty God. And more then this. As a man who feeds upon
good meat, yet if he want repose, and necessary sleep, will prove but weak
and sick, yea and also be in danger, to loose his wits; so also he, who shall
go greatly employed in exterior businesses (how holy and good soever they may
be) yet if he want the necessary repose, and rest of Prayer, he will prove but
weak and decayed in spirit, and will run hazard to loose himself. And
therefore does the Spouse require, That they awake not his beloved, till she
will, herself. When they wake a man out of sleep, by any noise which they
make, it is a thing displeasing to him; but when he waketh of himself,
because nature is satisfied, and for that he has reposed enough, (in regard
that the fumes which mounted up to the brain, are now disgested,) there is no
offense therein. Just so is it with the soul. Our Lord requires, that no man,
nor no thing trouble it, nor hinder the Prayer which she is in; but when that
rest is taken which is necessary, she may then awake herself, and return to
the employments of the works of Charity, and so they will be well performed.

Although it be of great importance for all men, and upon all just occasions,
to recollect themselves in spiritual Exercises, and to give themselves more to
Prayer, and so much the more as we shall do it, so much the better it will be;
yet particulerly in some occasions and conjunction of reasons, this is
necessary. As namely, when a man sees, Note.
that he goes declyning in the spiritual Exercises of Prayer, of Examen, of
spiritual reading, and that now, he gathers not the fruit, and profit by
it, which were fit: When he sees that he grows negligent, and careless in
the observance of his Rules, and that now, he makes no more accounte of small
matters: When he seems to himself, that he is not spiritual, and
introuerted, but that he is very exterior, and much carried away, by the
occasions, and businesses which he treates: When he also observes, that he
does not overcome, and mortify himself out right, in some one thing; it is
very good for him to recollect himself, some days, in these Exercises, that
so he may finish the resolution, to conquer himself. For it may be, that in
one of these Recollections, he may obtain more grace of our Lord, and more
strength wherewith to mortify, and overcome himself, then by the labor of
many days.

Many times it happens, that a man goes lymping; he rises, and he falls,
and in some one of these Exercises, he remains vnbeguiled of the vanity of
the world, and fully possessed of Truth, and resolute to do all that is fit. He
changes his style, and he takes a new manner of life upon him. For in fine,
the being so long alone, treating with God, and with himself, is a great
disposition, to make our Lord speak to his heart, and to induce his Majesty to
do many fa^iours. Sedebit solitarius, and tacebit, Tren. 3.28
quia leuauit se super se. A man does raise himself, above himself, and makes
himself, quite another man. And so we have seen very extraordinary changes,
wrought in men by this means. Et non est abbreuiata manus Domini. We must
never disconfide in God, Isa. 50.1.
but be ever doing that, which is of our part. How do you know, what God will
work in your soul, by means of this disposition? It may be, that our Lord
has resolved to grant the spiritual profit, and perfection of your soul, in
one of these Exercises.

Again, after the having ended some very long journey, or some business, or
employment of extraordinary distraction; this kind of Recollection, seems to
be as important, as good and dainty treaty, is to a body, after a long disease,
to the end that a man may recover himself, and repair the strength which he
has lost. And for the same reason, it is also very good, for a man to prepare
himself before hand, by these Exercises, when he finds that he is growing
into some such kind of business; to the end that he may do things with more
virtue, and less spiritual loss of his own. The Preservative, is a better
kind of Physic, then the Remedy, which comes after the disease. And
therefore our B. Father, did recommend to all superiors, that before they began
to enter upon their office, they should make the Exercises, for some days. The
same is also good, when one is to go into some long Mission. Whereof Christ our
Lord gave us an example. Matt. 4.1.
For before he began to preach, he retired himself forty days, into Desert.
Also in a time of tribulations, and afflictions, whether they be general of
the whole Church, or of his own Order, or of his own person, the occasion is
very good, for this. For to add more Prayer, and more penance, and
mortification, has ever been a means, much frequented in the Church, for
appeasing the wrath of God, and obteyning mercy from him.

All these are very good occasions to make a man recolect himself in these
Exercises. But indeed we have no need, to stand seeking of occasions. Our own
necessity, and interest, must solicit us to desire, and procure this benefit
very often. At least, no year ought to pass, without our meeting with these
spiritual Vacations. And when we do it, it must be very much in earnest, and
with the whole heart. For a thing of so great substance, as this, must in no
case be performed with ceremony, nor for complement, or because it is handsome.

Our Lord has imparted this means to the Society, in a very particular
manner, not only for our own profit, but for the help, and profit of our
neighbor. And therefore, in the Breues of our Institute, this is placed for one
of the Principal means, which the Society has, for the helping of their
neighbors. And this also, is another very particular reason, for which our B.
Father will, that we have much use of these Exercises. And he places it in his
Constitutions, and in the Rules of Priests; Vt in hoc armorum spiritualium
genere tractando, quod Dei gratia ad ipsius obsequium tantopere confer
cernitur, ^. p. Constable. c. 8.5. reg. 7. Sacerdo.
dexteritatem habere possit. To the end that they may be very dextrous in the
managing of this kind of Arms, which are so profitable for the gayning of
others. By this means, our Lord did gain our B. Father Ignatius. By this
means he gained his Companions. By this means, so many others have been
gained since, as well within the Society, as without it; and both in the one,
and in the other sort of men, we have seen, that our Lord concurreth, with
admirable effects. In fine we are to have great confidence, that by this
means, which has been imparted to us, in so particular manner by our Lord,
he will help us much, and do us many favors.

To that which is already said, I will add another thing, which is very
important, and which ought to assiste and encourage us much herein, which is
the singular favor and grace, which the Sanctity of Paul the fifth, has
granted in this particular, to all Religious men, in that Bull, or
Constitution, which he dispatched forth, upon the three and twentieth of May, in
the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundredth and six, which was the first
of his Pontificate; declaring the Indulgences, which Religious men should enjoy
thereby. He there grants a Plenary Indulgence, and remission from all sin,
to all Religious persons, of what Order soever they were, who for the space of
ten continued days, should make the spiritual Exercises; and that, as often
as they should make them, they were to obtain the same Indulgence. Whereby it
may well be seen, what estimation his Holiness made of this matter, and thereby,
how much our selves ought to esteem it. ^js v^ro qui de suorum superiorum
licentia, a negotijs, por december dies, alieni in cella commorabuntur, aut ab
aliorum conuersatione separati; in piorum librorum, and aliarum rerum
spiritualium, animos ad deuotionem, and spiritum inducentium, lectionibus
operam suam dederint; addendo saepe considerationes, and meditationes
mysteriorum sidei Catholicae, diuinorum beneficiorum, quatuor no uissimorum,
Passionis Domini nostri Iesis Christi, and aliorum exercitiorum, orationum
iaculatoriarum, aut vocalium, saltem per duas horas in diem, and noctem,
orationibus mentalibus sese exercendo, faciendo eodeni tempore confessionem
generalem, aut annualem, vel ordinariam, sanctissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum
sumpseriut, aut missam celebrauerint. Quoties pro quolibe^ praedictorum
Exercitiorum, plenariam similiter omnium peccatorum suorum indulgentiam and
remissionem, misericorditer in Domino concedimus. And also to all them, who
with the leau^ of their Superiors, (having laid business a side, and being
recollected in their Cell, or separated otherwise, from treating and conuersing
with the rest) shall exercise themselves for the space of ten days, in the
reading of pious books, and using other spiritual exercises, which raise the
heart to spirit and devotion; accompanying these things many times with the
considerations and meditations of the mysteryes of the Catholic Faith, and of
the benefits of God, and of the Quatuor nouissima, and of the passion of
Jesus Christ our Lord, and other Exercises of iaculatory and vocal Prayers;
and making also mental Prayer, at the least for two hours of the day; and
making, also within the said time, either their General, or Annual, or
Ordinary Confession, and receiving the most B. Sacrament of the Eucharist, or
saying Mass; whenever they shall do the aforesaid Exercises, for every
time, that they so shall do them, we do mercifully in our Lord, grant a Plenary
Indulgence, and remission of all their sins.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Fruit which we are to gather when we recollect our selves,
to make the spiritual Exercises.
WE are principally to cast our eyes, upon three things, which we are to
procure by these Exercises. The first is, that we must repair, and renew our
selves, in the ordinary daily actions which we perform, and that we perfect
our selves in them. For all our spiritual profit and perfection, does consist
in doing our ordinary actions well, as we said else where. Let no man think,
Tract. 2. cap. 18.2.
that the performing of these Exercises, is nothing else, but to continue
recolected there, for a week or two, Note.
enjoying much time of Prayer. It is not so; but to the end, that he may depart
from thence, with ability to make better Prayer, and to keep those Additions,
and documents, which are given to that purpose, and to make his Examens well,
and to say, and hear Mass, and (...) divine office, and to read spiritual
books with profit. For this, it is, that a man disimployes himself from other
business, during this time, to actuate and exercise his mind in doing those
things well; that so he may go forth, al renewed, and accustomed to perform them
still, after the same manner.

And so our B. Father says, Ignatius l. Exercit. spiritual. in ad^is. 5.
hebdomad. notabile 4. and in hebdoma. 5. and hebd. 3. notabile 4. post 2.
contempl.
that during all the time, that the Exercises continue (which when they are
made completely, are to last for the space of a month, there must be a
particular Examen, carried upon the observation of the Additions; and whether
the same spiritual Exercises be made with diligence, and exactnes, or no;
setting down the errors which he may have committed, concerning either the
one, or the other; to the end that a man may be habituated, and accustomed to
do these things from that time forward, truly well. This he repeateth many
times, as one who well knew, the much good that grows thereby. And not only in
the spiritual Exercises themselves, which is the principal, and which must
give force, and spirit to all the rest; but for all his other exterior
ministeryes, and employments, a man is to go, a very good proficient, out of
the Exercises, fetching breath from thence, wherewith to do his duty, and to
keep his Rules, better then before. So that the Fruit of his Exercises, is
not to be gathered, for that time alone, but principally for the future. And so
as that when any man comes forth of the Exercises, another man may see, the
profit which he has made, by the actions which he performs.

The second thing which we are to procure, to draw out of these Exercises, is,
to overcome and mortify our selves, in any untowardness, or imperfection, to
which he may have been subject. Let every man cast his eyes upon those things,
in which he uses to sail most frequently; or to be a cause to make others
fail, or be scandalized by the disedification which he gives them. And let
him procure to go out of the Exercises very well, and for that they were
principally ordained, and it is their End. And so, the Title which our B.
Father gives, to the Exercises, is this in vulgar: Spiritual Meditations, to
make a man able to overcome himself; and to direct his desires, and deeds, to
the greater service of our Lord God. In such sort, that a man must procure, to
go out of the Exercises, converted, and changed into another man. Et mutaberis
in alium virum, as Samuel said to Saul. 1. Reg. 10.6.
Et in virum perfectum: Into a perfect man (as S. Paul says,) that a man may
see, by the effects, and by the actions, Ephe. 4.13.
that such a one, has made the Exercises. That if before, he loved to be
talking, and to loose his time; men may see that now, he is a lover of silence,
and recolection. If before, he loved to be kindly, and commodiously used; it
may be seen, that now, he is a lover of mortification, and penance. If
before, he were a man, who used to mortify others by his tongue; that from that
time forward, he speaks no more, any such things, as those. If before, he
were negligent, and careless, in the observation of his Rules, and made noe
great reckoning of small errors; that from thence forth, he be very obedient,
and very punctual, and that he makes much account, even of the least
omissions; and that, by the grace of our Lord, he commits no fault at all,
of set purpose. For if a man be still to continue with the same untowardness,
and errors, and that he will needs come out of the Exercises, as he went in,
for what purpose do they serve?

S. Ambrose tells a certain thing, Ambr. l. ^. de poenit. 1.10.
of a Young man of his time, which since he relates, we may do so too. He had
been a lost man, and had taken the broad way, which had offered it self to
him. The time came, that he changed his purpose, and retorning afterward to his
City, he encountered with his old Camerado's, but he went wide of them. And
they maruelling thereat, and thinking, that he had not known them, came to
him, and said: We are they etc. and he answered, Gal, 1.20.
But I am not he. For he was changed, and grown another man. After this
manner, are we to be converted, and changed, that so we may say with the
Apostle; Viuo ego, iam non ego, Hier. super haec verba.
viuit vero in me Christus. I live, yet now not I; no longer now lives he, who
lived anciently in the Law, he who persecuted the Church, but Christ is he, who
lives in me. And this says S. Ambrose; Ambrose
which is also the same which was said by Christ our Lord, Math. 16.24. Lucae
9.23.
Si quis vult venire post me abneget seipsum; That man (says he) denies
himself, who is changed into another man, and procures already not to be that,
which he was wont to be. It is related of our Father Francis de Borgia, Lib. ^.
c. 8. vitae P. de Borgia.
in his life, that after he had conducted the body of the Empress to Granada
(where our Lord gave him great light, and vnbeguiled him concerning the vanity
of the world, by that spectacle of death, which was present to him) and
returning to the Court, Note.
he said that it seemed to him, as if he had found it changed, from what it
was. But the truth is, that it was himself who was all varied, and changed, by
the knowledge, and light, which God had given him. And in this manner, are we
to come out of the Exercises, with such new light, and so vnbeguiled, as our
Lord is wont to make men, in the Exercises.

The third thing, Note.
upon which we are to look, that we may draw it out of the Exercises, which
indeed does follow, upon that which is already said, is the obteyning of some
virtue, or something belonging to perfection; and particulerly of that, whereof
we have greatest need; for they be ordained for this, To root out Vice, and to
plant Virtue. Thomas de Kompis
Two things says the Saint, do help a man much toward God. The one, to divert
a man's self, with great courage, from that to which his nature viciously in
clynes him, which is that we spoke of before. The other, to labor with
fervor, for that virtue, which is most wanting to us. And so the Directory of
the Exercises, (speaking of the way, Directoriu^ Exercitio. l. 3.
which we are to hold, when we recollect our selves to them) does advertise,
that all the time is not to be employed, upon the Meditations, of the first
week. For them (says he) two or three days will suffice, to the end that
there may be also time, to go to other Meditations, from whence we may draw
more perfection. And amongst others things which he places there for this
purpose, one is, that we must take now and then, some of those principal
Rules, in which we may conceive, that all the perfection which we can desire,
does consist. As that (for example,) which says, Reg. 11. sumarij constie.
That as worldly men love and seek honors, fame, and estimation of renown in
the world; so we must love, and intensely desire, the very contrary. Take to
heart, in some one Exercise, to obtain this perfection, and to arrive to this
degree of humility, that you may be as glad of affronts, disgraces, iniuryes,
and false testimonies, as worldly men are glad of honor, and estimation; and
thereby you shall grow to be Lord over many impertinences, and debates, which
use to present themselves to you, upon the point of being valued, and
esteemed; more then one, for his learning; and then another, for his office;
and then another, in the Ministeryes of business which he treats; which things
are wont to inquiet us, Reg. 17. Summar.
and to hinder our spiritual profit, very much.

Take to heart, at some other time, that rule which says: Let all men, in all
things, procure to serve, and please the divine goodness, for that goodness
sake it self, and for the love of it, and for those singular benefits,
wherewith he preuenteth us; more then either for the fear of punishment, or
the hope of reward Procure you to arrive to this Purity of intention, that you
seek not your own interest at all, neither in much, nor little, neither in
the temporal nor eternal; but in all things, desire truly, the will, and
glory of God and let this be your contentment, having forgotten your selves,
and all your own interest, and commodity. Take to heart, another time, to
obtain, A most perfect Conformity, to the will of God, taking all things which
shall present themselves, either great or small, in whatsoever manner, or by
whatsoever way they come; as being delivered, by the hand of God himself. Upon
these points of perfection, and other things like these, we are to cast our
eyes, when we enter into the Exercises, and not to give over, till we obtain
them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of some directions, which will help us yet more, to profit by
these Exercises.
TO the end that we may profit more by these spiritual Exercises, and fetch
that Fruit from them, which has been said, it is to be advertised, first
(according to what we said before) that as when one is going to Prayer, he is
not only to have those Points provided, Cap. 14.
upon which he will Meditate; but also the Fruit, which he is to draw from
thence; so also he, who is to make the Exercises, must, in particular, have
that thing ready provided in his mind, which he means to obtain by their
means: and it may be done after this manner.

Before he retires himself to them, Note.
he is to consider, and treat thus with himself, at much leisure, and
attention, Which is the greatest spiritual necessity, that I have? What is
that, to which my vicious inclination or my passions, or my ill custom, does
inclyne me most? What is that, which makes the stissest war against my soul?
What is there in me, whereby my brethren may be offended, and disedified? And
this is that which I am to carry before mine eyes, to the end that I may
obtain it by my Exercises, and may resolve effectually to amend my self. This
is a very good preparation, for entering into the Exercises.

And it is also to be advertised, that when a man recollects himself, Note.
to make the Exercises, he must not propound to himself, the obteyning of very
high Prayer; nor to think, by that retiring, and shutting up himself, that he
must presently have much quietness, and attention, and familiarity with almighty
God; for it may well happen, that he shall be subject to more distractions,
unquietness, and temptations, then when he was in the dispatch of his business,
and performing his office abroad. But he is to fix his mind, upon fetching
that which I have said, out of his Exercises, and to resolve himself upon
that, in great earnest. And if he obtain this, he shall have made the
Exercises very well, though he had not the devotion, which he desired. Whereas
if he obtain not this, although, from the very first hour he have been ever
dissoluing himself in tears, and devotion, he shall not have made the
Exercises well; for in fine, that was not the end thereof,

That other advertisement will also help us much, which our B. Father gave, and
which he will ever have us observe in Prayer. That afterward, when a man has
ended his hour of Prayer, he shall, Ignatius l. Exercit. spiritual-in addit.
1. hebdomad. addit. 5.
for a quarter of an hour, or therabouts, either sitting or standing, make his
Examen, of the same Prayer. And he shall take account of himself, how it has
proved with him. If ill, Note.
he shall consider the cause from whence that may have proceeded. He shall
consider, if he prepared his Exercise well; if he gave place to any impertine^t
thoughts; if he suffered himself to be overcome with sleep; if he deteyned
himself too much in the speculation of his Understanding. If his heart were
remiss, and fainte; and if he did not procure, to exercise the affects of his
Will. If he had not an intention, as pure as he ought to have had it; but that
he sought his own comfort, more then the accomplishment of the divine will. If
he find himself to have sailed, in any of these things, he shall repent
himself thereof, and purpose amendment, for the time to come. And if it have
proved well, with him, he shall give thanks to our Lord God, procuring to
carry himself after the same manner, at his other times of Prayer.

This document, is of much importance: First, because by this Examen, and
Reflection, which is made, how the Prayer has proved, experience is taken to
avoid the faults, and to prosecute that, which was well done; whereby a man
obteynes a certain spiritual discretion and magistery, which grows from
experimental knowledge. For this reason, did our B. Father, esteem greatly of
this Examen, and Reflection, for the making of such, as might be Masters, not
only in this, but also in other employments, and ministeries of outs. And so,
4. p. Constable. c. 8. litera D.
in the fourth part of his Constitutions, he says: That it will greatly help
a Ghostely Father, toward the doing of his duty well, to make reflection, and
to consider if he have made any fault, in the hearing of Confessions.
Especially (says he) let him do it, in his beginnings, so to help himself
another time; and to draw amendeme^t out of his errors. For this reason
therefore, the Examen of Prayer, is to be made. And this is the first thing
which we are do therein. And Prayer is of so great estimation, and it imports
us so much that we be accustomed to make it well, and to go shredding off the
faults which we make therein; that our B. Father, did not content himself with
the Examen of Conscience, which we use to make every day at noone, and at
night; but instantly also, as soon as we have ended our Prayer, his express
pleasure is, that we should make a particular Examen thereof.

The second thing, (and that a very principal one) is, that a man is to
consider the Fruit, which he has gathered by that Prayer, Note.
and to return to actuate again upon it, (as when one repeats his lesson) and
draws out the Conclusions, and Truths, which have occurred; and makes as it
were, an epilogue of them. And this Examen, is to be held, for a thing of so
great importance, that if a man want time to make it after the Prayer is ended,
he is to make it in the very Prayer, it self, in the ending thereof.

We may add in this place, another point which will also be of good use. That
a man set down, that which he has wrought out of his Prayer; writing the
desires which he has had, and the Purposes which he has made; but this, must
not be done at large, but in a brief manner. And so also, let him set down,
such Truths, and Illustrations, or Vubeguilings of the vanity of this world,
as our Lord is wont to give in Prayer. Sometimes concerning some Virtue, and at
other times, concerning the Mysteryes themselves, which are in question. And so
we read, that our First Fathers used to do, Lib. 9. c. 13 vitae P. Babri.
our B. Father Ignatius, and Father Peter Faber; and we have in our hands, some
of those things which they wrote hereupon. Xauer. c. 2. and ^. Director.
Exercitori^ spiritual.
And Father Francis Xauerius, did also advise the same, as we read in his life.
And in the Directory of the Exercises, we have also the same advise.

And our Father General, Claudius Aquauiua, in the book of Industryes,
Claudins Aquauiua in industriis ad curandos animae morbos c. 3.
which he wrote, does recommend it unto us, when he speaks of Prayer. For
besides, that herby, we perfect our Purposes, and desires more, and that they
grow to be more rooted in our hearts; we find by experience, that a man also
profits much in other respects, by reading these things afterward. Because
they, having been a man's own, and for that he has felt them as such; they
move him afterward, more then other things; and he easily actuates upon them,
again. And when he finds afterward, that he arriueth not to the spirit, of
that he was before; he is confounded, to see, that he is no more the man he
was; and that, instead of advancing, he is retired. Whereby he will either
animate himself to put on a pace; or else he will supply, by his confusion,
that which he shall want of perfection. So that this, uses ever to be of much
profit; though especially it be so, in time of the Exercises.

Lastly I say, 3. p. tract. 7.
that if at all times, it be good to give account of a man's conscience, and of
his Prayer, to some spiritual man; in this, it will be much more fit. And some,
because they will not humble themselves so far, do not gather, out of the
Exercises, so much Fruit, as they might.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Reading of spiritual Books; and how important it is;
and of some means which may help us to do it profitably, and well.
READING, is the Sister, and a great Helper to Prayer. And so the Apostle S.
Paul, 1. Tim. 4.23.
does counsel his disciple Timothy, That he should attend to Reading. Attend
lectioni. This spiritual Reading is of so great importance, for a man that
prete^ds to serve God, Athanasius.
that S. Athanasius, in an exhortation, which he makes to Religious men, says
thus: Sine legendi studio, neminem ad Deum intentum videas. Thou shall see no
body, who indeed prete^ds to profit in spirit, who is not also given to Reading
of spiritual books; and he who leaves it, will quickly show it, by the state
which you shall find him in. S. Hierome, Hierome.
in an epistle to Eustochium, recommending much to her, that she give herself
greatly to this sacred Lection, says thus: Tenenti codicem somnus obrepat, and
cadentem faciem pagina sancta suscipiat. Read, till sleep take thee; and when,
being overcome by sleep, thy head is dropping downward, let those holy leaves
receive it. All the Saints do greatly recommend this spiritual lection. And
experience tells us, how profitable it is; since we see the stories full of
great conuersions, which our Lord has wrought, by this means.

This Reading, is a means so principal, and so important, for our spiritual
good; that the founders of Religious orders, being rooted in the doctrine of
the Apostle, and in the auctority, and experience of the Saints, have ordained,
That their Religious, should every day, resort to spiritual Reading. Vmbertus
in Prolog.
Vmbertus says of holy S. Bennet, that he ordained a set time, for this
Reading, every day. And he ordained with all, that during that time, two of the
most ancient Monks, should go about the Monastery, to visit, and to see, if
any did either forbear it themselves, or hinder others. Whereby it may appear,
how much accounte they made thereof. And, by the way, we may perceive, that
these Visites, which now are daily used in Religion, at the time of spiritual
Exercises ^re grounded in the doctrine, and experience of the ancient Saints.
For the first, and second time, that any failed herein, the Saint ordained,
that he should be reproved, after a mild fashion; but if he mended not with
that, that then they should correct, and give him such a penance, as whereby
the rest might be kept in fear. In the Society we have a Rule, which concerns
this spiritual Reading, and it speaks thus: Let all men, twice in the day,
give that time, Regula 1. commun.
which is ordained, to the Examen of Conscience, and Prayer, and Lection, with
all diligence, in our Lord. And the Superior or Prefect of spiritual matters,
has care that every one, may depute some time, to this purpose, every day. And
generally, this is a help for all those who pretend to obtain virtue, and
perfection; And therefore to the end that they may exercise it with the more
Fruit, we will here say something, which may conduce thereunto.

S. Ambrose, exhorting us, Ambro. li. 1. officior. cap. 20.
to give all the time we can to Prayer, and spiritual Reading, says: Cur non
illa tempora quibus ab Ecclesia vacas, lectioni impendas? Cur non Christum
alloquaris? Christum audias? Illum alloquimur cum oramus: illum audimus cum
diuina legimus oracula. Wherefore do thou not employ that time, which is
free from the Quire, upon Reading, and Prayer? Why do thou not go to visit
Christ our Lord? and both speak to him, and hear him? For when we pray, he
says, that we speak to God; and and when we read, he speaks to us. Let this
be therefore, the first means to profit by spiritual Reading, that we make
account, that God is speaking to us. and that he speaks every thing, which
here we Read.

S. Augustine does also speak of this help. August. Epist. 143. ad Demetriad.
virginem.
Ita Scripturas sanctas lege, vt semper memineris, Dei illa verba ^sse, qui
legem suam non solum sciri, sed etiam impleri inbet. When thou read, thou
art to make account, that God is saying to thee, that which thou read, not
only that thou may know it, but also that thou may perform, Note.
and put it in practice.

He adds another consideration, which is both very good, and very pious.
Diuinoe scripturae, quasi literae de Patria nostra sunt. August. ser. 36. ad
Pra. in eremo.
Do thou know, (says he) how we are to read the Holy Scriptures? As a man
would read some letters, which are come to him out of his Country, himself
being then abroad; to see what news there is of Heaven, what they tell us of
that Country of ours; where our Fathers, and Brothers, and Friends, and
Acquaintance are; and where we would so feign be, and we long, and sigh to be
going thither.

S. Gregory, Greg. li. 2. mor. c. 1.
treating of this point, says that the holy Scripture (and the same we may
understand of any other spiritual Reading) is like the placing of a glass
before the eyes of our soul, to the end that we may see, our inward man. For
there we come to know, and plainly see, the good and bad, that is in us; Note.
and how much we profit; and how far we are from perfection. And sometimes,
there are related to us, the admirable deeds of Saints, which may animate us to
their imitation; and to the end that by seeing their great victoryes, and
triu^phs, we may not be dismayed, at our own temptations, and troubles. At
other times, there is relation made, not only of their virtues, but of their
fauls, to the end that by the one, we may know what we are to imitate; and by
the other, what we are to fear. And so sometimes, there is set before us, a
Job, who rose up like foame, by means of temptations; at other times, a David,
who was drawn down thereby; to the end that the former may animate us, and
give us confidence in tribulation; and the later, may make us humble, and
timorous, in the midst of prosperityes and consolations; and may make us
never trust, or be secure of our selves, but ever to go on with great caution,
and care. And so says S. Augustine, Optime vteris lectione diuina, August.
epist. 143 ad virginem Demetr.
si tibicam adhibeas, speculi vice, vt ibi velut ad imaginem suam, anima
respiciat; and velfaeda quaeque corrigat, vel pulchra plus ornet. Then you make
good use of the Reading, of holy Scriptures when you take it as a glass,
wherein to view your soul, procuring to correct, and remove, that deformity
and ill, which is reprehended there, and to adorn, and beautify it yet more,
by the examples and virtues, which there you find.

But descending more in particular, to the way which we are to hold herein, it
is to be noted; That to the end that our Reading, may be profitable, it must
not be hasty, and cursory, as when a man would read a Story; but it must be
attentive, and quiet. For as the sudden and tempestuous rain, does not bath,
and fertilize the earth; but that is done, by the sweet, and quiet shower; so,
to the end that our reading may enter, and be steeped more thoroughly, in the
heart, Note^
it will be fit that it be done with pawse, and ponderation.

And it is good, when we meet with some devout passage, to deteyne our selves
more therein, Ber^^. epist. seu Tract. ad Fratr. de monte Dei. Hauriendus est
saepe lectionis seriae affectus, and. formanda oration quae lectionem
interrumpat, and no^ tam impediat interrumpendo. quam puriorem continuo animum
ad intelligentiam lectionis restituat. Et in spec. m^nachor. Neo semper ad
oratorium est cun dum, sed in ipsa lectione poterit contemplari and orare. Idem
S. Ephrem. sermon 7. Chrysostom. ho. ^0 super Genes^m. Aug. ser. 38. ad Fra. in
eremo.
and to make a kind of Station upon it; reflecting upon that which we shall
have read; and procuring to move, and effect our will thereby, as we use to do
in Meditation. Although in Meditation, this must be done more at large,
deteyning our selves more upon those thoughts, and ruminating, and digesting
them more. But yet, the same must be done, to some proportion, in this
spiritual Reading; and so the Saints do advise. And they say, that spiritual
Reading, must be like the drinking of a Hen, which drinks by little, and
little, and so lifts up the head again.

Heerby a man may see, what a Sister, and Companion, Reading is to Prayer. It
is so, in so great degree, that when we apply any man first to Mental Prayer,
and that, we will proceed with him gently (by degrees) to put him into some
disposition that way; we advise him to read some spiritual book, and whilst
he is Reading, to make some stations and pawses, in such sort as we have said;
for by this means, our Lord is wont, many times, to raise men, to the Exercise
of Mental Prayer. And so also, when men are not able to enter well upon Prayer,
and if they think they shall not be able to go through with it, at that time;
we use to counsel them, to take some good book in hand, and to join Prayer,
and Reading both together. First, Reading a little, and then Meditating, and
Praying upon it; and then to Read another little. For by this means, the
understanding being tied up by the words, which are read, a man is much more
secured from scattering himself upon diverse imaginatio^s, and thoughts, then
when he was free, and loose. So that in Reading, we may also very well, have
Prayer.

For this it is, Note.
that the Saints do so earnestly recommend spiritual Reading, and they deliver
in effect, the same praises, and profits as belonging to it, which they ascribe
to Priaer. For they say, That it is the spiritual food of the soul; That it
makes us strong and stisse against temptations; That it breeds in us, Note.
good thoughts, and desires of heaven. That it gives light to our
understanding; That it kindles, and inflames our will; That it drives away the
sorrows of this world, and causes a ioyfullnes in us, which is true and
spiritual, and according to God. And such other things as these, they say
hereof. Note.


The blessed S. Bernard gives us another aduertiseme^t, to make us profit by
Spiritual Reading. He says, Bernard. inspeculo Monachoy rum.
Si ad legendum accedat, non tam quaerat scientia^, quam saporem. He who comes
to Reading, is not so much to seek knowledge, as a certain savor, and gust
of the will. For the single knowledge of the Understanding; is but a dry kind
of thing, if it be not applied to the will, in such sort, as that the affect
may, by degrees, be taken, and devotion conserved; for this is that which
makes Reading to be full of juice, and profit, and it is the End thereof. This
is a very principal advise. For there is a great deal of difference, between
Reading to know; and Reading with a design to profit, by it; Between Reading
for others, and Reading for a man's self. For the former of these two, is Study,
and the later is Spiritual Reading. And therefore, if when you dispose your
self to Read, you only direct your mind, to the Knowing of things, or to draw
out co^ceits, which you may preach, and power out to others afterward; this
should be studying for them, and not Spiritual Reading for your own profit.
For that other, there are other times appointed. Omnia tempus habent: Eccl. 3.1.
Every thing has his time. And the time of spiritual Reading, is not for
Study, but for that, which we have said.

The Saints do also recomme^d to us, for the same reason, S. Ephren. sermon. 7.
Dern^episl. ad fratres de mont? Dei. Difficilis e^^am l^ctio scripturae
sa^igat, ^on reficit teneriorem animam; frangit intentionem, hebetat sensum vel
ingeniu^.
That we must not read too much at once, nor pass many hours together
therein, least a man's spirit be tired with long Reading, instead of being
recreated. Which is another advise very good, and very necessary, for some, who
seem to place their felicity in Reading much, and passing over many books.
But, as much eating is not the thing which susteynes the body, but good
digestion of that which is eaten; so nether is the soul sustained by Reading
much, but by ruminating, and digesting well, that which is Read.

For the same cause, they also say, that spiritual Reading must not be, of
things very hard; but they must be plain, and rather of devotion, Note.
then difficult. For things of difficulty, are wont to weary the mind, and to
dry up devotion. Hugo of S. Victor, brings an example of a servant of God,
who was admonished by Revelation, Hugo de S. Victore li. 5. erudit.
Didascalicae. c. 7.
that he should leave the Reading of such things; and should resort to the
Lives, and Martyrdoms of Saints, and such other plain and devout writings,
whereby he profitted much. S. Bernard says further. Bernard. Epist. seu tract.
ad fratrem de monte Dei.
Sed and de quotidiana lectione, aliquid quotidie in ventrem memoriae
dimittendum est, quod fidelius digeratur: and rursus reuocatum, crebrius
ruminetur; quod proposito conueniat, quod intentioni proficiat, quod detineat
animum ita vi aliena cogitare non libeat. We are always to commit somewhat to
our memory of what we read; to the end that we may ruminate, and digeste it the
better afterward; Note.
and especially that, which we see may help us most, and whereof we have most
need; to the end that between the hours of the day, we may go thinking upon
good and holy things, and not upon such, as are impertinent and vain.

Just so, as we must not eat, our corporal food, to the end that we may spend
that time in eating; but that, in virtue of the same food, which then we take,
we may labor all the day. Now Reading, is the meat, and spiritual food of
our soul, because they are the words of God which we Read; and we must not
only Read, that we may spend that time well in Reading, but to the end that we
may profit by it, Note.
all the day after. It will also be very well done, and it will give us great
help toward all goodness, that we lift up our heart, to God, and desire grace of
him; to the end that it may be profitable to us, and that the things which we
Read, may go imbruing, and bathing the very roots of our heart; and that we
may remain more tenderly affected to virtue, and more vnbeguiled concerning
the vanity of the world; and resolved upon those things, which import, us most.
Gregorius.
And so we read of the blessed S. Gregory, that before he went to Read, he
ever prepated himself by Prayer; Psa. 118.1^5.
and used to say this verse, Declinate a me maligni, and scrutabor mandata Dei
mei. Depart from me, you malign spirits, for I will consider the law, and
Commandments of my God.

To the end, that we may more esteem of this kind of Reading, and animate our
selves more thereunto, Note.
the Saints go comparing it, with hearing the word of God preached. And they
say, that though Reading have not that force, which the living voice has, yet
does it enjoy other commodityes, which Sermons have not. For first, a man
cannot always have a Preacher at hand, as he may have a good book. Secondly,
the good speech of a Preacher, passes through mine ears at once, and works
not therefore, so great effect in me. But that which is well said, in a good
book, I may reflect upon, and reuolue it in my mind by Reading it, once, or
twice again; and by ruminating, and pondering it, and so it will grow to make
a great impression in me. Thirdly, by Reading in a good book, I have a free,
and faithful counselor. And that other Philosopher, said well: Demetrius
Phaler.
That which, many times, my friend, or my counselor will not venture to tell me
my book tells me plainly, without fear, aduertising me of my vices, and
defects, and chiding me on the one side, and exhorting me on the other.
Fourthly, by this Reading I am conuersing with them, who wrote the book.

Sometimes you may go, and have a time of conversation with S. Bernard, another
with S. Gregory another with S. Basil; and you may stand hearing, and listening
to them, as truly, as if you had been their disciple of old time. And so they
say, and with great reason, That good books, are a kind of public treasure,
for the great benefits and riches, which we may draw from thence. To conclude,
the profit and advantage which grows upon this Reading of spiritual books,
Hieron. epist. ad Damasum Papam.
is so very great, that S. Hierome, treating of that interior inflammation of
the soul, does ask where this infla^mation, and fire is? And he answers,
that there is no doubt to be made, but that it is contained in holy Scriptures,
the Reading whereof, inflames the soul, toward God, and so it remains purged
from all vice. And he brings, for proof of this, that which the disciples
said to one another, when going to the Castle of Emans, Christ our Lord
appeared to them, in form of a Pilgrim, and went speaking to them of holy
Scripture. Luc. 24.32.
Nonne cor nostrum ardens erat in nobis, cum loqueretur in via, and aperiret
nobis Scripturas? Was not (say they) our heart all inflamed and in fire, when he
went speaking and declaring the holy Scripture to us, upon the way? And he also
brings those words of the Prophet. Eloquia Domini, eloquia casta, Ps. 11.7.
argentum igne examinatum; The words of our Lord, are chaste words, and pure;
they are as silver, purifyed by the fire.

And S. Ambrose affirms, That this sacred lection, is the life of the soul,
Ambros. 15. ser.
by the testimony of Christ our Lord himself. Quod autem sacrarum litteraru^
lectio vita sit, Dominus testatur dicens, Ioannis sexto, Verba quae ego locutus
sum vobis, Joan. 6.64.
spiritus and vita sunt. The words which I have said to you, are spirit and
life. To the end therefore, that we may lead a spiritual life, and that we may
walk ever on, in true spirit; and be all kindled, and inflamed with the Love
of God, let us give our selves much to this kind of Sacred Lection; and let us
use it in such sort, as has been said.

Now by that, which you have seen, it will follow; That they do very ill, who
as soon as they have Read over any good book, do cast it into some corner,
and say, I have dispatched that book. A good book is not to be read over,
only once. The second time that you read it, will profit you more then the
first; and the third, then the second. Yea and it will be ever new to you, as
they find by experience, who desire to profit by Reading. And it is a good
custom which some have, who when they meet with any thing in any book which
moves them much, and gives them particular satisfaction, do note it, and set it
down; to the end that they may always have at hand some of the most
substantial things, and wherein they may find the juice of devotion, at more
ease; and may have some comfort in store for such occasions, and times as may
occur.

We might bring many Examples, Note.
in confirmation of the great benefit and profit, August. li. 8. confess. c. 6.
which grows from the Reading of Spiritual books; but I will only bring the
Example of S. Augustine, which conteyneth much doctrine. That Saint recounts,
how a certain Cauallier, an Affrican, called Potitianus, coming one day to
visit him, gave him news of the wonderful things, which the world was saying
of S. Anthony. And he added further, that one evening, while the was at
Treuers, (employed, upon seeing certain public sports, which were represented
there) himself with three other Courtiers, friends of his, went out to take
the air. And that two, of the four, did chance upon the Cell of a certain
Monk; and finding there a book, wherein the Life of S. Anthony was written,
one of them began to read it, and instantly his heart was kindled with a holy
kind of love. And being all angry with himself, he said thus to his friend.
Tell me I beseech thee, what is that which we pretend to obtain, with all the
pains we take? What is that, which we aim at? In the hope of what, do we thus
earnestly employ our selves? Can we perhaps, have a higher ambition in the
Court, then to be Favorites of the Emperor? And yet even in that fortune, what
is there, which is not top full of danger? And by how many dangers, do we still
proceed toward some greater danger? And how long shall we sweat in this
pursuit? But to be the friend and sauourite of God himsefe, behold I am made
so, if I will, even at this very instant.

This he said, and being grown big, and swollen, with the fervent desire of
bringing forth a new life, he restored his eyes to the book, and read on, and
was inwardly changed, and his mind was wholly dispossessed of worldely cares, as
immediately afterward appeared. For whilst he was Reading, and rolling up and
down, those waves of his unquiet heart, he would sometimes groan deeply, and
then again pawse a while. And resolving at last, upon a better course, he said
with a serene countenance, to his friend: Even now have I broken loose, from
those hopes whereby hitherto we have been seized. I have firmly resolved, to
be the servant of God, and I will set upon it, in this place, and at this very
instant. As for thee, if thou can not be content, to imitate me, at least
dissuade me not. But the other answered, that he would gladly join himself to
him, as a companion in the prosecuting of so honorable a war, and the
obteyning of so noble a pay. And both of them, did build up that Spiritual
Tower, with the treasure which is only able to do it, of forsaking all things,
and following Christ our Lord. And that which is as strange, they both had
Spouses, who, as soon as they knew what these men had resolved, did consecrate
themselves to God, by a vow of Chastity.

This does S. Augustine relate; and this Example was of so great efficacy, with
himself, that soon after, he thus cried out, with great exclamation, to
another friend of his, What is this which we endure? What is this? What have we
heard? Surgunt indocti, and caelum rapiunt, and nos cum doctrinis nostris, sine
cord ecce vbi volutamur in carne and sanguine: The unlearned men of the world,
tear heaven from between our hands, and we, with our great knowledge, and
learning, behold how without brains, or courage, we are contented still to
wallow, in flesh and blood.

But with this alteration, and feeling, the Saint relates, how he entered into a
Garden, there adjoining, and did spread himself, at the foot of a certain
figtree; and (letting loose the reins to tears) he began, with great
affliction, and sorrow of heart, to cry out thus to God, and say: And thou, O
Lord how long? How long, O Lord? Wilt to be angry with us for ever? Remember
not Lord* our old iniquityes. And still he repeated these words* How long; How
long: shall I say, To morrow? Why not even now? Why, even at this instant, is
there not an end of my uncleanness? Whilst he was saying this, in the most
bitter feeling of his heart, he heard a voice which said to him. Take up and
read, Take up and read. He then rose up (as himself relates) to take up and
read, in that holy book, which lay before him: For he had heard it related of
the same S. Anthony, Matt. 19.21.
that by once Reading of the Gospel, (which he fell upon) as it were by chance
which said, Go and sell all that thou haste, and give it to the poor, and
follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; he determined to leave all
things, and to follow Christ our Lord*

And so S. Augustine, being moved much by this Example, and more by the voice,
which he had heard, says, That he toooke up the book, and read in it. And
there did God infuse, so great a light into his soul, that leaving all things
of this world, he delivered himself wholly up to the service of our Lord.

The end of this Treatise of Mental Prayer.
A TREATISE Of the presence of God: Written by the same Author.
CHAP. I. Of the excellency of this Exercise: and the great benefits, which are
contained therein.
QVAERITE Dominum, and confirmamini; quaerite faciem eius semper. Psa. 104, 4.
Seek God (says the Prophet David,) with perseverance, and strength; August.
super Psalm. 104.
be ever seeking his face: the face our Lord, which as S. Augustine says, is
the Presence of our Lord; and so to be ever seeking the face of our Lord, is to
be ever going in his Presence, and converting our hearts to him, with desire,
and love.

Isychius. Bonau to. 2. opusc. li. 2. de profectu Religiosorum. ca. 20.
Isychius, in his last Century says, and so does also S. Bonauenture; That to
be always performing this Exercise of the Presence of God, is to begin to be
blessed here on earth, as the glorious spirits are in heaven. For the felicity
of those Saints, consists in seeing God perpetually, without ever once
loosing the sight of him. But now, since we cannot see God in perfect charity,
nor as he is in himself (for this is only proper to those glorious spirits)
yet at least, let us imitate them, the best we can, according to the uttermost
of our frailty; and let us procure, to be all ways beholding respecting, and
loving him. So that, as our Lord God created us, to be eternally in his
presence, and to enjoy him in heaven; so was it also his pleasure, that, here
on earth, we should have an image, and model of that blessedness, by walking
ever in his sight, reuearing, and beholding him, 1. Cor. 13.12.
though in obscure manner. Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate, tunc autem,
facie ad faciem. We now behold, and see God, by faith, as in a glass; but
afterward, we shall see him clearly, and face to face. Ista est meri um illa
praemium. That clear vision, (as says Isychius) is the reward; and the glory
and blessedness for which we hope; this other obscure sight, is matter of merit
to us, whereby we must grow to obtain that other.

But yet still, in fine, we must imitate those blessed spirits, to the best of
our power; whilst we procure not to loose the sight of God, in the works which
we are doing. Just so, as the holy Angels, who are sent down to our succor,
for our defense, and help; are, in such sort employed upon those ministeryes,
as that yet withal, they never loose the sight of God. As the Angel Raphael
said to Toby, Videbar quidem vobiscum manducare, and bibere; Tob. 12.13. Mat.
18.10.
sed ego cibo inuisibili, and potu, qui hominibus videri non potest, vtor. I
seemed indeed, to have been eating, and drinking with you; but I, the while,
did serve my self of an invisible meat, and of a kind of drink, which cannot
be discerned by human eyes. They are ever susteyning themselves upon God;
semper vident faciem patris mei, qui in caelis est. And so also, although we
eat and drink, and converse, and negotiate with me^; and though it seem,
that we enterteyne, and employ our selves therein, must yet procure, that, that
be not our food, and entertaynement; but another food and entertaynement,
which is invisible, and which men discover not; and this is, That we be ever
beholding, and loving God, and accomplishing his most holy will.

Great was the accounte, and practice which the Saints, and the ancient
Patriarchs made, of going always in the Presence of God Prouidebam Dominum in
conspectu meo semper; Psa. 15.8.
quoniam a dextris est mihi, ne commouear. The Royal Prophet did not content
himself, with praising God seven times in the day; but withal he procured to
have God always present with him. And so continual was this Exercise, with
those Saints, that this was also their common phrase of speech, Viuit Dominus,
in conspectu cuius sto. 3. Reg. 17.
Our Lord lives, in whose presence I am.

The benefits, and profits are great, 4. Reg. 3.14.
which flow from our going continually in Gods Presence, whilst we consider
that he is ever looking on us; and therefore did the Saints labor in it so
much. This alone, sufficieth to make, that a man be very well ordered, and
composed in all his actions. For tell me, what servant is there, who will not
carry himself exactly well, under the eye of his Lord? Who will not do that
which he commands? or who will dare to offend him to his teeth? Or what thief
will presume to steal, whilst the Judge has an eye upon his hands?

Now therefore, since God is so ever looking upon us, Note.
and since he is our Judge, and since he is Omnipotent, and can command that
the earth may open and swallowe a man up into Hell; Yea, and since he has
indeed done so sometimes, to such as durst offend him, what is he, that will
dare to offend him any more? Aug. sol. 14.
And so S. Augustine says: O Lord when I consider with attention, that thou
art ever looking upon me, and that thou art watching over me, night and day;
and that, with so great care, as if there were neither in heaven, nor earth,
any other creature for thee to govern, but me alone; When I consider well,
that all my deeds, desires, and thoughts, lie open and clear before thee, I am
all fulfilled with fear, and ouer-whelmed with shame. Without doubt, we are
cast into a very straight obligation, of living with great rectitude, and
justice, by the consideration of our doing all things, under the eye of that
Judge, who sees all things, and from whom, nothing is able to hide it self.
If in this world, the presence of a grave, and qualifyed person, will keep us
in order, what will not the Presence of God be able to do?

S. Hierome, upon that place, where God said to Jerusalem, Ezech. 28.^,
by the Prophet Ezechiel, Meique oblita es, Thou have forgotten me, says thus;
Memoria enim Dei, excludit cuncta flagitia. The memory of God dismisseth, and
discharges all sin. The same also does S. Ambrose say. And else where S*
Hierome says again. Certe quando peccamus, si cogitaremus Deum videre, and
esse praesentem, numquam quod ei displiceret faceremus. The memory of God and
the watching still in his Presence, is a means of so great efficacy, that if
we did but consider that God is present, and does behold us, we would never
adventure to do that thing, which might displease him. This alone, sufficed to
make that sinful woman Thais, give over her bad life, and betake herself to a
course of penance, in the wilderness. Holy Job said thus: Nonne ipse considerat
vias tuas, Job. 31.4.
and cunctos gressus meos dinumerat? God stands beholding me, and as a true
ey-witnes counts the paces which I make; and who then is that man, who will
presume to sin, or to do any thing amiss?

On the other side, all the disorder, Note.
and perdition of the wicked, does proceed from their not considering, that God
is Present, and beholds them; according to that which the holy Scripture does
so often repeat, in the person of wicked men: Et dixisti, Isa. 47.10. Ierem.
1^.4.
non est qui videat me. Et non videbit nouissima nostra. And so did S. Hierome
note it, upon the seventh Chapter of Ezachiel; Hierome.
where the Prophet, reproouing Jerusalem for the many vices, and sins, which
it was subject to, grows to say, That the cause of them all, was for that,
that City had forgotten God. And he assigns also the same cause, when he
interprets many other places of scripture. For as a horse without a bridle,
and a ship without a stern runs upon precipices, and rocks; so if you take
this bridle, out of the mouth of man, he rums headlong after his own
inordinate appetites, and passions. Non est Deus in conspectu eius, inquinatae
sunt viae illius in omni tempore, Psa. 9.26.
says the Prophet David. He carries not God before his eyes, he considers
him not, as present before him, and therefore are his ways (which are his
works) all defiled still, with sins.

The remedy, which the blessed S. Basil gives, in many places of his works,
against all temptations, Note.
and troubles, and for all the occasions and necessityes, which may present
themselves, is the Presence of God. And therefore, if thou desire, a ready, and
compendious way, for the obteyning of perfection, and which may conteyne, and
lock up, in it self, the force and efficacy of all other means, this is that.
And for such, Genesis 17.1.
did God give it thus to Abraham; Ambula coram me, and esto perfectus; Walk
before me, and thou shall be perfect. The holy Scripture does here, (as in many
other places) take the Imperatine, for the Future, to express home, the
infallibility of the success. It is so certain, that thou shall be perfect,
if always thou will go beholding of God, and considering that he is ever
beholding thee; that even, from this instant, thou may account, that thou
shall be perfect. For just, as the Stars do, from the aspect of the Sun with
is present to them, draw light, whereby they are resplendent, both within, and
without their own bodies; and do also get other virtues, whereby they make
influence upon the earth; so do just, and virtuous men (who are as so many
stars in the Church of God) from the sight of God, and by considering him ever
present, and by converting their thoughts and desires to him, draw light,
whereby in their interior, (which God sees) they shine with real, and solid
virtues; and in their exterior, (which men see) they shine with all innocence,
and decency; and they draw strength, and force from thence, for the
edification, and profit of others.

There is nothing in the whole world, which does so properly declare the
necessity that we have, of continuing ever in the Presence of God, as this
which follows. Note.
Behold the dependence, which the Moon has upon the Sun; and the necessity,
to which it is subject, of being ever in prefence of it. The Moon, of it
self, has no clarity, but receives it all from the Sun, according to the
proportion of the aspect, which it has from thence. And it works upon
inferior bodies, according to the rate of clarity, which it receaues from the
Sun; and so do the effects thereof, increase or fail, according to the full,
or wayning of the same light. And when any thing does place it self above the
Moon, which may deprive it of the sight, and view of the Sun, at that
instant, is the luster and clarity thereof ecclipsed; and therewith withal, a
great part also fails, of the efficacy, which it had to work, by means of
the Sun. Now in the self same manner, does it pass between the soul, and
God, who is the true Sun of the soul.

For this cause it is, that the Saints, do so earnestly recommend this Exercise
to us. S. Ambrose, and S. Bernard discoursing of the continuance, and
perseverance which we are to use herein, say thus; Amb. lib. de dignitat^ con.
Sicut nullum est momentum quo homo non vtatur, vel fruatur Dei bonitate and
misericordia; sic nullum debet esse mome^tum, quo eam praesentem non habeat in
memoria. As there is no point, or moment of time, wherein man enjoys not the
goodness and mercy of God; so ought there not to be any point, or moment of
time, wherein he ought not to have God present to him, in his memory. And S.
Bernard says else where. In omni actu, vel cogitatu suo, sibi Deum adesse
memoretur; and omne tempus, quo de ipso non cogitat, perdidisse se computet. A
Religious man, must procute, in all his thoughts, and in all his deeds, to
remember that he has God present with him; and all that time, wherein he
thinks not of God, he is to hold for lost. God does never forget us, and it
is but reason, that we procure to be never un mindful of him.

S. Augustine, upon the 31. Psalm, Firmabo super te oculos meos, Aug. Psa.
31.8.
says: Non a te auferam oculos meos, quia and tu non aufers ame oculos tuos. I
will not, O Lord, withdraw mine eyes from thee, because thou do not withdraw
thine eyes from me. Continually, will I lodge them fixed, and firm upon thee,
as thy Prophet did, who said: Oculi mei semper ad Dominum; Ps. 14.15.
Mine eyes are ever upon our Lord. S. Gregory Nazianzen says: Gregor. Naz. in
ora. Theologica.
Non tam saepe respirare, quam Dei meminisse debemus; As often ought we to
remember God, yea and more often, then we fetch our breath. For as we have need
of respiration, for the refreshing of our hearts, and for the tempering of our
natural heat; so are we in continual necessity, of resorting to God, by
Prayer, for the restraint of that inordinate heat of concupiscence, which is
moving and intising us to sin.

CHAP. II. Wherein consists the Exercise, or Practice of going always, in
the Presence of God.
TO the end that we may serve our selves the better, of this exercise, or
practice, it will be necessary to declare wherein it consists. Note.
It consists in two Acts; the one is, of the Understanding, the other is of
the Will. Tract. 5. cap. 7.
The first Act, is of the Understanding. For this is ever ^^quisite and
presupposed, for the performing, of any act of the Will, as we are taught by
Philosophy. The first thing therefore, is to be, to consider with the
Understanding, That God is both here. and every where else, That he fills the
whole world, and that he is all, in all in every part, and in every creature,
how small soever it may be.

Of this, an Act is to be made, because this is a certain Truth, Act. 17.17.
which Faith propounds to be believed by us. Non enim longeest ab vnoquoque
nostrum; in ipso enim viuimus, mouemur, and sumus* says the Apostle S. Paul.
You are not to imagine, or fansy God, as one who were far from you; or as if
he were without you; for he is within you. S. Augustine confesses thus,
Confess. l. 10. c. 27.
I sought that without me, O Lord, which yet was within me. Within you is God;
and more present, and more intrinsecally, and more intimately is God in me,
then my self. In him we live, and move, and have our being. He it is, who
gives Life, to all that which lives; and he, who gives strength to all which
has any strength; and he who gives being, to all that which is. And if he were
not present, susteyning all things, they all would leave to be, and return to
their nothing. Consider therefore, that thou art all, full of God; environed and
compassed in with God, and as it were swimming in God. Pleni suunt caeli and
terra gloria tua, are very good words to this purpose: The heavens, and the
earth, are full of thy glory.

Some, to help themselves, more in this, Note.
do consider all the world to be full of God, as indeed it is; and they imagine
themselves, to be in the midst of this infinite sea of God; circled, and
hemmed in by him, in such sort, as a sponge, in the midst of the sea might
be, all bathed, and full of water, and besides compasted in, and enclosed by
water, on all sides. This comparison is not ill, for the rate of our weak
understanding. But yet it falls short, and reaches not, by a great deal, to
declare that, whereof we are speaking. For that Sponge, in the midst of the
Sea, if it mount upwards, it is at an end, above; if it descend downward, it
finds an end, below; and it meets with a stay, if it go either on the one
side, or the other; but in God, thou shall find nothing, of all this. Si
ascendero in caelum, tu illic es; si descendero in insernum ades; si sumpsero
pennas meas diliculo, and habitauero in extremis maris, etenim manus tua
deducet me, and tenebit me dextera tua. If I mount up to heaven, thou art there
O Lord; if I descend down to hell, thou art also there; if I take wings, and
pass to the extreme sides of the sea, thither will thy hand carry me, and
there thy right hand will hold me. There is no end, or term in God, because he
is infinite and immense. Besides, in fine, since the Sponge we spoke of, is a
body, it cannot be wholly penetrated, by the water; which is another Body;
whereas we, are in all, and through all, penetrated by Almighty God, who is
pure spirit. But yet nevertheless, these comparisons, and the like (how short
soever they fall, of expressing the thing,) are good, and do give great help,
for the understanding in some sort, of the infinite immensenesse of God, Epist.
57. ad Dardanum. and l. 7. Confess. cap. 5.
and how he is present, and most intimately in us, and in all things. And
therefore, S. Augustine brings these comparisons.

But yet, we are to observe in the performance of this Exercise of the Presence
of God, that there is no necessity, to form any conceit, with the imagination,
or any representation at all, of God; feigning that he is here, at our side, or
in any other determinate place; or that he is in this, or the other form.
There are some, who imagine either before themselves, or on the one side that
Christ Jesus our redeemer, is with the^, and that he goes with them, and is
^uer looking upon what they do, and in this manner, they ever go in the
Presence of God. Of these, some imagine, that they have Christ crucified before
them; others, that he is tied to the Pillar; others, that he is sweating drops
of blood in his Prayer of the Garden; others, in some other part of his
Passion; or else in some cheerful mystery of his most holy life; every one,
according to his inclination, and devotion. Or else, some one time they imagine
him in some one fashion, and at another time, in some other.

And although this be very profitable, for such as know how to do it well; yet
(ordinarily speaking) it is not that, which is best for us. Note.
For all these forms, and imaginations of corporal things, do toil and weary
men; and many times, do much trouble their heads. A Saint Bernard, or a Saint
Bonauenture, without doubt, knew better how to do this, then we; and they found
much facility, and ease in it; and so they would be able to go into those
holes, of the wounds of Christ our Lord, and into his holy side; and there,
would they find their rest, their refuge, and their safe retrayt; esteeming
themselves to hear those words of the spouse in the Canticles, spoken to
themselves: Surge amica mea, speciosa mea, and vent; columba mea in foraminibus
petrae, in cauernae maceriae. At other times, they would imagine the foot of
the Cross, to be fastened and rooted in their hearts, and that they, the while,
were receiving by their mouth, with extreme sweetness, those drops of blood,
which ran, and streamed from those fountains, of the Savior of the world.
Isa. 12.3.
Haurietis aquas in gaudio, de fontibus Saluatoris. Those Saints I say, did
very well, in doing thus, and they were happy in it; but if you will be going
on, all day, in these considerations, and with this kind of Presence of God;
perhaps, that for one day, or month, which you may pass after this fashion,
you will loose your Prayer for a whole year. Note.
For it may cost you, the breaking of your brains.

We may see how great reason there is, why we should be careful, in giving
this lesson of caution, since even for making a kind of structure or
composition of place, (which is one of the Preambles, or Preludes of Prayer,
whereby we are wont to make that matter present to us, whereof we are to
meditate, imagyning that the matter does really pass before us there) they who
treat of Prayer, are careful to advertise us, that we do not, with an
attention too much bent, fix our imagination upon the figure, or representation
of those corporal things, whereof we mean to think, for the danger, which
there is to break our brains; and for other inconuenie^ces, of illusions,
which grow sometimes out of this root. If therefore, for the making of a
Preamble, or Prelude of Prayer, (which uses to be passed over, so very soon,
and the man, being at that time, in quietness, and at good leisure, without
having any other thing to possess his mind,) there be need of so much
circumspection, and caution; what will there be, for one who has a mind to
conserve this kind of composition, for the whole day, and in the midst of all
his other business?

But now, this other Presence of God, whereof we treat, excludes all these
imaginations, and indeed is very far from them all. Note.
For now we treat, of a Presence of God, as God. And first, we need not feign
to our selves, that he is here; but we must believe it, for so he is indeed.
Christ our Lord, as man, is in heaven, and in the B. Sacrament of the Altar;
but he is not every where. And therefore, when we imagine, Christ our Lord, as
man, to be present with us, it is an imagination, and a thing which we faigne
to our selves. But now, as God, he is present here; and he is within me, and he
is in all places, and he fills them all. Spiritus Domini repleuit orbem
terrarum. We have no cause, ^ap. 2.7.
in this case, to feign, that which is not; but to actuate our minds in the
firm, and frequent belief, of that which is.

Secondly, the humanity of Christ our Lord, may be fancied, and figured by the
imagination, because he has a body, and a figure; but God, as God, cannot be
imagined, or figured, as he is, because he has no body, nor figure, but is a
pure spirit. Nay we cannot so much as imagine an Angel, no nor our own soul,
as indeed it is, because it is a spirit; and how much less then, shall we be
able to imagine, or frame a conceit of, how God is.

But how then, are we to consider, that God as God, is still present with us? I
say there is no more to be done, but only to produce an act of Faith, supposing
already, that God is present there; since our Faith tells us so, without
laboring to know how, or in what fashion that is; as S. Paul affirms, that
Moses did. Qui inuisibilem, tanquam videns, sustinuit. He considered God, who
is invisible, and had him present still, as if he had seen him. But yet so, as
that he would not strive to know, Note.
or imagine, how that was; but, as when a man is speaking with some friend of
his, by night, without reflecting how that is, and not considering it; but only
rejoicing, and delighting in the conversation and presence of his friend, who
he knows is present, with him there. In this sort, are we to consider God
present with us. It is enough that we know, our friend is there, that we may
enjoy him. Do not dwell upon thinking, how that is. You will not light upon it;
for it is yet, by night, for us. Do but stay till it be light, and when the
morning of the other life appears; he will then be discovered, and we shall be
able to see him clearly, as he is. Cum apparauerit, similes ei crimus, quoniam
videbimus eum sicutiest. For this, did God appear to Moses, in obscurity, and
in a cloud; that you may not look to see him, but only believe him to be
present.

All this which we have said, belongs to the first act of Understanding, which
must be presupposed. But it must be considered also here, that the chief part
of this Exercise, does not consist in this. For not only is the Understanding
to employ it self, in behoulding God present; but a man must also employ the
Will; by aspiring to God, and by loving him, and by uniting himself to him.
And in these acts of the Will, this Exercise does principally consist, whereof
we shall treat, in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the acts of the Will, wherein this Exercise does principally
consist; and how we are to employ our selves therein.
SAINT Bonauenture, in his Mystical Theology says, that the Acts of the Will,
wherewith we must lift up our selves to God, in this holy Exercise, are
certain ardent desires of the heart, whereby the soul does thirst, to be united
with God, in perfect love. Certain inflamed affections, they are; certain
sighs, which break out of the very bowels of the soul, wherewith it calls
upon God. Certain pious, and amorous springings of the will, wherewith, Note.
as with certain spiritual wings, she reaches, and stretches her self
upward; and goes approaching, and uniting herself, more and more, with God.
These desires, these vehement, and enflamed affections of the heart, the Saints
do call Aspirations. Because by them, the soul raises herself up to God,
which signifies the same, with aspiring toward him. S. Bonauenture also
says, they are therefore called Aspirations, because, as by respiring we do,
without deliberation, draw our breath, and that interior air of our body; so
do we also with great agility, and sometimes without any deliberation at all,
(or in effect without any) draw out these inflamed desires, from the most
internal part of our soul.

These Aspirations, and desires, a man declares by certain Prayers, which are
short, and frequent, and they are called iaculatory, Raptim iaculatas, says S.
Augustine. Because they are as arrows, or fiery darts, which spring from the
heart, and at an instant, they are shot of, and sent up to God. Those old
Monks, according to the relation of Cassian, did much use these Prayers.
Breues quidem, sed creberrimae. And they esteemed, and made great account
thereof: Partly, because they were short, and did not weary the brain; and
partly, because they were made with fervor, and with an erected spirit, and at
an instant they are sent into the high Presence of Almighty God, in such sort,
as that the devil has no time to trouble him, Aug. ep. ad Proba. Chris. hom.
79. Abbas Isaac. collat. 10. cvp. 10.
that makes them; nor to cast any impediment into his heart. S. Augustine
delivers certain words which are worthy of Consideration, with such, as are
in Exercise of Prayer. Ne illa vigllans, and erecta intentio, quae tamen
necessaria est oranti, per productiores moras hebetetur. Least that vigilant,
and sharp attention, (which yet is needful for him that means to pray, with
dew respect, and reverence) go not lessing, or loosing it self, as it happens
sometimes, in long prayer. With these iaculatory Prayers therefore, did those
holy Monks, go ever on in this exercise; lifting up their hearts, very
frequently to God, and treating, and conuersing with him.

This way, of going in the Presence of God, is (generally speaking) more sit
for us, more easy, and more profitable. It will therefore be necessary, to
proceed in declaring the use, and practice of this Exercise. Cassian places
it, in this verse, which the Church repeateth at every hour, of her Divine
Office. Deus in adiutorium meum intend: Cass. collat. 10. cap. 10.
Domine ad adinuandum me festina. Art thou entering in to any business, wherein
there may be difficulty, or danger? Desire thus of God, that he will help thee
well out of it, O Lord be careful to succor me: O Lord be not slack to give
me help. We are in need of the favor of God, for all things; and so are we,
ever to be desiring his assistance. And Cassian says, that this verse, is
excellent, and highly to the purpose; for declaring all the affects of our
mind, Note.
in whatsoever state, and in whatsoever occasion, or accident, we may find our
selves. Because hereby we inuoke the aid of God; Heerby we humble our selves,
and we acknowledge our necessity and misery; Heerby we raise our selves, and we
confide to be heard, and favored by Almighty God. Hereby we kindle our selves,
in the love of our Lord, who is our protection and refuge. Against all the
combats, and temptations, which may present themselves, you have here, a most
strong buckler, an impenetrable coate-armour, and an inexpugnable wall. And
therefore you are still to be carrying it, both in your mouth, and in your heart;
and this is to be your constant, and continual Prayer; and your way of going
still, in the Presence of God.

S. Basil, places the practice of this Exercise, in that, at all times, we
take occasion to remember God. Art thou eating? give thanks to God. Do thou
cloth thy self? give thanks to God. Art thou going to take the air, or into
thy Garden? bless thou God, Note.
who made it. Do thou look up to heaven? do thou look toward the
Sun? then do thou praise the Creator of all things. When thou go to
sleep, and whenever thou do wake, lift up thy heart to God.

Now forasmuch, as in spiritual lif, there are three ways, The Purgative way,
which belongs to beginners; the Illuminatiue way, which belongs to such as
are Proficient; and the Unitive way, which belongs to such as are in some
degree of perfection; there are spiritual directours, who assign three kinds
of Aspirations, or Iaculatory Prayers. Some, which are addressed toward the
obteyning of pardon for sin, and toward the purging of the soul from vice,
and terrene affections, which belong to the Purgative way. Others, which are
addressed toward the obteyning of virtues, and ouercomming temptations, and
undertaking of difficultyes, and troubles, for the exercise of piety; which
belong to the Illuminatiue way. And others, which address us, Note.
toward the obteyning of an Union of the soul with God, by the bond of
perfect love; and these, belong to the Unitive way. And this they ordain, to
the end that every one, may employ himself in that exercise, which is most
agreeable, and fit for his own disposition, and state.

But yet know this the while; that how perfect soever a man be, he may safely
exercise himself in sorrow for his sins, and in desiring pardon of God for
them, and begging grace that he may never offend him, and this will be a very
good Exercise of his mind, and very acceptable to God. And both he, and that
other man, who is still procuring but to purge his soul from vice, and
inordinate affections; and he also, who labors to obtain Virtue, may also
exercise himself in acts of the Love of God, to make that other exercise,
which he is chiefly about, more easy and sweet. Therefore all men may imploye
themselves, sometimes, in this purgative exercise, by making such Acts as
these: O Lord, that I had never offended thee. Do not permit, O my Lord, thus
ever I may offend thee any more. Let me dye as much as thou will, but never let
me sin against thee. Let is please thy divine majesty, that I may rather die
a thousand deaths, them ever commit one mortal sin.

At other times, one may raise his heart to God, by giving him thanks for all
his benefits, both general and particular, which he has received; or else by
begging the gift of some virtue; sometimes profound humility; at other times
perfect Obedience; at other times, Patience; at others, Charity.

Again, at other times, a man may raise his mind to God, by acts of love, and
conformity to his most holy will, saying this, or the like. Cant. ^.141 Luc.
22.4^. Psa. 72.29.
Dilectus meus mihi, and ego illi. Non mea voluntas, sed tua fiat. Quid enim
mihi est in caelo, and a te quid volui super terram? These, and such others,
are very good aspirations, and iaculatory Prayers; whereby a man may go always,
in this exercise of the Presence of God. Note.
And they use to be the best, and most efficacious, which the heart, being moved
by Almighty God, does conceive within it self; although it be not done, in
words, so well composed and ordered, as those which we have here set down.

And there is also, no necessity at all, that these iaculatoryes, should be
many, in number. For one alone, being very often repeated, and with great
ardour of mind, may suffice a man for the going in this exercise may days, yea
and even all his life. Note.
If you find your self well, with always saying those words of the Apostle,
O Lord what will thou have me do? Or those other of the Spouse, My beloved to
me, and I to him: Or else those words of the Prophet, What have I to desire O
Lord, in heaven, or in earth, but only thee? you have need of no more; deteyne
your self here, and entertayne your self herein; and let this be your
continual Exercise, and your going in the Presence of God.

CHAP. IV. The practice of this Exercise is further declared, and here a way
is laid down, of going in the Presence of God, very easy, very profitable, and
of much Perfection.
AMONGST other Aspirations, and Iaculatory Prayers, which we may use; that one,
is a very principal one, and very much to purpose, for the practice of this
Exercise, 1. Cor. 10^ 31.
which is taught us, by the Apostle Saint Paul, in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. Sieve manducatis, sieve bibitis, sieve aliud quid facitis, omnia ad
gloriam Dei facite. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do, let
all be done to Gods glory. Procure, Note.
in all things that you do, or at least the most frequently that you can, to
lift up your heart to God, saying; For thee O Lord, do I this. To content thee,
and to please thee. Because thou will have it so; Thy will, O my Lord, is mine;
Thy contentment is mine; I have no other will, nor no other not-will, but that
only, which thou will, and that which thou will not. This is all my delight,
all my contentment, all my joy, the accomplishment of thy will, to please thee;
and there is no other thing but this, for which I care; nor which I can desire;
nor which is worth, so much, as the looking on, either in heaven, or in earth.

This is a good way, of going always in the Presence of God, and very easy,
and very profitable, and of much perfection. For it is to go, in a continual
exercise of the love of God. And because I have treated hereof else where,
Tract. 3. cap. 8. and Tract. 8. cap. 4.
I will only add in this place, that this is one of the best, and most
profitable ways of going ever in Prayer, of all the ways that can be thought.
For it seems, that there wanted no other thing, to extol and canonize this
Exercise, but only to say, that by it, we shall be in that continual prayer,
which Christ our Lord demands of us, in the holy Gospel. Oportet semper orare
and non deficere. Luc. 18.1.
For what better Prayer, can there be, then that one should be ever desiring,
the greatest honor, and glory of God, and to be ever conforming himself, to
Gods will Not having any other, either will, or not-will, but that which God
will, and wills not; and that all his contentment, and joy, is the
contentment, and good pleasure, of our Lord God.

Therefore says a learned Doctor, Dionis. Richel. l 1. de contempla. cap. 25.
and with great reason, that he who shall persevere with care, in those
affects, and interior desires, shall reap so abundant fruit thereby, that in
short time, he will feel his heart, all converted, and changed; and will find
therein, a particular auersion from the world; and a singular affection to
Almighty God. This is to begin already, to be a kind of Citizen of heaven, and
a standing servant, in the house of God. Ephesians. 2.9.
Iam non estis hospites, and aduenae, sed estis ci^es Sanctorum, and domestici
Dei. These are those Courtiers, whom S. John saw in the Apocalypse, who carried
the name of God, written in their forheads, which is the continual memory, and
Presence of God. Et videbunt faciem eius, Apoc. 11.4. Phi^ip. 3.2. Cor. 4.18.
and nomen eius in frontibus eorum. For their conversation, and discourse, is
not now, on earth, but in heaven. Nostra autem conuersatio in caelis est. Non
contemplantibus nobis, ea quae videntur, sed ea quae non videntur: quae enim
videntur temporalia sunt, quae autem non videntur, aeterna.

It is further to be considered in this Exercise, Note.
that when we produce these Acts saying: For thee O Lord, do I this; For thy
love; Because thou will have it so, and the like; we are to do them, and say
them, as one who speaks to God, already present; and not as one, who raises
his heart, or his thought, to send it far off, or without himself. This advise
is of great importance in this Exercise. For this is properly, to go in the
Presence of God, and this is that, which makes this Exercise, easy, and sweet,
and which makes it move, and profit more. Yea, even in our other Prayers, when
we meditate of Christ upon the Cross, or at the Pillar; they who treat of
Prayer, give counsel, that we should not imagine, that to be at Jerusalem,
and that it passed, a thousand, and so many hundred years ago; for this
wearyes more, and moves less: But we are to imagine it, as present, where we
are; and that it passes there before us; and that we hear the strokes of the
scourges, and the knocks of the hammers. And if we meditate the Exercise of
death; they say that we are to imagine, that we are already upon the point to
dye, and given over by the Physicians; and with the holy candle in our hand.
How much more reason then, shall it be, that in this Exercise of the Presence
of God, we perform those acts, which we have named, not as men, who speak
with an absent person, and that far off from us; but as men who speak with God
present; since the very Exercise it self, requires it, and in reality of
Truth, he is Present.

CHAP. V. Of some differences, and advantages, which there are, in this
Exercise, of going in the Presence of God.
TO the end that we may the better see the perfection, and profit of this
Exercise, and way of going in the Presence of God which we have showed; and to
the end that it may be the more declared, Note.
we will touch some differences, and advantages, which there are therein. The
first is this. In the other Exercises of the Presence of God, which some use to
propound; all seems to be but an act of the Understanding, and all seems to
end in this, that they imagine the Presence of God.

But this Exercise, presupposes, this Act of the understanding, and of faith,
That God is present, and then it goes further on, and makes Acts of the Love
of God; and in these, it does principally consist. And this does evidently
appear, to be better, and more profitable then the former. Just so, as we said
in the Treatise of Prayer, Tract. 5. c. 14.
that we are not to dwell in the acts of the Understanding, which is the
Meditation, and Consideration of things; but in the acts of the Will, that is,
in the affects and desires of virtue, and the imitation of Christ our Lord; and
this is to be of the fruit of Prayer. And so here, the chief and best, and
most profitable part of this Exercise, consists in the acts of the will; and
this is that, whereupon we must insist most.

The second benefit which follows upon this Exercise, Note.
is that it is more sweet, and facill, then the rest. For to those others, is
necessary discourse, and labor of the understanding, and imagination, to
represent forms before it; which is the thing, that uses to weary, and to
break the brains, and therefore it cannot last so long. Whereas toward this
Exercise, there is no need of discourse, but of affects, and acts of the will,
which are produced without difficulty. For although it be true, that there is
some act of the Understanding, even there; yet that, is presupposed by Faith,
without wearying us thereby. And as when we adore the B. Sacrament, we
presuppose by Faith, that Christ our Lord is present there; and all our
attention, and employment is, in adoring, reuering, loving, and begging favors
of that Lord, whom we know to be present; so it is in this Exercise. And from
hence also it is, that the same, being more facill, one may continue, and
persevere in it, longer time. For even to sick persons, who are not capable of
any other Prayer, we are wont to advise, that they are often to lift up their
hearts to God, with some affects and acts of the Will, because they may be
produced with facility. And therefore, although there were no other advantage
belonging to this Exercise, but only, that one may continue, and persevere in
it, longer time, then in the rest; we should have reason, to esteem it much,
and therefore how much more, are we to do it, having so many advantages besides.

The third, and principal thing, and that which we are to observe very well,
is: That the Presence of God is not only considered, to the end, that we may
dwell in that; but to the end, that it may serve us, for a means to do those
other things well, which we are to perform. For if we should content our
selves, with having an attention to the presence of God, and thereby did neglect
our works themselves, and did perform them with faults; this would be no good
devotion, but an illusion. We are always to make account, that although we
carry one of our eyes toward his divine Majesty, we must place the other, upon
the work it self; that we may perform it well, for the love of him. And our
seeing, that we stand in the Presence of God, must be the means, to make us do
all that, which we are to do, the better, and with the more perfection. And
this, is much better done by this Exercise, then by others. For in the
performing of others, the Understanding is much employed, about those corporal
sigures, which a man has a mind to set before himself, or about those
conceytes which he will draw out of that, which he has present to him; and
whilst he will needs draw this, or that good consideration from thence, many
times he marks not well, what he is doing, and so he falls out to do it ill.

But this Exercise, since it busieth not the Understanding, does not hinder,
any way, the good performance of the works; but rather it does greatly help,
that they may be exactly done. For he is doing them, for the love of God; and
in the Presence of God, who looks upon him. And so he procures to do them, in
such sort, and so well, as that they may be fit to appear before the eyes of
that divine Majesty; and that there may be nothing therein, which is unworthy
of his Presence. Concerning which, Tract. c. 3.
we spoke else where, of another point, which shows another way of going in
the Presence of God, which is very good and profitable, and recommended by the
Saints; and therefore we will forbear to repeat it here.

CHAP. VI. Certain pious Considerations, of Gods Immensity, and of his
Presence in all places, and in all things.
1. TO consider that God is so immense and great, as he fills all his
creatures with his infinite Greatness, and is more inwardly present in all
things, then they be in their own Essence. And notwithstanding all this, he is
not imprisoned here in the world: and though there were many millions of
worlds more, yet should he be still infinitely greater then they. in so much as
it is impossible to fly from him, since he is by his Essence, Presence, and
power in all places; and all creatures be filled with his greatness. This
consideration should make us more present to our selves in all our actions,
both private, and public, by representing to our selves, that Gods eyes be
upon us; and making unto our selves an Oratory in all places, since he is
euerywhere. We must excite in our selves affections of joy, and of admiration,
at so wonderful a greatness.

2. We must consider our selves* as living, and doing our actions in God, who
enuironeth us round, as does the water of the Ocean compass in the fish that
swym, and live therein. And this consideration, should keep us from going and
wandering out of our selves; seeing we have God present within us, as though we
were his house; or by considering our selves environed without, and penetrated
within by God, as though he were our own, and belonging unto us.

3. To consider, how God shows himself in heaven to his Elect with vnuealed,
and open face, working in them most glorious things: and he gives in some
places on earth particular signs of his presence, as Jacob saw him on that
mystical ladder, whereof the Scriptures make mention. God also has his abode
particulerly in the Churches, and Oratories; and in a more excellent manner in
the just, with whom he abides by his grace, and works strange and
wonderful things in them. But above all, he is with some great friends of his
in this life, producing spiritually within them miraculous effects, as
illustrations, discourses of the soul, revelations of divine mysteries, which
be all signs, and testimonies of his particular presence. All this ought to
make us the more attentive, and present to God, and our selves; and more
composed both within, and without.

THE COLLOQVY.
O my soul, thou have within thee all good things, how do thou not enjoy
them? Within thee is thy sovereign friend, and Father; rejoice to have him
with thee: join thee jointly with him, and give unto him thy whole heart. If
thou art poor, thou have God with thee, who is rich in mercy, run unto him,
that he may impart unto thee of his riches. If thou art weak, and
pusillanimous, thou have God with thee, who is fortitude it self; and united
with him, thou may do all things in virtue of him: wherefore then do thou
seek without thee, with anxietie, help of the creatures, having within thee,
the omnipotency of the Creator? O my Creator, my God, and my all things,
perfect in me this strayte coniunctio^ which thou have with me, uniting thy
self also with me, by the perfect union of grace, that I also may conioyne my
self with thee, by the perfect union of charity. Amen.

FINIS.

