The Rimers new Trimming.
To the tune of, In Summer time.


A Rimer of late in a Barbors shop,
sat by for a trimming, to take his lot:
Being minded with mirth until his turn came,
to drive away the time, he thus began.
You barbarous Shauers that nimbly trim
with Sissors and Rasor, and handling the Comb:
Your rubbing, your brushing, your Ball, and Basin,
displayes your fining of each one in fashion.
You are no Pillars, but poulers in the state,
and still are shauing for what you can scrape:
By excrementall Fees you purchase Pelf,
and wash from others; but keep to your self.
Your abusiue Balls you clap in our eyes,
making us wincke whilst you make up your prize
With bobbing our Lips, and pullings by the Nose,
and after to slap us in the mouth with your Cloths.
With your Liquor so hot, you often do scald,
and often to your hands comes Crowns that are bald:
The more that you clip them, the thinner they are,
and it is for your profit they loose their Hair.
You frizzell, you currell your long Hair and Locks
turns up their Moutchatos, snifled with Pox:
Rub them with Musk-ball, and sprinkle Rose Water
the snap of your Finger then follows after.
Your pulling out Teeth, or stopping the hollow,
your skill to cease pain, being but shallow,
Making show of a cure with a Masticke plaster,
they from your chair rising, a leg they scrape after
Having thus passed their time in prating,
the Chair became empty, he his turn taking:
To be trimmed, into what fashion or cut
(quoth the Barbor) will it please you to be put?
Good friend (quoth he) I would be known,
for knowledge is my living, now let be shown:
Thy cunning in shauing so of my Face,
that a blush may not stayne it to my disgrace.
For such company I come in that will try,
it they can stayne it with Vermilion die:
Or dash me out of countenance by action:
wherefore put me in the most shameless fashion.
Fear it not then good sir, (quoth the Barbor:)
Boy give me hither a Ball that will larther,
And pound those precious gums so dusty;
poynting to small Coal in a Pan all rusty.
The Boy straight about his business hies.
Now sir, says the Barbor, keep close your eyes
For this Ball will prove somewhat tart,
and twill disquiet you much to feel them smart.
Quickly Boy, bring my varnishing Ball.
Here sir, and gives him the Coals beaten small
Which over his Face he dusteth full thick,
and rubs him with Soap, the better to stick.
Being about his business: sir (quoth the Barbor,)
this Ball does well scowre, and ease my labor:
And though here needs no drying with Clothes,
yet I must be familiar to pull you by the Nose.
Having done his exployt, made a great smoke,
and under the Chair set; being ready to choke:
The Rimer up rose, and forth of doors flung,
they snatching off the Clothes on him that hung.
And being gone out bedawbed and smeared,
the people shouted, Boys on him stared:
He wondering at their laughing, thought his favor
was very pleasing, that moved such laughter.
And seeing the Smoke ceased, went back again,
with troops following at his heels amain:
The door was shut, but at the Window a Glass
was set of purpose to show him his Face.
Which he perceiving, did swear and rave,
quo'th Barbor, you are trimd like a riming knave
Your quality is awdacious and base:
now you having got a Vizard for your Face.
Where next you are trimde, be not too bold,
with scalding, and scraping; now your are pould:
Least they noch your noddle, and spoil your riming:
and so much good do you with your trimming.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for T. Langley.

A pleasant Song, made by a Soldier, whose bringing up had bin dainty, and
partly fed by those affections of his unbridled youth, is now beaten with his
own rod, and therefore terms this his repentance, the fall of his folly.
To the tune of Calino.


IN Summer time when Phoebus rays,
Did cheer each mortal man's delight,
Increasing of the cheerful days,
and cutting off the darkesome night.
When Nature brought forth every thing,
By just return of April showers:
To make the pleasant branches spring,
of sundry sorts of herbs and flowers.
It was my chance to walk abroad.
To view Dame Natures newcome breed:
The pretty Birds did lay on load,
with sugared tunes in every wood.
The gallant Nightingale did set,
Her speckled breast against a Bryer,
Whose woeful tunes bewayles as yet,
her brother Tereus foul desire.
The Serpents having cast their coats,
Lay listening how the Birds did sing:
The pretty birds with sugared notes,
did welcome in the pleasant Spring:
I drew me to the Greenewood side,
To hear this country harmony,
Whereas ere long I had espide,
a woeful man in misery.
He lay along upon the ground,
And to the heavens he cast his eye:
The bordering hills and dales resound,
the Echoes of his pittious cry.
He wailing sore, and sighing, said,
O heaven, what endless grief have I?
Why are my sorrows thus delaid?
come therefore death and let me dye.
When Nature first had made my frame,
And let me loose when she had done:
Steps Fortune in that fickle Dame,
to end what Nature had begun,
She set me soft upon her knee,
And blast my tender age with store;
But in the end she did agree,
to mar what she had done before.
I could no sooner creep alone,
But she forsook her fostred child,
I had no land to live upon.
but ^^^c'd abroad the world so wild.
At length I fell in company,
With gallant youths of Mars his train,
I spent my life in ieoperdy,
and got my labor for my pain.
I wat^^^d on the sieged walls,
In thunder, lightning, rain, and snow,
And often in shot of powdered halls,
whose costly marks are yet to show,
When all my kindred took their rest,
At home in many a slately bed:
The ground and pauement was my nest,
my Flaske a pillow for my head.
My meat was such as I could find,
As Roots and Herbs of sundry sorts:
Which did content my hungry mind,
although my commons were but short,
My powder served to salt my meat,
My murren for a gilden cup,
Wherein such drink as I could get,
in sprin^ ^r ditch, I drank it up.
My Rapier always by my side.
My piece lay charged with match alight,
Thus many a month I did abide,
to ward all day, and watch all night,
I lived in this glorious vain,
Until my limbs were stiff and lame:
And then I got me home again,
regarding not such costly fame.
When I came home, I made a proof
What friends would do if need should be,
My nearest kins folks looked aloof,
as though they had forgotten me.
And as the Owls by chattring charms,
Is wondered at of other Birds,
So came they wondering at my harms,
and yield me no relief but words.
Thus do I want when they have store,
That am their equal every way:
But fortune lent them somewhat more,
else had I been as good as they.
Come gentle Death and end my grief,
Ye pretty Birds ring forth my knell:
Let Robin red breast be the chief,
to bury me, andd so farewell.
Let no good Soldier be dismaide,
To fight in field with courage bold.
Yet mark the words that I have said,
trust not to friends when thou art old.
FINIS.
Printed at London for John Wright.


