IERVSALEMS FALL, Englands warning.
LVK. 15.41.42.43.44. Verse 41. And when he was come near, he beheld the
City, and wept for it.

42. Saying: O, if thou had even known, at the least, in this thy day, those
thing which belong unto thy peace, but, now are they hid from thine eyes.

43. I (...) the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in or every side.

44. And shall make thee even with the ground, and thy Child which are in
thee, and they shall not leave in thee a (...) upon a stone, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation.


THis Chapter consists of four parts: the first contains the calling of
Zacheus; the second includes the Parable of the Noble man delivering his money
to his Servants, to occupy till his return; the third, comprehends the
manner of Christ's riding to Jerusalem, Math. 21.
accompanied with his Disciples and much people, who laid their garments on the
Ass, Ioh. 12.
on which our Lord Jesus did ride, with great joy and loud acclamations. The
fourth and last, is the purging and clensing of the Temple, of corruptions
crept in and allowed by the Pharisees. The third part I have chosen to entreat
of, wherein the Evangelist Luke, declares the great joy, triumph, and
rejoicing of the Disciples and people, with their loud acclamations, as they
approached near to Jerusalem: in which action they were directed by the holy
Ghost; that the Prophecy of Zachariah might be fulfilled, which was this:
Rejoice greatly O daughter Zion: shout for joy, O Daughter Jerusalem: behold,
thy King comes unto thee: he is just and saved himself, poor, and riding
upon an Ass, and upon a colt, the soul of an Ass, Zacha. 9.9. Yet our Lord
Jesus, approaching near unto Jerusalem, and beholding it, and withal reuoluing
in his mind the great mercies of God, offered by the Prophets, and now by him,
and considering how the hearts of the Jews were obdurate and hardened, and
their eyes blinded, that they could neither see the grace offered, nor believe
the promises made unto them; he burst forth into weeping, wishing that they had
known the things that concerned their pence; but because they did not, he did
Prophecy the utter destruction of the City, and of their policy; which came
to pass about some forty years after, and remains unto this day: which is
an admonition to us, and to all succeeding ages, to beware and take heed that
we do not despise the grace of God, lest we taste of his judgments. But I come
to the words themselves, which offer to our consideration two things.

1. An Admonition to Jerusalem. 2. A Prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem.
The first part of my text contains an Admonition to Jerusalem: wherein our
Lord Jesus warned her of her present estate, to draw her to a diligent
consideration of the great mercy of God showed unto her. First in sending his
Prophets: Secondly in sending his Son to allure her unto repentance, that she
might have avoided the judgments and plagues which were imminent, and hung
over her head, and afterward fell upon her.

Wherein we may observe the great mercy of God, admonishing her of the danger
that she should fall into, if she did not prevent it by true and unfeigned
repentance. God gives a Cauent before his Capias, and does warn before he does
wound. And thus the Lord has done from the beginning; admonishing men either
immediately, or mediately, before of the danger, that avoiding it, they might
escape the punishment. He admonished Adam before his fall, immediately by
himself, showing him the danger and punishment if he did eat of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.17.
in the midst of the Garden: Thou shall die the death. He likewise warned
Cain, before he murdered Abell his Brother, immediately by himself: If thou
do well, Genesis 4.7.
shall thou not be accepted? if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.
Likewise he forewarned Noah of the drowning of the world immediately by
himself, Genesis 6.8.
who believed and escaped the merciless waters. He admonished, immediately,
Genesis 7.1.
by meane^, the old world by Noah, the eight Preacher of righteousness. He
admonished the Sodomi^ai by Lot, 2 Pet. 2.5.
the Egyptians by Moses, the Ninevites by Jonah, Genesis 19.
the Israelites by the Prophets, often before they were led into captivity,
Jerusalem by the Prophets, Math 23.
and by our Lord Jesus, as here Saint Paul says, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning.
Therefore all the admonitions, comminations, and examples of punishments is in
the Scriptures are therefore recorded, that in all times and ages they should
be propounded and preached unto men, as testimonies of the judgments of God
against all impenitent sinners, who stop their ears at the voice of God,
wincke with their eyes, that they may not see the mercies of God, and harden
their hearts, not believing his threatenings: Therefore our Lord Jesus
denounces a heavy woe against Chorazin, Math. 11.
Bethsaida and Capernaum, telling them that it should be easier for Tire and
Sidon, and for Sodom, then for them in the day of judgment. Saint Paul
showing how God slew three and twenty thousand of the Israelites for
committing fornication declares, 1 Cor. 10.11.
that all those things came unto them for examples, and were written to
admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the Generation to come.
This Admonition then unto Jerusalem, and all other Admonitions in the
Scriptures, are recorded in the Scriptures to be Preached unto all men, to all
Nations, to all estates and conditions of men, especially to those to whom the
Gospel has been declared, that it might be an example of the just judgment
of God, and an Admonition to Repentance, lest they likewise despising the
riches of Gods goodness, patience, and long-suffering, according to their
hardness, and heart that cannot repent, they heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans 2.
and just judgment of God. This Admonition then concerns us, and warns us
in time to repent, and to lay hold on the day of grace, before the day of
judgment come. The Gospel has been preached unto us many years, God has
bestowed many favors and benefits upon us, he has given us a long peace, he
has defended us against our enemies, that are more in number and stronger then
we; he has made us his vineyard, and bedged us round about, that the wild
Bore of the forest could not root us up; he has done as much, yea, much more
for us then for Jerusalem, he has called us to repentance by his servants, the
Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel: All the examples of Gods judgments in
the Scriptures have been red and pressed unto us, yet we generally live in
security, neither suspecting any change, nor fearing any punishment: But let
us take heed that our Halcion-dayes do not deceive us; neither let us think
that we are privileged above others: Romans 11.21.
For if God spared not the natural branches, when they did not repent, will he
spare us that were wild Olives? The Jews in the time of Jeremiah, who dwelled
in Jerusalem, lived in great security (as we do) neither regarding Gods
mercies, nor fearing his judgments; therefore the Lord sent Jeremiah with this
message unto them. Behold I begin to plague the City where my name is called
upon, Ier. 25.29.
and should you go free? ye shall not go quite, for I will call for a sword
upon all the inhabitants of the earth. Even so this example of Jerusalem, yea,
and all the examples before mentioned do preach unto us to turn unto God, not
flattering our selves that we are better then they; nay, I fear that our
sins are grown so great, that we have justified Jerusalem, yea, Sodom and
Gomorrha in their sins; and therefore I say from the mouth of Christ unto
you, except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. Luke 13.


Now out of this general, let us observe these particulars. That he would not
the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn and live. This mercy of
God should lead us to repentance; it should break our stony hearts, and
soften the hardness of them, when God spreads out his hands unto us, and
offers to gather us together as a Hen does her Chickens, that we perish
not with the wicked.

Jerusalem and other Cities, were destroyed, for refusing the grace of God
offered unto them, I hear how such men were severely punished, when they would
not be warned: If I do not make use of this, the same punishment will fall
upon me, therefore I will pray unto God to grant me his grace, that I may take
these warnings, and speedily turn to God, that the fall of others may be my
rising.



Jerusalem, Tire and Sidon, and for Sodom and Gamorha in the day of Judgment,
then for us. God Almighty give us grace to make a good use of these things.

Now I come to the words, in particular, as they lie in order.

And when he was come near unto the City.
Our Lord Jesus, accompanied with his Disciples and much people, rejoicing with
great triumph, approaches to Jerusalem: And when he was come near unto the
City; he beheld it, and wept for it. He comes to Jerusalem, to an
ungrateful and a rebellious. City, from which he had just cause to depart:
for she neither would receive his Doctrine, nor believe his miracles: His
Doctrine she challenged not to be of God, his miracles she ascribed to Satan,
Math. 12.
to Belzabub the chief of the Devils; his person she contemned, is not this
the Carpenters Son? art thou not a Samaritan? Math. 13.
Yet our Lord Jesus, passing by all these indignities, comes unto her, and
leaves nothing unattempted to save her; as he himself by his own words
testified. O Jerusalem, Math. 23.37.
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee; how often would I have gathered thee together as a Hen does her
Chickens, and thou would not. Behold here the love of our Lord Jesus to an
unfaithful and a rebellious people. This example of Christ does teach all his
Ministers, yea, and all Christians, to open their bowels of mercy, even
toward the obstinate, not rashly to forsake them, and depart from them, and to
give them over; but rather to labor to win them unto Christ, and to omit no
time, to spare no labor to effect it, and to bring it to pass. So did Noah
labor with the old world, Lot with the Sodomites, Moses with Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, Samuel with Saul, the Prophets with the Israelites, Paul with the
Jews. But it may be objected that it is in vain and but labor lost, to cast
pearls before Swine, Math. 6.
and to give that which is holy unto Dogs. I answer, we ought not so to
think by and by of such as are obstinate and ungrateful, of such as are
froward and stubborn, for God can suddenly change them; Paul was a Persecutor,
a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and an oppressor, but God took mercy upon him; Matthew and Zacheus were
Publicans and Sinners when our Lord Jesus called them; Therefore let us do our
diligence, and commit the success unto God: If they continue in their
disobedience, they are without excuse, and their condemnation is the more just:
He that refuses light, is worthy to continue in darkness; he that rejects
grace, deserves to abide the sensure of Justice. If we with our admonitions
and exhortations reclaim and win them, we save so many souls from death,
James 5.19.20.
and cover a multitude of sins, and we our selves shall in the day of the
resurrection shine as the Stars in the firmament. Dan. 12.3.


He beheld the City.
AS our Savior Christ approached near unto Jerusalem, so he beheld it, he
looked upon it, and reuoluing in his mind her blockishnesse and ingratitude,
neither seeing, nor acknowledging Gods mercies, nor yet fearing his judgments,
he burst forth into weeping. Now we may consider his kindness and love toward
Jerusalem, that he looks on her, that he beheld her, from whom he had just
cause to turn away his eyes; yet he beholds her, he does not auert his face
from her, as men turn their eyes from their enemies: Luke 10.33.
But he is that good Samaritan, who seeing the wounded man, is moved with great
commiseration and compassion toward him, pitying his distressed case, and
indeauouring to relieve it.

The use.
This example is our instruction, teaching us to behold obstinate sinners, to
look upon them, pitying their miserable estate, which they themselves see
not. When therefore we behold the common Swearer, breaking forth into
outrageous oaths: When we see some profane the holy Sabbath of the Lord: When
we look upon the common Drunkard, or upon any other notorious sinner,
committing sin with a high hand, and acting it with greediness, making no
conscience of sinning: let us be moved with compassion toward them that know
not what they do; they little think of the judgments that hang over their
heads, if they repent not. Now as the beholding of a man in some sharp fit of
sickness, or the looking upon some grievous sore or festered wound, extremely
payning the patient, does draw compassion from us; even so should we be moved
to pity the miserable estate of grievous sinners, who are sick and wounded
with sin, and yet do not feel it: And if we should and ought to be moved
with compassion toward the obstinate, for their great miseries that shall
befall them; how much more ought we to pity the godly in their distresses,
crosses, and afflictions, Dilige iure bonos and miseresce malis Boethius.
whereof we are many times eyewitnesses. Here then the Stoikes, and all that
are without natural affection, are to be reproved: Colos. 3.12. Romans 12.15:
They that are Gods elect have put upon them the bowels of mercy; they weep
with them that weep, they remember them that are in bonds, Heb. 13.3. Pro.
12.10.
as if they were bound with them; and them that are in affliction, as if they
were afflicted in the body: But the wicked have cruel hearts, they give
themselves to case and pleasure, as Amos teaches, Amos 6.6.
and remember not the affliction of Joseph.

And wept.
AS our Lord Jesus approached unto Jerusalem, so he beheld the City, and
beholding it he wept for it. We read that Christ wept thrice: First when he
raised up Lazarus; for when he came to the place where they had laid him, Saint
John says, And he wept, Ioh. 11.35. Secondly, he wept over Jerusalem, as here
we read. Thirdly, in his Passion, as the Apostle says; which in the days of
his flesh, did offer up Prayers and Supplications, with strong cryings, and
tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, Christ's love.
and was also heard in that which he feared. Heb. 5.7. The tears of Christ
express the affection of his love, as does a Father weeping over his
disobedient and dissolute son, for the misery that he fore-seeth will come
upon him for his inordinate life. He delights in mercy, rather then in
judgment. He delights not simply, no not in the destruction of the wicked;
he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth: 1 Timothy 2.4. Ezekiel. 18.32. The use.
He desires not the death of a sinner.

If then Christ weep for the misery and destruction of the wicked, much more
will his ears be open unto the sighs and groans, to the Prayers and
Supplications of his poor members, who turn unto him with true contrition and
sorrow of heart, and call upon him with a lively faith. This should be
remembered of us, that it may comfort and encourage us to approach unto the
throne of his grace in time of necessity, that we may receive mercy, and find
grace.

Again, if the tears of Christ do not moisten and mollify our dry and hard
hearts; if they do not move us, and draw us unto Repentance, he in the end
will punish our obstinacy and hardness of heart, and though we cry then, he
will not regard our weeping, because we despised his tears. Let us in the
fear of God meditate on this godly motion, that it may lead us unto true and
speedy Repentance. Do thou not know that this love of Christ should lead
thee to repentance?

The tears of Christ also express unto us the dolor and grief of Christ.
Christ's dolor.
For being sent of his Father to gather the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
and seeing their obstinacy and stubbornenesse, despising his word, reproaching
his miracles, and rejecting his grace, he could not refrain from weeping; he
burst forth into tears. This was the cause why he being touched with
compassion, showed his love and his grief, weeping for the imminent
destruction of Jerusalem. For when he considered that Jerusalem was ordained of
God, to be the holy seat, in the which the covenant of everlasting salvation
should abide, the sanctuary, from whence salvation should come to the whole
world, it could not be but that he must needs greatly lament the destruction
thereof: when also he saw the people to perish miserably, by their own
ingratitude and malice, which was adopted to the hope of eternal life, it is
no marvel if he could not refrain from tears. Now this affection in Christ
was not counterfeit, it was not fained, far be it from us to admit any such
thought; but it was true, Heb. 4.15.
for we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but he was in all things tempted, in like sort as we, yet without
sin: wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren
(for he took the seed of Abraham) that he might be merciful, and a faithful
high Priest in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the
sins of the people, for in that he suffered, and was tempted, Heb. 2.17.18.
he is able to succor them that are tempted.

This affection then of true sorrow in Christ for Jerusalem, is a notable
testimony and a sure proof of his humanity and manhood, and is sufficient to
convince and confute Marcion and other Heretics, denying that he was a true
and natural man. And in this sorrow of our Lord Jesus Christ, expressed by his
weeping for Jerusalem, we have a true pattern of natural affections: weeping
for Jerusalem, a stubborn City, a disobedient City, an unfaithful City. O
should not this move us? O should not this draw us to compunction? O should not
this pull up the sluices and floodgates of our eyes, and give them free passage
to gush out with tears? Our Lord Jesus wept, and can our eyes be dry to hear
it? Quis talia fandoi temperet a lacrimis?
Virgill the Heathen Poet, describing the lamentable destruction of Troy, that
was sacked by the Graecians after ten years Seege, says, who speaking of
these things, can refrain from tears? So say I, who is it that reads or
hears how our Lord Jesus wept, and can pass away with dry eyes?

Now these tears of Christ did intimate that the sins of Jerusalem were
greater; and the calamities and punishments imminent, and hanging over her
head, were more grievous then Jerusalem did think or understand: for it is a
great matter that good men speak with tears. The sequel did verify this in
the destruction of Jerusalem: Our Lord Jesus weepeth for the sins of
Jerusalem, and for the punishments and calamities that should come upon her.

2 Pet. 2.7.8.
This example teaches us to weep for the sins of others: Righteous Lot had
his soul vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked Sodomites. Isa.
24.16.
Isaiah cries out, My leanenesse, my leanenesse, woe is me: the transgressors
have offended; yea, the transgressors have grievously offended: He did so
grieve at the transgressions of the people, that he became exceeding lean
withal, as the doubling of the word imports. The Prophet Jeremy likewise is
full of passion in this behalf, Ier. 4.19.
sometimes he cries out, as if he were in great perplexity. My belly, my
belly, I am pained even at the very heart, my heart is troubled within me, I
cannot be still. Sometimes he wishes that his head were full of water, and his
eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for the sins of
the people: and he told them that his soul should weep in secret for their
Pride, Ier. 9.1.
and his eyes should weep and drop down tears. How did Samuel weep for the
sins of Saul? Ier. 13.17. 1 Samuel 16.2. Psalm. 119.139.
And David says, that his eyes did gush out with rivers of water, because men
kept not the Law of God. How did Saint Paul weep for them that did walk
inordinately among the Philippians? Phil. 3.18. Ezra. 10.1.
How did Ezra and other good men weep for the sins of the people in his
time? If then these good men beholding the sins of the people of their times,
and considering the calamities and punishments that would fall upon them, did
weep abundantly: How can we pass by our brethren, sinning with an high hand,
and committing sin with greediness, and not weep for their sins? Before I
begin to relate unto you the sins of this age, and of our Land, I cannot but
tremble. How do men and women, young and old, rich and poor, generally take
the holy name of God in vain? how commonly is Gods holy Sabbath profaned? how
many murders in this land have been committed, and the murderers have
escaped? how is adultery and fornication committed, and is not punished? how
is theft boulstered? how does drunkenness reign in this land, and is made but
a sport and pastime? Are not these sins like the sins of the first age?
Have not the sins of our Land, exceeded the sins of the Sodomites? and
shall we not now weep for the sins of the people of this land? yes, let us
not only weep, but let us houle and cry for them, Joel. 2.17.
as Joel exhorted the people of his time. Now if this be required of us for
other men's sins, much more should we sorrow and weep for our own sins;
our sins should be our greatest sorrow; nothing in the world should come so
near our hearts as they: and therefore the Lord says, that when men are once
brought to a true sight of their sins, they shall mourn for them, Zacha.
12.10.
even as one that mourns for his only son; and be sorry, as one is sorry
for his first borne. As nothing more wounds the heart of a tender Father,
then to loose his only Son, the image of his name, and the hope of his
house: so nothing should pierce the heart of a man so deeply, as the
consideration of his sins. Many weep in the world, but not for their sins,
but for worldly respects; such abuse their tears, as Chrysostom upon the
Colossians does at large declare. Many weep because they cannot have that
which they unjustly desire. 1 King. 21.4.
So mourned Achab for Naboths Vineyard. Some weep because they cannot be
revenged on their enemies; so did Esau weep because he could not hurt his
brother Jacob. Many weep, because their Parents die not, that they might be
their heirs, and enjoy their goods. Many weep because they cannot be rich,
nor have the world at will, as some have: But how few among us do weep for our
sins? Psalm. 6.6. Psalm. 102.10. Math. 26.
David every night washed his bed, and watered his couch with his tears: Peter
when he had denied his Master, went out and wept bitterly: Mary shed such
plenty of tears, Luke 7.38.
as she washed our Savior Christ's feet with them: And have not we think you
as great cause to weep for our own sins? yes verily, and if we would but
enter into our own consciences, and call our sins to remembrance, and judge
our selves, every one of us humbly bowing the knees of our heart, should thus
say unto the Lord; O my God, how have I bestowed all those Talents of gold
which thou have given me? how have I requited thee for all thy kindness
toward me? what has my whole life been else but a continual warring against
thee? O Lord Jesus, what has my life been else but a daily renewing of all
thy bloody torments, and of all thy passions! Ah vile wretch that I am, how
often have I betrayed thee, and sold thee for a little worldly pleasure, or
for a little luker and gain? How often have I bound thine hands, and even most
despitefully spitefully spit in thy face, by refusing those gifts which thou
would have given thee? how often have I quenched the good motions of thy
spirit put into me? For this should I weep day and night. In fontem frontem,
atque in flumina ^umina vertam.

Lachrimae nobis deerunt, ante quam causae dolendi. Senec. de breui. vitae.


It is no small measure of sorrow that is sufficient, in respect of the
greatness of our sins: For if we had an hundredth eyes, and should weep them
all out; and if we had a thousand hearts, and they should all break asunder,
with remorse and sorrow for our sins, it were too little, and we should
sooner want tears, then matter of mourning.

If we think that we should be such vile wretches, as by our sins to crucify
Christ so often, and to put him to so many deaths, who has been to us so
kind a Lord, and so loving a Savior: For we must not think that a little
sorrow, or a few tears will serve the turn, but we must have great measure of
grief; look how grievously we have sinned, so grievously should we bewail
our sins. A deep wound must have a large plaster; and our repentance must
not be less then our fault. It is true, it is no matter of merit for a man to
weep more or less: we may say in this case, 1 Cor. 8.8.
as the Apostle says of meats; it is not our tears that makes us acceptable
to God: but yet much sorrow, and much weeping, in a token of great repentance:
and on the other side, where there is a little sorrow, and a little weeping,
there is but a little repentance. Peter when he had denied his Master, went
out and wept bitterly. The people of Israel, 1 Samuel 7.27.
that lamented after the Lord for their sin, are said to have poured out
buckets of tears, as it were unto the Lord: and David says that he wept in
such abundance, as he caused his bed to swim, Psalm. 6.6.
and watered his couch with his tears. In both which places, though there be
an Hyperbolicall excess of speech (for it is not possible for men to fill
buckets with tears, Cura dolorque animi, lacrymaeque alimenta fuere. Ovid
meta. li. 10.
nor to cause themselves to swim in their beds) yet it signifies that there
was an exceeding great measure of grief. Again, he says, that his tears
were his meat, Psalm. 42.3. Luke 7.38. Joel. 2.12.
day and night: And Mary, as before was noted, shed such plenty of tears, as
she washed our Saviors feet with them. Let us then I beseech you, Weep for
your selves, and for your children. Luke 23.28. A good saying of a profane
mouth. Ille dolet vere qui sine test dolet. Martialis. lib 1. Epigra. 34.
turn unto the Lord with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning; both
for the sins of others, and for our own sins. O that I could obtain thus
much of you, or rather of God for you, that you would weep for your sins,
though not at this time, and in this place, yet when you are at home, and by
your selves, when ye consider of this ye have heard this day, that so God may
regard your tears, put them into his bottle, and auert the judgments which
our sins have justly deserved.

We have heard how our Lord Jesus wept over Jerusalem: now let us consider what
Jerusalem did. Jerusalem: was secure, she rejoiced, she was merry, she feared
no danger, therefore her destruction came suddenly upon her, and she could not
avoid it. This was the state of the first age, they ate, they drank, they
bought, they sold, they married, and were given in marriage, and suddenly the
flood came, and swept them all away. This was the state of Pharaoh and his
Host.
This was the state of the Sodomites, they feared no danger, and suddenly were
consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven. This was the state of Babylon,
Isa. 47.7.
who said, I shall be a Lady for ever: therefore she gave her self to
pleasure, and dwelt careless: she said, I am, and none else, I shall not sit
as a widow, neither shall know the loss of children. 8.
But what said the Lord? now hear, 9.
these two things shall come to thee suddenly in one day, the loss of children
and widowhood, they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for the multitude
of thy diuinations, and for the great abundance of thy Inchanters. Saint John
likewise, Revel. 18.7.8. Luke 12.19.20.
in the Revelation, prophesied in like manner of her. This was the state of the
rich man in the Gospel, who promised to himself many days, Of the rich
Glutton. Luke 18.
and yet the same night his soul was fetched away. This was the error of
David, who said in his prosperity, he should never be removed; but he retracted
it, finding the contrary. Now here we have a true description of the world, and
of the times wherein we live; we have inioyed such a long peace, as neither our
Fathers, nor our forefathers ever knew; we have had so long prosperity, we
have had so great plenty of all things; but above all these, we have had the
Gospel and word of God so plentifully, and so sincerely preached among us, as
scarce has been seen in any age heretofore. Now these Halcion days, this
long peace, this great prosperity, makes men secure, they think this will
ever hold, they fear no alteration, they think they stand immovable: this
was the state of former times, and they smarted for their security, and vain
confidence, let us then take heed and be wise, Omnium rerum est vicissitudo.
let us remember the change of all things is sudden, if God enter into
judgment with us, if he hide his face from us, we shall be changed, and our
prosperity may be turned into adversity, and our joy into mourning. Mat.
24.37.38.
Our Lord Jesus foretold the security of the world, before his coming, that
it should be as it was in the time of Noah. And Saint Paul says, When they
shall say peace, These. 5.13.
and safety, then shall suddow destruction come upon them, as the travail
upon a woman, and they shall not escape. Let us not then flatter our selves
with these goodly days, but let us fear an alteration, let us like good
Servants be always ready with our account in our hands, and like wise Virgins,
with oil in our Lamps, that no sudden change may overtake us, nor any
adversity dismay us, but that we may say in any adverse hap that may befall
us, as Job said, that is come upon me that I was afraid of. Amen.

Saying, O if thou had known, at the least in this thy day, those things
which belong unto thy peace.
IN these words our Savior Christ does complain, and vpbraide the blindness
of Jerusalem. His words are passionate, therefore abrupt: for we know in whom
earnest affections meet, being surprised with grief, they cannot utter their
whole mind, but break off abruptly. Christ then does not only complain, and
pity the destruction of Jerusalem, but does also vpbraide this ungrateful
people, their great wickedness in rejecting salvation offered, and drawing
wittingly the heavy judgment of God upon them. For it is very like that this
thought did disquiet the mind of our Lord Jesus. Behold, O daughter Sion and
Jerusalem, I come unto thee, thy King, and thy Savior, as the Prophet promised
thee; but poor, and humble, therefore thou despisest me, from whose hand thou
might receive righteousness, and everlasting life. I would thou had
known those things which belong unto thy peace, and were not blind in thine
own evil, and in this thy day, wherein so many and such admirable things do
call thee to the knowledge of these things. For now thou have me preaching
unto thee the kingdom of heaven, the day of salvation and visitation is risen
upon thee, which thou ought to know by my doctrine, and miracles wrought
before thy eyes, in the midst of thee. But O thrice, and four times unhappy,
these things are hid from thee, thou do maliciously blind thy self, that
thou might not see them; therefore thou do rage, and art mad against me,
and seek my blood, whom with an earnest affection, thou should receive
and embrace as thy Savior.

By this then it appears, that our Lord Jesus complains against the
blindness, stubbornenesse, and ingratitude of Jerusalem, that by no
admonitions, no benefits, nay, not with tears, she would not be mollified, nor
warned, to avoid her future calamities. Jerusalem, not considering the grace
that was offered unto her.

And this affection of so great mercy which we see was in Christ the Son of
God, the like we read that God the Father does declare to be in himself, in
many places of the Scriptures. As when he complained against the Israelites,
for their stubbornenesse and ingratitude, he says thus: Psalm. 81.13.14.
Oh that my people had harkned unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways. I
would soon have humbled their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries. 15.
The haters of God should have been subject unto him, and their time should
have endured for ever. 16.
And God would have fed them with the fat of wheat, and with honey out of the
rock would I have satisfied thee. Again, Isa. 48.18.
Oh that they were wise. then they would understand this, they would consider
their latter end. Deu. 32.29.
Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always: that it might go well with them, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
and with their children for ever.

By these Scriptures it is evident, that man's perdition is of himself, and in
himself, and not of God. Hos. 13 9. Eze. 33.11. Pro. 1.29.
Thy perdition, O Israel, is of thy self, but thy help is in me. I live says
the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner. I have called says wisdom, and
ye have refused. Math. 23.37.
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says our Lord Jesus, how often would I have gathered
thee together, as a hen does her chickens, and thou would not. 1 Timothy 2.4.
God would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth: Here then those wicked and profane
men are to be reproved, who ascribe their damnation to God, when it is in
themselves. For God calls, and they stop their ears, like the deaf Adder, and
will not hear: God offers grace, and they refuse it: God warnes them of their
miseries to come, if they do not repent; but they will not believe and turn
to God, but harden their hearts, as Pharaoh did, till destruction come upon
them.

Thou.
THis word (Thou) is emphaticall, for every word in the Scriptures has his
weight, and every syllable his sense. Oh that thou, thou Jerusalem, whom God
has chosen to be his sanctuary, to be his dwelling place, to put his name
there, with whom he has made a covenant, upon whom he has bestowed so many
benefits, whom he has hedged about, and defended against all enemies: Oh that
thou, which in privileges and prerogatives excellest all the Cities in the
world, had known the things that belong unto thy peace. Other Cities have
known their peace, and the time of their visitation in mercy; as Niniuie, who
repented at the preaching of Jonah. Oh that thou were in the number of them.

The use.
Here the Ministers and Preachers of Gods word, are taught to apply their
admonitions to the whole Nation; yea, to particular Cities; yea, to particular
Towns; yea, to particular persons: when they wilfully and obstinately reject
the grace and mercy of God, then they may justly complain against them, and
fitly use this manner of speaking; Oh that thou had known the things that
concern thy peace. Oh that thou Adulterer, Oh that thou Drunkard, Oh that thou
Blasphemer, Oh that thou prophaner of Gods Sabboath, Oh that thou Usurer, thou
Oppressor, would fear the judgments that will light upon thee, if thou
know not the things that belong unto thy peace, and do not by true
repentance turn unto God whiles he does speak unto thee, and warn thee.

Had known.
Our Lord Jesus wishes that Jerusalem had known the things that belong unto
her peace. Whence we learn that knowledge is an excellent thing; we should
all labor for to attain unto it. For to know God and Jesus Christ, to know
the mysteries of salvation, to know the things that belong unto our peace; to
know the time of our visitation, in mercy; this is man's Summum bonum; his
happiness, Ioh. 17.3.
his glory. This is life eternal, to know thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength; nor the rich man in his riches; Ier. 9.24.
but let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows me to be the Lord:
for I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6.6.
and the knowledge of God, more then burnt offerings, says the Lord. Oh that
thou had known, says our Lord Jesus to Jerusalem. And may not we say to
England; yea, to London; yea, may not every Minister and Preacher of the word,
say to his particular place, where he is resiant; Oh that thou had known
the things wherein thy peace consists?

At the least in this thy day.
IN these words is an Amplification taken from the time. As if our Lord Jesus
should say, hitherto thou have been obstinate and stubborn, thou have killed
my Prophets which I sent unto thee; thou have often hitherto rejected me: Oh
that now, in this thy day, which my Father has appointed to call thee by me,
thou would be wise and know thy time. The speech of our Savior Christ
contains an exclamation proceeding from his heart, and uttered with so great
affections of dolor, that he could not perfectly declare it, but breaks it
off, even as when a man is in great heaviness and sorrow, intending to utter
his grief, he is enforced to break it off abruptly. In this speech our Lord
Jesus admonishes, that the day was come which God in his eternal counsel had
appointed for the salvation of Jerusalem, and was promised by the Prophets;
which opportunity, if she did not lay hold on, the gate of salvation should be
shut against her for ever. This kind of speech is frequent in the Scriptures:
Isa. 49.8. 2 Cor. 6.2. Isa. 8.6.
Now the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation. Again, Seek the Lord
whiles he may be found, call upon him whiles he is near. And that considering
the season, Romans 13.11.
that it is now time that we should arise from sleep, for now is our salvation
nearer, then when we believed. 12.
The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the
works of darkness, and put upon us the armor of light.

The use.
Here then we learn, that when God gives men a day wherein God does call them,
it is not to be neglected, not to be let slip. Now God calls men two ways:
First, by his judgments: secondly, by his mercies: And the word (day) is so
taken, both for the judgment of God, and also for the mercy of God. In the
first kind God does call by afflictions, by war, by famine, Aut terrendo
minis, aut cordeudo flagellis, aut blandiendo beneficijs. Flugo in Cant. 1.
by pestilence and sickness, by captivity, for when God does chastise and
punish us, he calls us to repentance: In the second kind, God does call us
by mercy, and clemency; and he calls us more openly at one time, then he
does at another. Sometimes he seems to forsake his Church, as if the truth
were altogether extinguished; as he did when the Pope reigned in all places,
almost through Christendom: But now he has given unto us his Gospel, he does
reach his hand of mercy unto us. This then is a merciful calling, unto the
which, except we obey, there remains no excuse for us hereafter. God does now
then call us by his Gospel, and he has called us many years: Now is our
time, now is the day of Salvation; O three times happy we, if we know it, if we
lay hold on it, before it is past, before it slip away. The day, when it is
past, cannot be called again; when the day of mercy is past, then comes the
day of judgment, which cannot be avoided. I beseech ye therefore brethren, by
the mercies of God, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that ye would diligently
consider these things, that ye would know this acceptable time, this day of
Salvation, that it be not justly said unto you, Oh that ye had known, at the
least in this your day, the things that belong unto your peace. Our Fathers and
Forefathers never had so great mercy showed unto them, as we have; they had not
the Gospel so plentifully and sincerely preached unto them, as we have;
therefore except we repent, and be converted, we shall be the more severely
punished. The fault is increased by circumstance of the time, and the
punishment of the fault, is greater, or less by degrees: Therefore the nearer
God comes unto us, and does offer unto us the light of his Gospel, if we
neglect it, or despise it, there remains no excuse; for God will say, I have
called, and ye refused, Pro. 1. Iere. 22.21. Zacha. 7.13.
I offered grace unto you, and you would not embrace it: therefore ye shall
cry, and I will not hear you. To day therefore, whiles it is to day, hear his
voice, and harden not your hearts, lest ye provoke Gods wrath, and draw great
punishments upon you.

Moreover, we hear learn the great mercy of God receiving men even at the
last unto repentance: For God is long suffering, Psalm. 103.
patient, and slow unto wrath, he waits for us long, and expects our
conversion every day, and receives us to mercy, though it be late or we
repent. Oh the great mercy and unspeakable clemency of God toward sinners! He
received the thief on the cross to mercy at the last hour; he received the
Prodigal child to mercy, though it were long ere he returned. This is a
Doctrine consolatory, if it be taken aright, but alas, there are too many that
abuse it. Psalm. 50.
The wicked, because God holds his peace, and is long suffering, in waiting
for their conversion, they think God to be like unto themselves, and encourage
themselves to mischief, and take liberty to sin; Romans 2.4.
Know thou not, says Saint Paul, that the patience and long suffering of
God, does lead thee unto repentance? 5.
but thou after the hardness of thy heart, that cannot repent, heapest unto
thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God, who will reward every man according to his works. Let us not
then abuse the patience of God, neither let us presume of his mercy, for as he
is merciful, so he is just. This point is to be pressed against those that
cry God is merciful, God is merciful, and say that it suffices if in the
last hour they can say, Lord have mercy upon me: But this is an ungodly
presumption; for has God promised to any that time to presume of it? nay, many
times such presumption does provoke Gods wrath against such sinners, that he
takes them suddenly away, that they cannot utter one word: Therefore that good
father said well of the two thieves which were hanged with Christ, one was
saved, that no man should despair, and the other condemned, that no man should
presume. This example is but one, therefore let us not presume; and it is
generally held, that Qualis vita, finis ita; as men live, so commonly they die.
And it is said, Paenitentia sera, raro est vera: Late repentance, is seldom
true repentance. But another Father says thus, Hoc prorsus affirmo, hoc audio
dicere, nunquam malo mori potest, qui been vixit: This I altogether affirm,
this I dare bouldly say, he never can die ill, that has lived well. Let the
mercy of God then this day lead us to repentance, that we may serve him from
henceforth in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, Amen.

Those things which belong unto thy peace.
Our Lord Jesus wished that Jerusalem knew those things that did concern her
peace. The word Peace, among the Hebrews, does design all the parts of
felicity. Neither does he say simply that Jerusalem knew not her peace, but
the things that did belong unto her peace. Because many times men know their
happiness, but being blinded with malice, they knew not the way, nor the
means unto it. As for example: All men confess that it is man's happiness to
be joined with God, and yet reject and contemn the Gospel, which is the
means to obtain it. Our Lord Jesus and his Apostles preached the Gospel unto
Jerusalem, but she despised it, therefore she did not know the things which
concerned her peace.

Here then we learn, that the word of God, and the Gospel of Christ where it
is preached, does bring with it true peace, true happiness, and does offer it
unto men. It procures outward peace, and inward peace. In a word, the Gospel
of Christ does make a City, a Policy, a Kingdom, and Region to flourish, and
makes a People happy: Therefore happy are they which believe that the word of
God does contain in it those things which belong unto their peace; that is,
unto perfect and eternal felicity. And that this doctrine may appear to be
most true, if we a little examine the writings of the Prophets and the
Apostles, we shall see plainly, that no kingdom nor policy can flourish, that
no King, no Potentate, nor People can be wise; nor blessed in their government,
which have not the word of God to direct and guide them. It has been the
judgment and opinion almost of all wise men in the world, that Kings and
Kingdoms of the world were most happy, if the King of the Country were wise;
if he had many aged, grave, wise, and faithful Counselors; if his Captains
were valerous, courageous, expert, and fortunate in war: If he abounded in
wealth; if his kingdom were euery-where well fortified. Lastly, if his People
and Subjects were peaceable, and agreed together: I confess that all these
things are rightly, truly, and wisely spoken; yet the chief and most
excellent of all, is not mentioned, without the which no true felicity is
obtained, and being gotten, cannot be safely preserved and kept: on the
otherside, where this alone is present, all other thing necessary for man, do
accompany it and follow. Our Lord and God therefore, who is the only giver of
wise and perfect counsel, does briefly and shortly knit all these things
together in the Gospel, and his holy word: First, Seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be administered unto
you. Mat. 6. Therefore our Lord Jesus said thus to his Disciples, Luke 10.
Blessed are your eyes which see the things that you see; for I say unto you
that many Kings and Prophets, have desired to see the things which you see, and
have not seen them; and to hear the things which you hear, and have not
heard them. Again, Luke 11.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. And this one thing
above all other things, is most necessary; Mary has chosen the better part,
which shall not be taken from her. I dare therefore confidently affirm out of
the word of God, that those Kings shall flourish, and enjoy a happy estate,
which do wholly give and submit themselves, and their kingdoms unto Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, acknowledging him to be the most mighty Prince and greatest Monarch of
all; and themselves to be his servants and subjects, in all their affairs and
businesses, not following their own mind and judgments, nor the traditions
and laws of men contrary to the statutes of God, nor good intentions, having
no good warrant out of the word of God, but in all things submitting themselves
unto Christ, the king of the Church, and endeavoring to subdue all their people
to the laws of this king, and so doing, they, their people, and their
kingdoms shall flourish. For so the Lord himself has spoken, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
When the King shall sit in the throne of his kingdom, and shall set before him
the example of this Law, in this book, let it be with him, and let him read
in it all the days of his life. Verse. 20. And let him not depart from this
commandment, either to the right hand, or to the left, that he may prolong his
days in his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of Israel. So likewise,
Deuteronomy. 28. from verse. 1. unto the sixth. Again, Let not this book of the Law
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate in it day and night, that thou may
carefully do as it is written therein, then shall thou prosper in thy ways,
and all shall go well with thee. Iosu. 1.8. Whereby it appears that the
felicity and prosperity of Kings, Princes, People, and kingdoms, do depend
upon the word of God, and have promises of blessings, both in this life, and in
the life to come. And now we will prove it by examples. Saul the first King of
Israel, was so long happy and a conqueror of his enemies, as he obeyed the
word of God, but when he yielded to his good intentions, contrary to Gods word
and commandment; Samuel said unto him, Thou have played the fool, thou have
forsaken the word of the Lord, and the Lord has forsaken thee, that thou
should not be King of Israel. 1 Samuel 15.26. Now how great the misery of Saul
was afterward, the story does evidently declare. David succeeded him next in
the Kingdom, who was most happy in his kingdom. But how greatly he esteemed
the word of God, it may appear in the book of the Psalms, especially in the
119. Psalm; for from his private evils, from his evil actions committed
against the word of God, and from the unnatural insurrection of his Son
Absolon against him, he had learned how great a sin, and how pernicious an
evil it was to decline from the word of God. Solomon the Son of David the
most wise, and most excellent King of all the world, did so long enjoy
prosperity, and was commended of the Lord, as he did reverently obey the word
of God: but when he once began to reject the word of God, the Lord by and by
said unto him, Because this was in thy heart, that thou have not kept my
covenant, and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will rent thy
Kingdom from thee, and give it to thy Servant. 1 King. 11.11. And this
presently came to pass after the death of Solomon. The kingdom was rent into
two parts, ten Tribes followed Jeroboam, the Servant of Solomon; and two Tribes
only cleaued to Roboam the Son of Solomon, who for the contempt of Gods word
and following strangers, was overwhelmed with many evils. 2 Chronicles. 12.5.
Therefore Shemaiaeh the Prophet said unto Roboam, and to the Princes of Judah;
Thus says the Lord, You have forsaken me, therefore I do also forsake you,
leaving you to the hands of Shishacke. Likewise Abia the Son of Roboam
overcame the army of Israel, though more in number, and greater in strength,
because he trusted in the word of the Lord. 2 Chro. 13.15. So Asa prospered in
peace and tranquillity forty years, because he suppressed Idolatry, and
superstition, and restored the sincere religion of God. 2 Chro. 14. So
Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. This is also diligently noted in the lives of the rest
of the Kings, as in Ioram, in Ochosia, 4 King. 9. In Ioas, 2 Chro. 23.24. In
Amasia, 2 Chro. 25. In Osia, 2 Chro. 26. In Iothan, 2 Chro. 27. In Achaz,
ibidem. In Ezechiah. In Manasses, and the rest, until the carrying away into
captivity, both of the house of Israel, and of Judah; for so long did they
flourish, and prosper, as they did cleave to the word of the Lord; but when
they contemned and forsook the word of the Lord, they fell into great misery
and ruin. Therefore hence we may collect that the ground, foundation, and
continuance of all happiness, peace and prosperity of Kings and Kingdoms,
does consist in the word of God, and the obedience thereunto: and on the other
side, the ruin and confusion of Kings and Kingdoms, is in the contempt and
forsaking of the word of God: And why so? because the Lord says, They that
honor me, I will honor, but they that despise me, I will despise. 1 Samuel 2.30.

But leaving these examples, which do abundantly confirm this truth; Let us
consider of some modern and late examples, whereof we have been
eyewitnesses: How did God bless our late noble Queen Elizabeth, that again
he might seal the truth of this doctrine to all the world: Blessed is that
Prince whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15. How plentifully did God bless her,
and her people, above all Kings and Nations, with peace and plenty? according
to the Prayer in the Psalm, for Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. For she, and we her
people did enjoy such peace and such plenty, as our forefathers never knew, nor
Chronicles do record to have been in the time of our ancestors, in times
past. Our Land did yield abundance of all things which grew at home; and
foreign Nations did minister plenty of other commodities growing abroad: So
that whatsoever from the East, to the West, whatsoever was under heaven, was
brought home unto us; whereby our Land has been greatly enriched: The peace
of our Country is marvelous in so long and continual troubles of our
neighbor Countries round about us, and in so many consultations and devises of
the Church of Rome, for the disturbance of our peace, and the ruin of our
Country. Moreover God did give unto her Majesty, such honor and renown,
that she sat as a Judge, and an honorable Arbitratour in the causes and
controversies of the mightiest Monarchs and Potentates of Europe, and of all
her Neighbors: Now what was the cause of so great peace, of so great treasure,
and of so great honor? Verily the Word of God, which her highness received,
embraced, and promoted to the uttermost of her power. Now after all these,
though the Papists devised and plotted her death, and many were suborned and
hired by the Pope, a man of sin, a maintainer of rebellion and murder
(wherein he shows of what spirit he is) yet God brought her to the grave in
peace, by natural death, full of days: And after her, God has given unto us
a wise, gracious, and Religious King, our King James, whom God brought into the
Land so peaceably, to the astonishment of foreign Nations, and to the great
admiration of us all: and he, to the great comfort of all Christians, loves
the Gospel and word of GOD, maintains it to his uttermost power, and
commends the true worship of God, to all his people. And how has God
protected him, both in Scotland, and here in England against the wicked
Papists, who with bloody and murdering hearts, devised such a devilish and
inhumane stratagem, to overthrow him and his issue, and to destroy the
flourishing state of England: so that if God had not been on our side, both
his Majesty, his royal and hopeful progeny; and all we that love the Gospel
had been swallowed up, and made a prey to their teeth. Happy therefore we, if
we know our happiness, blessed are we, if we know the things that concern our
peace.

But now they are hid from thy eyes.
Our Lord Jesus first sent his Prophets to Jerusalem, at length he came in his
own person (for Jerusalem killed and stoned his Prophets) therefore he
comes, and in the midst of Jerusalem, Math. 23.
among all the people he does many miracles, which the Prophets foretold should
be wrought by the Messiah when he came, he preaches the Gospel to them,
wherewith he labored to gather them together as a Hen does her Chickens,
and wherein her happiness consisted, Math. 23.
as we have heard; yet all these things were hidden from the eyes of Jerusalem,
as our Savior Jesus Christ here says. This is not spoken to extenuate, or
lessen the fault of Jerusalem, but rather in reproach, her wonderful
blockishnesse is noted, that she did not see God present: For how could
Jerusalem be ignorant of Gods will, which daily had the promises of salvation
in her mouth; and to whom the Law was often repeated? Could the Jews be
ignorant of Christ, who was many years conversant among them, showing forth
his saving power, not only in teaching, but in working many wonderful works
and miracles among them? Therefore our Lord Jesus in these words, does note
their blockishnes, and wilful blindness, wherewith being hindered, they could
not see God offering himself unto them, nor yet observe his mercy, nor
manifest arguments of his wrath. Christ therefore here does teach, that the
Citizens of Jerusalem were authors of their own destruction, as also heals a
scandal which rose from their voluntary and wilful ignorance. For without
doubt, many were detained and kept back, by the example of Jerusalem, from
embracing Christ, and receiving his Gospel, which they saw were rejected of
them, who bare the chief estimation of doctrine and wisdom: He therefore
does admonish that their incredulity and contumacy should not offend any, who
being wilfully blinded with their own pride and blockishnesse, did draw upon
themselves Gods wrath, and their own destruction.

Let us now apply this unto our selves, and diligently consider, whether it be
not our case. Our Lord Jesus by the preaching of his Gospel, has manifested
unto us his love, has revealed unto us his kindness, has with his Gospel
given unto us a long peace, and innumerable blessings; but men are so besotted
with the vanities of the world, and so blinded with the pleasures of this life,
that they wink with their eyes, that they cannot see, and stop their ears,
like the deaf Adder, that they cannot hear the sweet voice of Christ calling
and alluring them: For it cannot be but men maliciously blind themselves,
seeing the grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared,
teaching men to deny ungodliness, and worldy lusts, (...) to live soberly,
justly, and godly in this present world. Tit. 2.11. Tit. 2.11.
Therefore if men now are blind, Deu. 30.11. Romans 10.6.7.8.
if they be ignorant of so great favors of God, whereof we have been
eyewitnesses, and have tasted of the good word of God, there is no excuse to
be pretended. But we may say to them, as Paul said to the Corinthians, If (...)
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world
has blinded the minds: that is, of Infidels, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God should not shine unto them. 2 Cor.
4.3.4. This is a great judgment, wherewith God does punish the wicked
contemners of his word, when the eyes of their mind are blinded, that they see
not God present, not taste his mercies, nor fear the punishments that are
imminent and near at hand.

The Scriptures teaches us, that no ignorance is excusable: for he that
knows not his Masters will, Luke 12.48.
shall be beaten, though with few stripes, because ignorance is not of
creation, but of deprauation and corruption of nature: But he that knows his
Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, because he
cannot excuse himself; therefore wilful ignorance, voluntary blindness is
inexcusable, and shall be the more severely punished. Here then that gross
error of the Papists is convinced, who affirm without wit or blushing, that
ignorance is the mother of devotion; Math. 22.29.
but it may better be called the mother of error, and destruction, because it
leads men to perdition and eternal punishments: for if eternal life consist
in the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3. then eternal death
abides them which know not God, nor his son Jesus Christ. If the wise man
ought not to glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the
rich man in his riches; but should glory that he knows and understands the
Lord, to exercise mercy, righteousness and judgment. Ier. 9.23.24. Then
whosoever is ignorant of God and his will, and knows not Christ the Son of
God, should lament and be sorry that these things are hid from his eyes, (...)


