Look beyond Luther: OR AN ANSWER TO THAT QVESTION, SO OFTEN AND SO
INSVLTINGLY PROPOSED BY our Adversaries, asking us; Where this our Religion was
before Luthers time?

WHERETO ARE ADDED SOVND PROPS TO BEAR up honest-hearted Protestants, that
they fall not from their sauing-faith.

BY RICHARD BERNARD, OF Batcombe in Sommersetshire.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Edmund Weauer, at
his shop, at the great North-doore of Paul's. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir WALTER EARL, Sir CLEMENT COTTEREL, KNIGHTS: And
to their virtuous Ladies, euersoundnesse of Faith, with the power of Religion
and constancy, in both most hearty wished.
Right Worshipful,
I Should marvel to see any once professing the truth, to turn from the light
unto darkness, from the true Worship and Religion of Christ, to the
superstition and idolatry of Antichrist, but that I read, that our first
Parents believed Satan before God; that men love darkness more then the
light, and that fornot loving the truth, and delighting in unrighteousness,
God gives such over to believe lies, that they may be damned. Could it else
otherwise be, that so many in this so clear light of Gods Gospel, should fall
away? What have our adversaries now more to plead for their cause, then
heretofore they have had? What can they now say, which is not already fully
answered by our learned men? They put out indeed new books, new in regard of
the writing and printing; but the reasons one and the same in older written and
printed books: this is in show a putting of more strength, to uphold their
ruinous building, but not in substance: yet thus they beguile the simple and
vnstable-minded. By many ways they seek to deceive, and beguile people, but
especially by accusing our Religion of falsehood and nouelty, and affirming
theirs to be the true and most ancient faith: in both which they speak very
untruly. For touching this their present Religion (as it differs from ours,
and as it is Popery) it is but a new vpstart Religion, a patcherie of Iudaisme,
Paganism and Heresy; a Religion devised by men, and not having God for the
Author: How far our Religion is from falsehood and novelty, I have here
endeavored to show, answering to that question so often propounded, Where it
was before Luthers time?

If any of our adversaries, or all of them together, dare to go plainly to
work, (for hitherto they have not) and first set down ours and their accord,
wherein, and how far we and they in every thing do agree, to cut off hereby
all needless strife and contentions. Secondly, then truly and faithfully
without equivocal terms, to deliver their distinct differences from us, that
so every one may rightly discern, whereabout we do contend, and what indeed
their now present Religion is, which we call Popery, bing severed from our
common agreement. Thirdly, to bring these their differences to the due trial
of Scriptures, the common principles of Christianity, and the true writings of
the ancient Fathers in the first Ages; then will it clearly appear to every
one of indifferent judgment, whether ours or theirs be the true Religion, and
whether ours or theirs be the false Church.

In the mean space, till they proceed thus uprightly and sincerely, I hope,
no Protestant in earnest, will be ensnared and catched by their deceites. Let
such as in the plentiful means of knowledge wilfully live in ignorance, or
having knowledge, live lewdly, without fear of God, love of truth, and power
of Religion, be the prey for crafty Foxes: for these be the fittest subjects
for them to work upon; and these only prevail they with, receiving a just
punishment for their contempt of saving knowledge, or for their consciencelesse
living contrary to their knowledge. For there is no man of right understanding,
and that makes conscience of his ways, loving the truth, walking humbly before
his God, being acquainted with Gods Word, and praying for Gods direction, that
God either will give over, or that can in reason submit unto this false
Antichristian Church, if he do but seriously consider of such things, as will
work, if not an absolute condemnation, yet a most just suspicion of her to be
naught; as first, the vilifying of holy Scriptures, locking them up from the
common people, as if Gods Word were infectious. Secondly, her thrusting upon
the people her feigned traditions, all besides, and many of them against
Scripture. Thirdly, the absurd and unreasonableness of their Latin Service,
which the people understand not. Fourthly, their idolatrous praying to Saints,
worshipping stocks and stones, and relics of the dead. Fifthly, their gross
conceit of Christ's corporal presence in the Sacrament. Sixthly, the feigned
miracles, and notable coozenages therein, found out here, and in other
Countries; the boasting of them a far off, but not able to work the like
among us. Seventhly, the shameless and gross belying of our doctrine, and
slandring the lives of our learned men, as Luther, Calvin, Beza, and others.
Eighthly, the citing in defense of their Religion, counterfeit Authors, so
known to be, and so condemned to be by the learned on their own side.
Ninthly, the not permitting freely our books among them, as we do theirs
among us. Tenthly, the tying of the people to the Priests lips, and not
permitting them to try their doctrine, as we do. The unjust curses,
dissembling practices, and merciless cruelties used to uphold their Religion,
swearing and for swearing, by equivocations, meant all reseruations, and Popes
dispensations, massacres, and powder-plots, and bloody persecutions.
Twelfthly, The avoiding of a free general Council, to hear and determine our
differences. Who is he that shall consider of these things with judgment, but
will suspect this Romish Church to be none of Christ's Church, if withal he add
hereto the consideration of the differences between the wisdom below (by
which that seat is guided) which is earthly, natural, sensual, and deuilish,
and the wisdom from above (by which Christ's Church is guided) which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy, as Saint James writes?

I doubt not but that you have already considered of these premises, and that
you are resolved, that this is the true. Religion, and the good way, wherein
you walk, even the ancient, Catholic and Apostolic verity, grounded upon
Scripture, and the principles of Christianity, taught by the holy Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, and confirmed by the blood of blessed Martyrs. My desire
is, that God would continue your love, with increase of zeal toward the same
more and more. To this purpose are these my endeavors, which I present unto you,
praying your favorable acceptance of my good meaning, and hearty wel-wishes,
and worthy respect unto your selves, and to all that wish well to Sion, and
pray for the peace of Jerusalem: God let them, and you with yours, to prosper
which love it. Amen.

Your Worships in all Christian services to be commanded, Richard Bernard.
Batcombe, Sept. 26.
Look beyond Luther: OR AN ANSWER TO THAT QVESTION SO often, and so
insultingly proposed by our Adversaries, asking us; Where this our Religion
was, before Luthers time?
IT is a common question, and often propounded by Papists in an insulting
manner over us, Where our Religion was before Luthers time? As though we could
not answer to the demand, nor fetch our Religion from any more ancient, or
better Author: but they are deceived in both. And that I may not be tedious in
prefacing, I answer:

I. It was, and is written, and contained in the holy Scriptures, the
Canonical Books of the old and new Testament.

II. The same has been, and is written in the hearts of Gods people, such as
the Lord from time to time effectually has called, according to every man's
measure, as they have bin taught it, and learned it out of those books of holy
Scripture. For this must we know, that no other doctrine of Christian Religion
was, or is written in men's hearts, by Gods Spirit, then that which the same
Spirit inspired the Penmen of the Scriptures to write in those Books. The
necessary truths of doctrine therein contained (as God had promised) has he
written in the hearts of his people, Ier. 31.33, 34. 2. Cor. 3.3. And for these
ends, that they might know God, and know him to be their God, and they his
people, Ier. 31.33, 34. that they might make profession thereof, and obediently
set themselves to the practice of that his blessed will, Ezech. 11.19, 20. and
36.26, 27.

III. That it was also written in learned men's labors, agreeing with those
holy Books, as they found the truth therein, taught unto them by the Prophets
and Apostles. So as the doctrine of our Religion is no other, then that which
the Scriptures do teach, the Church and true People of God have believed, and
professed; nor no other then that, which is to be found in the writings of ye
holy ancient Fathers, and of learned men, before ever Luther was borne.

That our Religion was thus before Luthers time, I prove by these ensuing
reasons.

I. Argument. From holy Scriptures, wherein our Religion is written and taught
in every point.
THat Religion which is in all and every point thereof written, and prescribed
in holy Scriptures, the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, was
before Luthers time. For the Scriptures were written many hundred years,
before Luther was in being, and the Penmen thereof had a care to practice the
same.

But this our present Religion in all and every point thereof (wherein we
differ from our Adversaries) is written and prescribed in the holy Scriptures,
the Canonical books of the old and new Testament: as is in every particular
point proved exactly by those of our side.

And therefore was it before Luthers time. The Minor I thus prove.

I. By the public Records of our Church here at home, as the public
authorized Catechism, shorter and larger, by the book of Homilies, by the
book of Articles, and our book of Common Prayer. Out of which (wherein soever
we differ from our Adversaries) nothing is found besides, as wanting warrant of
Scripture, much less any thing contrary thereunto, but every thing grounded
upon, and fully agreeing with the same.

II. By Gods Spirit, the Author of the Scriptures, which does further our
Religion in the hearts of the people, through the reading and interpreting
thereof, which the Spirit of God would not do, if our Religion were not that,
which the Scriptures teach. For would the Author of the one, approve of the
other, if they were not both one? If he should further a Religion, contrary
to the Scripture, he should be contrary to himself, allowing and making good
that in men's hearts by inward operation, which he has disallowed by the
Scriptures, which are of his divine inspiration. It is evident to all that are
read in the Scriptures, that they condemn all Heathenish, al Heretical, and
Idolatrous Religion; likewise, all will worship, all vain inventions of men,
the serving of God by humane traditions, by the precepts and doctrines of men:
so as if our Religion were any such, Gods Spirit would not grace it, nor so
knit men's hearts unto it, nor so effectually work by it in men's consciences,
nor so persuade unto it, as he daily does by the Scriptures.

If they shall deny, that Gods Spirit does any such thing, as we suppose; I
would feign know of them, what other spirit it possibly may be, that does so
lead men to esteem so much the Scriptures, does excite men to the study of
them, and to make them the only rule of doctrine, and life, to hear, believe,
rest and delight in them, and so to worship God only, as herein he requires
to be worshipped, and to reject whatsoever is not warranted by them, in every
necessary point of faith? And that only upon this persuasion, that the
Scriptures are Gods word, that they are endited by his Spirit, and written by
his holy Prophets and Apostles? If this be not the Spirit of God, which does
thus magnify the holy Scriptures in the heart of every sound Christian, what
spirit then is it? Certainly it must be either the Spirit of God, or of Man,
or of the Devil. But neither of these two latter, therefore the former.

I. It is not the spirit of man that can, and does thus work: for first, the
spirit of man perceives not the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.11. 1. Cor. 2.14.
Romans 8.7.
till Gods Spirit acquaint him with them. Secondly, they be foolishness unto
him. Thirdly, his wisdom is enmity with God, so as Gods wisdom in divine
mysteries, and man's wisdom can never agree in one. Verse 5.
Fourthly, the spirit of man sauoureth the things of the flesh, and not of the
Spirit of God. Fifthly, his heart is continually evil, till he be regenerate.
Sixthly and lastly, it is evidently known by too much miserable experience,
that man loves not the study of the Scriptures, he cannot delight in them,
he cannot away to frame his life after them; every one that has any spark of
divine knowledge, knows this to be true from his own natural corruption,
both in himself and others also. Now can any reasonable-minded man think,
that such an auerse spirit as is in man, so disaffecting the holy Scriptures,
and the study thereof, that it can be that Spirit which persuades and draws
men, contrary to it corrupt self, to embrace that Religion which is grounded
upon the Scriptures, and to press to the obedience thereof? Yea, can it be
man's spirit, that works love to such a Religion, which so opposes man's
corruption, as the worldly wise Politician derideth it, the pleasurable man
hates it, the greedy of gain cannot abide to be ruled by it, and the
haughty spirit which hunteth after the pride of life, has it in great
contempt? so as none in very deed, but only such as do deny themselves, do
forsake the world, and can be well contented to take up their cross, and
follow Christ, either can, or will embrace the same.

II. It is not the spirit of Satan. For although he will abusiuely now and
then allege Scripture, yet is he a deadly enemy to the Scriptures: he will
not lead to the right use of them, nor persuade men to frame their Religion
and life after them, but rather does suggest the clean contrary, as the
story of the Scriptures witnesses, and our own temptations tell us. For, as
a Origin upon Numb.
Father says, The Devil cannot endure to have any to study the Scriptures;
that is torment and pain above all pains to him. He has ever been a raiser
up of persecution against such, as serve God in a Religion only grounded upon
the Scriptures: as he was in the Jews, against the Apostles, and the
believing Gentiles; so in Gentiles Infidels, against Christians; in the
Heretics against the Orthodoxall; in our Antichristian Adversaries against us;
and in all lewd livers, the children of disobedience, in whom he bears rule,
and whose hearts he stirs up to do his will against all such, as in a more
strict manner endeavor to frame their lives after Gods Word, though in general
together, they profess one God, and have received the same Baptism, and do
live together in the same Church. Therefore we see, that it cannot be the
spirit of Satan, that persuades to our so holy a Religion by the Scriptures,
upon which only it is settled, seeing he so deadly hates such a Religion, and
the sound and zealous Professors thereof.

III. It is not the spirit of man and Satan together, as may appear, first, in
Heretics, who are led by Satan, and their own spirit. These being not able to
justify their heresies by holy Scripture, they fall to weaken the authority
of the Scriptures, they will not rest on them, but do fly the light of them,
as Tertullian, and other ancient Fathers witness of Heretics in their times,
who left the Scriptures, Tertul. de resur. Carnis. Epiphaen de Haeres. lib. 1.
cap. 23, 24 38. Irae. li. 1. cap. 23. Tertul. de praescript. A^bana. orat. 2.
contra Arianos.
and ran to Traditions, as did the Manichees, Cerynthians, Basilidians,
Carpocratians, Marcionists, Valentinians, Arians, and others. Secondly, In all
will-worshippers, which framing a service to God out of their own brains,
cannot away to make holy Scriptures their guide, but do leave them as soon as
they be addicted to their own inventions, of which, God by his Prophets in
Scripture often complains. Thirdly, In Heathen Idolaters, who have been set on
work by the Devil to burn the Scriptures, as did that wicked Dioclesian;
also here in Britain, the Infidel Saxons; and in Jerusalem, Ier. 36.
that ungodly Iehoiakim, who burnt the Prophecy of Jeremiah, which Baruch writ
from his mouth at that time. Fourthly, In our Adversaries now, who cannot rest
with the Scriptures, nor will admit them, as the only Judge in controversies,
nor as the only Rule of Religion. And the very reason is, because they teach
and practice many things out of their own spirit, even the doctrine of Devils,
which the Scripture utterly condemns. Their Sainted will-worshippers in their
Heremeticall life, and their world of Monkish Orders, cannot abide the rule of
Scripture; their holy course of life so much admired and extolled (yet only of
such as know not the power of Satan, in the deceivable ways of his
unrighteousness) dares not stand to be judged, ruled, and squared after the
rule of holy Scriptures: yea, as holy as they pretend to be, yet neither can
they, nor will they wholly frame their service and devotion and life after the
Word of life. And therefore we see, that it cannot be the spirit of Man and
Satan, whether apart considered or conjoined, that does persuade, move and
further to the embracing of that Religion, which is wholly grounded upon the
Scriptures, as ours is. And therefore not being either of these, it follows,
that it must needs be the Spirit of God, that thus persuades men to our
Religion by the Scriptures, wherein it is contained.

III. Our Religion appears to be written in, and justified by the Scriptures,
for that in those places it gets entrance, and thriueth, where they are
permitted to be studied, and read of all, and to be taught, as the only rule
of Religion. The Scriptures are the very life and strength of our Religion, as
is sufficiently known by experience to our very Adversaries. Now, how could
this be, if our Religion were not that, which is taught in the Scriptures? For
the Scripture, as is aforesaid, does condemn Heretics and Heresies,
will worship and will-worshippers, idolatry and idolaters; and is the Sword of
the Spirit, 2. These. 2.
the breath of Christ's mouth, that consumes the Man of Sin. If our Religion
were heresy, or will worship, or idolatry, or the invention of that Man of
sin, the Scriptures could not be the life and strength thereof, seeing they
oppose, and utterly condemn those things.

IV. Our Religion stands, and is vpheld by such holy and heavenly means
only, as the Scriptures allow and prescribe, and which we find there to be
the only means, used at the first planting of Christian Religion by the
Apostles in the Primitive Church, which were these that follow.

I. There was then the preaching of Gods Word. This means was prescribed by
our Savior Christ, to make Disciples unto him, Mat. 28.19, 20. and the same
observed by his Apostles, Mark. 16.15. 20. Acts 2.14. and 10.34. and 11.19. So
preaching of Gods Word is the means, by which our Religion, through Gods
blessing, is planted in men's hearts. As also it was foretold and appointed,
that it should be the means to regaine people from under Antichrist, Revel.
10.11. and 14 6.

II. There was the teaching of the grounds, In the Popes Bull before the
Catechism of the Council of Trent.
and principles of Christianity, then called milk, now commonly called, the
Catechism, Heb. 6.1. and 5 12. 1. Cor. 3.2. This has greatly furthered our
Religion, even by the testimony of our Adversaries, and is a special means to
inform the minds of the ignorant, in the truth of our Religion, that they may
not be deceived.

III. Then was teaching and preaching altogether out of the Scriptures of the
Prophets. The Apostles taught the Gospel only out of them, Romans 1.2. Acts
26.22 and 28.23. the Scriptures they cited, Acts 1.16. and 2.16, 17. by them
they confuted the Adversaries, Acts 17.2. and 18.28. So our teaching and
preaching is out of the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles: by these we
confirm our doctrine, and by these chiefly do we confute our Adversaries.

IV. Then was allowed the use of the holy Scriptures indifferently to all
sorts, without restraint or exception; they were free to all of the Laity, both
men and women. The Apostles never forbade them to any, nor ever reproved any
for reading or studying of them, but commended them to all sorts, 2. Tim. 3.15,
16. 2. Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. and left it written, as a matter worthy praise in
religious men, the Eunuch, and the Noble Baereans, that they read and searched
the Scriptures; so also in godly women for training up their children herein,
Acts 8.30. and 17.11. 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15. Yea, Peter (whom our Adversaries
make their Rock) in general tells all Christian believers, that they should
do well to take heed thereunto, as to a sure Word, 2. Pet. 1.19. So is there
here with us, the free use of the Scriptures; this we commend to all sorts,
forbid them to none, but rather hold them most religious, who delight in the
holy and reverent study of the Scriptures, according to the practice of the
ancient Primitive Church in the Apostles days.

V. Then were there public Assemblies, where they met together, 1. Cor. 11.18,
19. Acts 1.13. and 2.46. and that upon the first day of the week, Acts 20.7.
1. Cor. 16.2. These Assemblies none might forsake, but all were mutually to
exhort to the frequent use of them, Heb. 10.25. to beware of causing divisions
and offenses, contrary to the received doctrine of the Apostles, Romans 16.17. So
have we public Assemblies, where we meet on the first day of the week, and
at other times, which all are bound to come unto, and none ought to forsake, to
prevent divisions, contrary to the Apostolical doctrine, and to preserve the
public profession and exercise of our Religion.

VI. Then was there set over every several Assembly and Congregation, such as
might be able to teach, having the oversight of the people, and care of their
souls, Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. So is
this in our Church a most excellent means to uphold our Religion.

VII. Then was God only worshipped, and he only prayed unto in those
Assemblies; not Saints, nor Angels, nor the Virgin Marie. In them prayers were
made with one accord, Acts 1.14. and 2.42. and 4.24. the Word read, 1. These.
5.27. Col 4.16. the Word preached, Act. 20.7. the Sacraments administered, Act.
2.42. 1. Cor. 11.18, 20, 23, 26. and the Lords Supper in both kinds delivered,
1. Cor. 10.16. Collections were also made for the poor, 1. Cor. 16.12. and al
things were performed to edification, in a known tongue, 1. Cor. 14. In our
Assemblies God is only worshipped, to him only we make our prayers, and
neither to Saint nor Angel, nor to the Virgin Mary; though we honor them
duly as we ought. In our Assemblies, Prayer is made with one accord, the Word
read and preached, the Sacraments administered, and the Lords Supper in both
kinds delivered, Alms, as need requires, given to the poor, and all done to
edification, and in a known tongue, as in the Apostles days.

VIII. Then was preached against, and forbidden all will worship, though never
so fair in show, all service to God after the doctrine and commandments of
men, Col. 2.20, 23. also, the worship of Angels, Col. 2.18. the worship of
Idols, 1. Ioh. 5.21. and fellowship with Idolaters, 1. Cor. 8.10. and 5.11. 2.
Cor. 6.14, 18. So with us are forbidden all these things, and condemned by our
Religion, as is evident by our book of Homilies, book of Articles, the
public authorized larger Catechism, and other public Records: yea, the
forbidding, abolishing, and preaching against these things, is an excellent
means to uphold the purity of our Religion, which in it self is so contrary
to all will worship, humane inventions, superstition and idolatry.

IX. Then was the exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline for the preservation
of order, for the punishing and casting out of obstinate Heretics, 1. Tim.
1.20. and 6.3. Tit. 3.10. as also of notorious offenders, which would not
otherwise be reformed, 1. Cor. 5.7. 2. These. 3.14. and those the people were
to avoid, 1. Cor. 5.10. 2. These. 3.6. 2. Tim. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.7. This godly
discipline duly observed, is of great force to preserve our Religion, and to
keep it in honor and estimation.

X. Then was there urging and pressing to a holy conversation, both in Pastors,
Tit. 2.7, 8. 1. Tim. 4.12. and in the people, Romans 12.1, 2. Ephesians. 5. and 6. This
Christian-like conversation adorneth our Religion, which is only powerful in
them which live well; for it condemns all Libertinisme, and requires very
strict obedience to God and his Word.

XI. Then was suffering of persecution for the truth, and the same foretold to
accompany the godly, Acts 14.22. 1. These. 3.3. 2. Tim. 3.12. and 1.8. Phil.
1.19. which greatly furthered Religion, taught by the Apostles, Phil. 1.12. And
so has it done ours in these parts of Christendom, as the World knows.

XII. Then was taught subjection both of Pastors and people unto Principalities
and Powers, as to Kings, so to inferior Magistrates sent by them. All sorts
without exception, were taught obedience to them, and for conscience sake, were
they bound to render to them dues, tribute, custom, honor. They were
commanded to make prayers for them with thanksgiving, which was a means to
further Religion: for the Apostle tells them, that thus to do is well-doing,
and a means to stop the mouths of the Adversaries, that so they might lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, Romans 13.1, 7. Tit 3.1.
1. Pet. 2.13, 17. 1. Tim. 2.1, 2. This is, and has bin an excellent means to
advance our Religion: for Kings and Princes seeing, that our true and
Apostolical Religion did not derogate from their lawful authority, did not
draw subjects from their allegiance, nor exempt any from their true obedience,
but rather maintained the right, which God by his holy Word in Scriptures had
given them; they submitted to the truth, and embraced our Religion, shaking off
the yoke of Antichrist, and so took upon them the authority given them of
God, to reform Religion, according as they were taught, and had learned the
doctrine of Christ in the Scriptures.

Thus we see, first, the ordinary means which the holy Scriptures prescribe,
and evidently show to have been used in the Primitive Church, for the planting
and upholding of Christian Religion. And secondly, that the very selfsame
have been, and yet are the means for planting and preserving of our Religion,
in every Country where it has been received. Which means are so powerful and
effectual for this purpose, that look by how much these means are put in
execution, by so much does our Religion prosper, in spite of all worldly
oppositions, and gaine-sayings whatsoever: and on the contrary, look as these
means, either wholly, or but in part, are neglected, or fail to be
performed, so does our Religion lose of its strength, and decay amongst the
people, what policy soever men otherwise use to uphold the same. For our
Religion stands by holy and heavenly means, and not by mere worldly policy,
or humane devices, fair shows to the eyes, delights to the ear, pleasurable
objects to delight the carnally-minded. Neither can it be held by any
Satanicall delusions, fabulous narrations, feigned miracles, deceitful
iugglings; nor by pretended apparitions of Angels, or of souls departed; nor
by the bare authority of men's sayings, Decrees of corrupt Councels, Popes
sentences, wrangling Canonists, Sophistical distinctions of Schoolmen, humane
Traditions, Apocryphal writings, old and idle customs, examples of ignorant
forefathers, estimation of men's persons for learning, and show of holiness;
nor by any deceitful, wicked, and corrupt dealing, as by counterfeite and
bastard writings, corrupting of Councels and Fathers, expunging words and
sentences out of learned men's works, or altering them from the true meaning,
to beguile the simple Reader. No, nor by furious and forcible means; as by
fire and faggot, massacres, treasons, poisons, and stabbing of Kings, and
Gun-powder-plots, nor by any such hellish practices, such as the Apostles never
spoke of, the Primitive Church never knew of, nor in holy Scripture were ever
spoken of; for all these, our Religion does utterly condemn. It is vpheld only
by those holy and heavenly means, which the Apostles taught, and practiced,
and which they have left written in the Scriptures for direction of Gods
Church, that she may know, which be the only effectual means, that God has
appointed to uphold his true Religion. By these means only, ours is
preserved. And therefore it is that true Religion, which the holy Scripture
teaches. Which being so, I conclude this first argument, That this our present
Religion, wherein we differ from our Adversaries, was before Luthers time.

II. Argument. From the blessed Martyrs in all Ages.
THat Religion which was written by God in the hearts of his Martyrs, and which
from the beginning to this day, they all suffered for, was before Luthers time.
This cannot be denied.

But our Religion now present, was written by God in the hearts of his Martyrs,
and is that which from the beginning to this day, they all suffered for.

And therefore this our now present Religion was before Luthers time.

The Minor is thus confirmed, both for the writing of it in their hearts, and
for suffering for it. The latter manifests the former: for they that
faithfully and constantly obey the truth, even unto suffering persecution, and
death for it, without doubt have it written in their hearts. For if Religion be
not imprinted in the hearts of the Martyrs, in whose heart is it written? For
the Martyrs had the Spirit of the living God, sauing-knowledge, and remission
of sins: they walked in Gods Statutes, and kept his Judgments sincerely; all
which are the evident signs, that Gods truth was written in their hearts, as
these places of Scripture witness, 2. Cor. 3.3. Ier. 31.33, 34. Ezech. 36.27.
This is not to be doubted of. But the question is, Whether all the Martyrs did
suffer for this our Religion, or no? To answer to this, we must consider,
that all the Martyrs of Christ may be ranked into four sorts, every of which
suffered for such truths, as are in our Religion, which we do at this day
profess.

I. Sort of Martyrs were those, who suffered by the Jews, whereof the first
was Stephen, then James, with many more, Act 7. and 12.2, 4. All these did
suffer for that Religion, which Christ and his Apostles taught: but they taught
out of the Scriptures, and not out of Traditions, as the Evangelists and Acts
show. But to suffer for that Religion, which is only taught in the Scriptures,
is to suffer for ours, as by the former argument is proved. Therefore they
suffered for our Religion.

II. Sort of Martyrs were such, as suffered by and amongst the Heathen,
especially under the Roman Tyrants, during the ten bloody persecutions; among
which Martyrs were most of the Apostles: for we read not in Scripture, that
any of the Apostles suffered martyrdom amongst the Jews, but only James,
John's brother, Acts 12. the rest suffered among the Heathen. Now the Apostles
being the planters of our Religion (as by their writings does appear) and also
Martyrs for the same among this second sort, they must needs be our Martyrs,
suffering for our Religion, and so all the rest which followed the Apostles in
the same faith.

III. Sort of Martyrs were such, as suffered by the fury and rage of
Heretics, when the Arians had god an ouerswaying power through Arian Emperors
and Kings. But those Orthodoxall Martyrs and Confessors suffered for no other
doctrine, then our Religion teaches. For we hold and profess the faith of
the Council of Nice, and Athanasius Creed; for in our common Prayer-booke they
are appointed publicly to be read in our Assemblies. And therefore these also
suffered for our Religion, and were our Martyrs.

But here our Adversaries will say, that all these three sorts were their
Martyrs; for they brag and boast of these to silly people, as if they had
suffered for their religion, now professed and practiced among them. But that
the truth may appear, whether these Martyrs be theirs, or ours, we must
consider them both as Martyrs, and also as believers: properly they were
Martyrs in those things, for which they did suffer. Now their suffering was for
the common truths, received both by our Adversaries and us. So the cause making
the Martyrs, and it equally held of both, they are our Martyrs, as well as
theirs. Yea, if we consider them also as Believers, holding other points of
faith, for which they were not questioned, neither suffered for, we may more
rightly claim them, then our Adversaries. For of which Religion they held, and
most agreed unto, of that Religion must they be judged to be. That this may be
known, it must be well conceived, what they and we mean by saying, Our
Religion. We either side stand upon our Religion, not as we agree in points of
Christianity one with the other; but as we have our differences also to our
selves one from the other. So upon this rests the point, to try the Martyrs
whose they be, theirs or ours, by their more or less agreeing, or disagreeing
with either side in our said differences. But in respect of the maine
differences of their Religion from ours, that they cannot claim the Martyrs, I
thus prove by these ensuing reasons.

I. If these maine, differences in their Religion be such, as none of these
Martyrs (which suffered by, and amongst the Jews, or by, and amongst the
Heathen, or by, and amongst the wicked Heretics) ever made profession of, much
less suffered for, then in respect of these differences, are they not their
Martyrs; they cannot appropriate them to themselves, as they use to do, but
are still Martyrs in common.

But the antecedent is true, as shall be proved by my third reason next
following, for six hundred years space after Christ, in which space were all
three sorts of Martyrs. And therefore the consequence cannot be denied.

II. If these differences in their Religion be nothing else but humane
inventions, without sound authority from holy Scriptures, and that the Martyrs
professed and believed those things only, which expressly, or by necessary
conclusions, are contained in the Scriptures, then in respect of these
differences, they are not their Martyrs.

But the former part is true. Ergo, the latter must needs be granted.

For the truth of the antecedent, touching the vnwarrantablenesse of these
their differences, and without all ground of Scripture: I demand of Papists,
what Scripture have they for these things, wherein we and they do differ?

I. Of God. What Scripture for the picturing of the holy Trinity; forbidden by
Moses to be any way represented? Deuteronomy. 4 15, 16.

II. Of the Scriptures. Where is it written, that the Scriptures receive
authority from the Church, and the sense thereof only subject unto her? That
the Vulgar Latin translation is only to be admitted as authentical? That the
Scriptures be imperfect, and are not the certain rule of faith? That there are
traditions besides for perfecting the Scriptures, and to be received with
equal authority with Scriptures?

III. Of the Church. That the Catholic Church is not the company only of Gods
elect people? That the Church of Rome cannot err?

IV. Of the Pope. Where is Scripture to prove, that Peter was at Rome, and
Bishop there twenty five years? That he was to be appointed Vicar of Christ?
That the Pope is the universal Bishop? That he only is Peter's successor, and
Christ's Vicar? That he cannot err e Cathedra? That he is above Councels? That
he may depose Kings from their temporal estates, and dispose of their
Kingdoms? That he can dispense with sins against the plain Law of God? That
he can set souls free out of torments after this life?

V. Of the Clergy and Ecclesiastical persons. In what place of Scripture is
it taught, that there be Popes, Cardinals, and Popish Prelates like Princes?
That there are now Priests, to whom a special Office of Priesthood is
assigned? That there be seven degrees thereof? That a man is now appointed in
the time of the Gospel, to offer sacrifices daily for the quick and the dead?
That all Churchmen (so called) are to live unmarried? That a Monastical life
is the best estate? That Ecclesiastical persons are exempt from secular
authority?

VI. Of the Sacraments. Where does the Scripture teach, that Baptism is to be
administered with Chrisme, Oil, Coniuring, Salt, Spittle? That there is such a
spiritual kindred between the Witnesses, and the party baptized, as also
betwixt the Parents and Children of those Witnesses, as it hinders marriage
(without a dispensation) betwixt one another, though there be otherwise no
kindred either of affinity or consanguinity? That Jesus Christ is bodily and
wholly, as he is Man, borne of the Virgin Mary, in the Sacrament, the Bread
being turned into his Flesh? That it is a sacrifice for the quick and the dead?
That the Cake is to be reserved, and carried about in pomp, and that all are
to fall down to it, and worship it? That it is to be administered but in one
kind? That the Lay people must not take it, but gape and eat it? That the
Priest that says Mass, must have a shaven Crown; have his Amice, Girdle,
Aube, Manuple, Stole, Chesible, and other pretended holy vestments? That he
must use such crossings, turning, duckings, liftings, whisperings, gapings,
minglings of wine and water, such lickings, and other variety of stagelike
gestures?

VII. Of Prayer. That it must be in Latin? That not God only, but Saints may
be prayed unto? That the dead are to be prayed for? That it is lawful to pray
by number, to say the same 150. times, and to pray upon Beads?

VIII. Of Worship. What written Word teaches, that Divine Service is to be
said only in the Latin Tongue? That Saints, and their Relics are to be
adored? That Images and Pictures are to be in Churches, for adoration sake, and
to be Laymens books?

IX. Of the Virgin Mary. That she was borne without sin? That she is the
Queen of Heaven, the Lady of the World? That she is divinely to be worshipped?
That she is to have her proper service, and her Aue Mary's?

X. Of the Church or Temple, the place of public worship. What Scripture, that
Belles are to be baptized? That there must be Altars, Veiles, Holy Water,
Holy-ashes, Palms, and many such trumperies? That children dying without
Baptism, are not to be buried in the Churchyard; and that there is for their
souls a Limbus Infantium?

XI. Of days. Where do the Apostles teach, that there are such a number of
Holy Days, as be in that Religion? That a special Holiness is to be put in
the observation of days? That days and times are to be set apart to the
worship of Saints?

XII. Of meats. Where in Scripture read they, that there is such a difference
of meats, as the observation of such a difference at some times, is more holy,
then at other some times?

All these differences are humane inventions, without warrant of Scriptures.
Now let them show, that any of these sorts of Martyrs believed and professed
these differences; if they cannot, then the conclusion is good, that they were
not their Martyrs by these differences, but in common still ours as well as
theirs.

III. If these differences be but a very patchery of Heresies, Iudaisme, and
Paganism, then in respect thereof, they cannot be their Martyrs: for Martyrs
suffered for none of these three, but, in detestation thereof, were grievously
persecuted by Jews, Pagans, and Heretics.

But the anticedent is most true, as our learned men have made it manifest. For
Heresies; De Eccles. pa. 308.
Bish. Morton, Apol. Catho. cap. 66.
Doct. Whitacres, Lib. de Antichrist. c. 24.
Gab. Powel, and In his second pillar of Pop.
Doctor Willet. For Iudaisme, Against Heart. cap. 8. diuis. 4. pa. 567.568.569.
and 572.
Doctor Raynolds has sufficiently manifested it, and somewhat of Paganism.
But for this, read Thom. Moresin, Doctor of Physic, his whole book, called
Papatus, printed at Edinburgh, and Ca. 1. verse. 25. pa. 200
Gab. Powel on the first Chapter to the Romans. For all three, see a late
published book, called, The three Conformities. And therefore in respect of
these differences, being heretical, Jewish, and Paganish, these Martyrs are
none of their Martyrs, neither did their sufferings make good any whit this
their now present Religion.

IV. If these differences from our Religion do offer violence to the three
Offices of Christ, and make their public worship in many things blasphemous,
and idolatrous; then in respect of such differences, they are not their Martyrs.

But the antecedent is true. Ergo, the consequent. To prove the antecedent,
Doctor Fownes has lately of purpose set forth his Trisagion, wherein he has
sufficiently confirmed it, out of their public Missaes, Breuiaries, Portuses,
Rosaries, Liturgies, Psalters, Primers, and Manuals of prayers, to which I
refer the Reader for full satisfaction: And do conclude therefore, that
these blessed Martyrs were none of theirs, by virtue of these differences.

V. If many of these differences of theirs be not only besides Scripture,
without warrant from thence, as before is showed, but also flat against
Scripture, and against our common tenants, agreed upon between us and them:
then in respect of these differences, they are not their Martyrs. For they did
not suffer for those things which were against Scripture, and the common
tenants of Christianity, wherein we and our Adversaries do agree. If they dare
affirm this, let them give instances thereof.

But many of these their differences are against Scripture, and against the
common tenants of Christianity, in which we both agree. Which being so, these
their differences can be no part of Christianity, because they be against both
the rule, and also against the grounds of Christianity. Therefore the
consequence is true. That there are such differences between us, I instance
for proof in these ensuing.

That the Scriptures are imperfect, contrary to Psalm. 19.7. 1. Tim. 3.16, 17.
That there is an unwritten word, called, Traditions, to be added thereunto;
contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.2. Revel. 21.8. Prou. 30.6. That the witness of the
Church, is greater then the witness of the Scriptures, and to be believed
before them: contrary to 1. Ioh. 5.9. Ioh. 5.17.

That the invisible God may be pictured: contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.15. Acts 17.29.
Esa. 40.18. Romans 1.23. That Images may be made to be worshipped: contrary to
Deuteronomy. 27.15. Exodus 20. and that they are for instruction: contrary to Hab. 2.18.

That prayers may be made to the Virgin Mary, and to Saints departed: contrary
to Matthew. 6.19. and contrary to the practice of the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and holy men in Scripture. That prayers made by number, and often
repetitions, are pleasing unto God, as when people are taught to pray by number
on Beads: contrary to Matthew. 6.7. That they may be uttered in an unknown
tongue, and also Gods public service so said: contrary to 1. Cor. 14.15, 19.
That therein a general good intent is acceptable to God, though the mind be
not endued with sound knowledge: contrary to Prou. 19.2.n 1. Cor. 14.20.

That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be administered and received in
one kind: contrary to Matthew. 26.27. 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.23, 24, 25. That
Jesus Christ is corporally in the Bread transubstantiated: contrary to Act.
3.21. And that it is very God: contrary to Hos. 8.6. That it is offered for a
sacrifice propitiatory, as if Christ once offering himself, were not
sufficient: contrary to Heb. 10.10, 14.

That the Law may be fulfilled, and a man justified thereby before God:
contrary to Romans 7.19. and 3.20. and 4.2. 1. Cor. 4.4. Esa. 46.6.

That a man may merit by his works: contrary to Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8, 10. Romans
6.23. Luke 7.10. That a man may be able to do more, then God requires of
him, or that he is tied by duty to do: contrary to Romans 7.19. Luke 17.10.
Prou. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. Psalm. 130.3. That the Pope may dispense with Gods
Law: contrary to 1. Sam. 2.25. Romans 8.33, 34. Job 9.33. and 34.29.

That there are sins which yet are not prohibited by Gods Law: contrary to 1.
Ioh. 3.4. To. 4.15. and 7.8. and 3.20. That some sins are in themselves
venial, which deserve not death: contrary to Romans 6.23. James. 1.15. Genes.
2.17. That original concupiscence is no sin in the regenerate: contrary to
Romans 7.19. Psalm. 51. That the Virgin Mary was without sin: contrary to Job
14.4. Eccles. 7.2, 20. Psalm. 130.3. Romans 3.9, 23. 1. Ioh. 1.7, 8. Luke 1.46.

That Marriage is not honorable in all sorts of men, as for instance, not in
the Clergy: contrary to Hebr. 13.4. 1. Cor. 7.9. 1. Tim. 5.14. and contrary to
the practice of the married Priests under the Law. That married persons with
consent, may ever live asunder, to lead a Monastical life: contrary to 1.
Cor. 7.2.

That holiness is to be put in the observation of days: contrary to Col.
2.16. Of meats: contrary to Romans 14.14. 1. Cor. 8.8. Matthew. 15.20. 1. Tim.
4.3, 4. and so men lose thereby Christian liberty: contrary to Gal. 5.1.

That many who dye in the Lord, not abiects from God, yet rest not after death
for a time: contrary to Revel. 14.13. but make a temporal satisfaction, in a
place they call Purgatory, whose sins although here pardoned, yet go not
these souls immediately to heaven: contrary to Luke 23.43. where the good
Thief is promised Paradise, which is Heaven, 2. Cor. 12.3, 4.

That the Popes power is kingly, yea, that he may use the temporal Sword, and
depose Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms, and be subject to none: contrary
to Luke 22.25, 26. Matthew. 20.25, 26. Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13. That
he which gets the Popes dispensation, sins not in that he does, though the
same be against Gods Law: contrary to Matthew. 5.19. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Ier. 11.3. Ioh.
3.4. That the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and yet may intermeddle with the earthly
and temporal Kingdoms of this World: contrary to Christ's own practice, Luke
12.14. the nature of his Kingdom, John 18.36. against the nature of such
spiritual weapons and power which God gave to his Apostles, 2. Corint. 10.4,
5, 6. Yea, that the Pope may take upon him (as he does) to have to do with
those which are without, to wit, the Heathen, to give away their Kingdoms, (as
he presumes to do with such as forsake him, whom he judges to be
Heretics) contrary to 1. Cor. 5.12, 13. That his Clergy are exempted from
civil jurisdiction: contrary to Christ's commandment, Matthew. 22.21. to his
practice, Matthew. 17.27. to Saint Peter's teaching, 1. Pet. 2.13, 14. and to
Saint Paul's, Romans 13.1, 7. Tit. 3.1. It were infinite to particularize all the
differences between our Religion and theirs, wherein they are contrary to holy
Scripture, and contrary to the ten Commandments, the Creed, the Lords
Prayer, and the two Sacraments. Of which if any desire herein instances to be
better satisfied, Lib. de Antichr. cap. 6. to cap. 33.
let him read Gabriel Powel, who has purposely set down a multitude of
particulars.

VI. And lastly, if none of the Martyrs were Papists, or (as they please to
call themselves) Roman Catholics; then could they not be their Martyrs: for
they which be not such, are not held to be of their Roman Religion, nor
Church.

But none of these Martyrs were Papists, or Roman Catholics; for they held
not these many differences of theirs from us, by which a Papist becomes a
Papist or Roman Catholic, and without which he is not by them approved to
be such a one. For let a man hold all other points of Christianity wholly and
fully; yet if he hold not, that the Pope has authority, as Christ's Vicar upon
earth: that the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches:
that there are seven Sacraments: that the Sacrament may be received in one
kind: that the bread after consecration is transubstantiated, and Christ there
corporally under the forms of Bread and Wine, and so to be divinely adored:
that service is to be said every where in Latin: that Images are to be set
in Churches, and to be worshipped: that Saints departed, are to be prayed
unto, and their Relics worshipped: that there is a Purgatory for penal
satisfaction after this life: that our works do merit, and that we are
justified by them before God: that Ecclesiastical persons may not marry: that
confession of sins is to be made secretly to a Priest in his ear, and that
he has power iudicially to absolve the confitents, and impose penance upon
them for satisfaction for sin unto God.

These, and such like articles newly coined, whosoever does not hold, is not
judged to be a Roman Catholic But none of these differences did these Martyrs
hold, much less ever suffered persecution for. For not one of these articles
of the Trent Conuenticle was held in the time of these sorts of Martyrs, all of
them suffering within the 600. years after Christ, in which space was there
none that might be called a Papist, or Roman Catholic after the definition of
the Trentists. And therefore were they not their Martyrs, neither did any of
them profess the now new Roman Trentisme.

And thus we see, how by these differences they cannot claim the Martyrs. Now
our differences from them, are all grounded upon Scriptures, and principles of
Christianity, and warranted by such common truth of Christian Religion, as they
and we do fully accord in; not one of our differences being either heresy, or
any part of Iudaisme, or Paganism, nor ever condemned by any general Council
in the space of these first six hundreds of years, in which these three sorts
of Martyrs did live. True it is, that our adversaries call us Heretics, and
lay heresies to our charge, but falsely, Lib. de eccles. cont. 2. quaest. 5.
pa. 300. and 308.
without just proose, as our learned Whitacres, Bishop Morton, and others, show
in answering Bellarmine his calumnies herein to the full. Seeing then our
differences and truths of Christian Religion, taught by the Apostles, and by
the succeeding Pastors, and believed by the Church, are the parts of that Faith
and Religion, which these Martyrs suffered for; I conclude, that in regard both
of the truths, wherein we and our Adversaries agree, and also of our
differences, wherein we disagree from the now present Church of Rome, they were
our Martyrs, and none of theirs.

IV. Sort of Martyrs are those, who suffered by, and amongst these our
adversaries, as the Berengarians, Waldenses, Albigenses, Wicklife and his
followers in England, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, at Constance, and many
more in Bohemia, and in other places, even to Luthers time, and after, an
innumerable multitude slain and massacred, burnt, and put to sundry deaths
for our Religion, and for gaine-saying our adversaries in those differences,
which we now stand out in, against the Church of Rome at this present. These
were therefore our Martyrs.

But our adversaries will say, that these were no Martyrs, Object.
but condemned Heretics.

That they were Martyrs, and no Heretics, its clear. Answ.
S. John in the Revelation, calls those Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, Revel.
17.6. which should suffer for the Word of God, for refusing to worship the
Beast and his Image, and for not receiving his mark in their foreheads, or in
their hands, Revel. 20.4. and for keeping the Commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus, and so dying in the Lord, should rest from their labors, and
be accounted blessed, Revel. 14.12, 13. But such were these our Martyrs, for
they suffered for Gods Word, for keeping the Commandments and Faith of Jesus,
and for refusing to worship the Beast and Whore of Rome; drunk with the blood
of the Saints. And therefore were blessed Martyrs, and no Heretics.

But they will say; These held diverse errors, Object.
and were not in all things wholly with us?

They suffered, Answ.
and were Martyrs for those selfsame things, which with us they witnessed
against the Church of Rome.

II. Many errors are ascribed unto them, De continu. and statu Ecclesiae.
which they never held, as Doctor Usher Bishop of Meeth learnedly shows.

III. Though in some things they should have differed from us, yet does not
that make them not to be of our Religion. For if for lighter differences in
opinions, men should be held not to be of the same Religion (if so our
adversaries will conclude) then are the now Romanists not of one and the same
Religion, which is now professed at Rome: for one of them differs much from
another in many things. See Doct. Hall his peace of Rome.
Neither have they any right to the ancient Fathers, between whom and these
our adversaries, is also great difference, and that in many things. These
Martyrs therefore, though they might differ from us in some things (the Light
then not shining so clearly, as now it does) were our Martyrs. Thus we see
all the Martyrs from the beginning, to be ours, and so have our Adversaries
none at all, which may be properly called theirs, for the first 600. years:
For if they claim the first three sorts, its but as they do agree with us;
for in their differences from us, the Martyrs are none of theirs. The fourth
sort are clearly our own, and are Martyrs in defense of our differences from
them. But for their differences, they have no Mrrtyrs of Jesus: for such
Martyrs as be his Martyrs, suffer for his sake, for Gods Word, for his Faith
and Commandments: but their differences are not Gods Word, nor the Faith, nor
Commandments of Jesus, neither suffered Papists here for Religion; but for
treason, rebellion, disloyal acts, for denying due obedience to lawful
authority, and for standing in defense of foreign power, and the authority of
the Whore of Babylon, the murderer of Saints, and of that Antichrist the Pope,
as he is proved sufficiently so to be. And therefore I conclude, our
Religion to be before Luthers time.

III. Argument. From the Writings of the ancient Fathers.
THat Religion which is to be found in the writings of the ancient Fathers, as
professed and taught by them, in the first 600. years after Christ, that was
before Luthers time.

But this our present Religion (in the points of doctrine wherein we differ from
our Adversaries) is to be found in the writings of the ancient Fathers, as
professed and taught by them in the first 600. years after Christ.

Therefore was this our present Religion (in the points of doctrine, wherein
we differ from our Adversaries) before Luthers time.

The Minor I thus prove: All the differing Religions of greatest note, which
were ever since Christ's ascension, are one of these; Iudaisme, Gentilisme, or
Paganism, Arianisme (under which I comprehend all heresies) Mahometisme, or
Turcisme, the present Religion of the Church of Rome, which may be called
Trentisme, or Iesuitisme, commonly called, Papistrie; and this our Religion
termed, The reformed Religion, or Protestancy; which we profess and teach
with an vnanime consent in the Harmony of Confessions, otherwise then the
Church of Rome now does. But those ancient Fathers taught not Iudaisme, nor
Paganism, nor Arianisme, or other heresies, which in those days rose up, nor
Mahometisme. Ergo, either the Religion of the now Church of Rome, or ours, with
either of our differences one from another. But not so this of theirs. For
those differences on their part, whereby a man becomes a Roman Catholic, or
Papist, the ancient Fathers, with one consent, never taught. The differences
are mentioned before: for all which if they can produce the vnanime Consent of
those Fathers in 600. years space, we yield them the Fathers: but if not, then
are they ours, as they that taught and professed our Religion. For they not
only taught all the maine points of faith, which we and our adversaries do
agree in; but also all the principal differences with us, wherein we and our
adversaries do differ, as Polanus has largely proved, In his Symphonia
Cathol.
to whose learned pains I refer the Reader. Therefore this our present
Religion was before Luthers time.

IV. Argument. From the witness of our very Adversaries.
THat Religion which is to be found in the public records of the Church of
Rome, and in the writings of learned men therein, from the very first
foundation of it unto this day; that was before Luthers time. This (I hope) may
pass for current.

But this our present Religion is such a religion; and therefore before Luthers
time.

The Minor, if they deny, is thus confirmed. I. There are amongst them the holy
Scriptures, which they acknowledge to be the Word of God: but by those
Scriptures may all our Religion be proved, and fully confirmed, in any thing
wherein we differ from our adversaries. And therefore this our Religion is to
be found among them.

II. There is that which is called, The Apostles Creed, and the Nicene Creed,
which they profess, the Articles whereof we hold, and therein is contained the
sum of our Faith.

III. There is the Lords Prayer, the pattern of all true Prayers, according to
which only we teach how to pray aright, and thereafter do frame our prayers.

IV. There is the Decalogue and ten Commandments, which though defectiuely set
down in their Catechismes (the second being left out) yet are they wholly set
down in their Bibles, which ten Commandments are the sum of our moral
obedience, and of our duties toward God, and our neighbors.

V. They acknowledge the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, both
which we do administer.

VI. There are common tenants of Christianity, which all Christian Churches
have ever held, wherein we and they do fully agree.

VII. There is their Service Book, wherein though many abominations are to be
found, yet in other things it justifies our Religion and Service: As may
appear by comparing our Service Book with it; out of which, ours was, for the
substance thereof, taken. Against which they cannot justly take exception;
neither are they able to prove, by Gods Word, by the ancient Councels, and
consent of the ancient Fathers, any thing Idolatrous, Heretical, or any way
unlawful, wherein soever it differs from theirs.

VIII. There may also be found their accord in general terms with us, in
those things, wherein for the particulars we and they be at odds, and do
disagree; In his reformed Catholic.
as Master Perkins gives instance in one and twenty particulars* and the like
may be done in many other points.

IX. And lastly, there is to be found all and every point of our Religion
particularly, wherein we differ from them, which either we affirm, or they
deny; or we deny, and they affrme; and the same justified by the writings of
the learned amongst them. For proof hereof, I refer the Reader to my Lord of
Couentrie and Lichfield, his Catholic appeal, and Catholic Apology, first
and second parts; to my Lord of Meeth, his book de Chri. Eccles. succes. and
statu; to Illyricus, his Catalog. Test. Veritatis; to Ioh. a Munster, his
Nobilis Discursus; to Doct. Field, his fourth book of the Church, who proves
seven and twenty particulars of our maine differences out of their own
Writers. And if the writings of their learned men do not justify our
Religion, I would know, why they do not suffer such writings to pass without
purging? For if such things were not for us, and against them, they would not
put out, nor alter, nor so indeed corrupt Authors, or inhibite them to pass
abroad, as they do: which one act of theirs shows, that our differences
might be proved, even by their own Writers, if they might decide the
controversies betwixt us and them.

Thus we see, how our Religion is to be found amongst them, not only in the
points wherein we do agree, but even in all our particular differences, in
which we stand out against the preualent faction of that Church, which always
has ouer-borne the truth, which by others of more sound judgment in that
Church, has been from time to time published and maintained. And therefore
this our now present Religion was before Luthers time.

V. Argument. From the beginning of our Religion here, before Austin the Monk
came to this Island.
THat Religion which was here in this Island of Great Britain, before Austin
the Monk came into it, that was before Luthers time: for this Monk came in
many hundred of years before Luther was borne.

But this our present Religion was here in this Island of Great Britain, before
Austin the Monk came into it.

Therefore was it before Luthers days.

The Minor I thus prove:

I. The Christian Religion taught at Jerusalem by the Apostles, and other
Disciples of Christ, was our Religion, as by the first Argument is proved from
the Apostles writings.

Cambden in Brit. p 40.157.
But that same Christian Religion was here taught, and that either by some
Apostle, as Simon Zelotes; or some Disciple of Christ, as Joseph of Arimathea,
Harison before, Hollins. Chron. Midleton in his Papistomastix. page 202. See the
Protestants Apol. under Brerelys name.
as some of our side have proved fully, and our Adversaries yield us. Now if
that which was taught at Jerusalem was ours, then must it needs be ours, which
Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea did here teach; at the first planting of
it, being before Austins time: for can any say, that these brought from
Jerusalem hither, any other Religion, then the Apostles delivered there?

II. That same Religion first taught, did continue here in succession from the
Apostles days, and was held at Austins coming, Brerely his Appeal, Trac. 1.
Sect. 2. page 69.
as our adversaries, the Apologists do prove, and do take this also for an
undoubted truth, that the Britains of Wales received the faith of Christ, by
preaching of the Apostles, and held that Faith at Austins coming. Now the
Faith taught by the Apostles, being the same with ours, as the holy Scriptures
bear witness against all gaine-sayers; it is clear by the Apologists
proofs, and their own acknowledgement of the continuance thereof, from the
very beginning, that this our present Religion was here in this Island of Great
Britain, before Austins coming.

III. Here were many which suffered Martyrdom in Dioclesians reign, before
Austines days, but it is proved before in the second Argument, that all the
Martyrs of Christ were of our Religion. And therefore was that our Religion,
which was here before Austines time.

IV. Before Austines coming, the Church of Christ here, was not subject to the
Romish Church: for first, they kept not their Easter after the Romish fashion,
but as the Eastern Churches kept it, whence our Religion came. Now if they had
been of the Romanists tutoring, the fiery spirit of Victor, who attempted to
excommunicate the Eastern Churches, would have compelled the Britains to have
kept their Easter, as he did. Secondly, they administered Baptism not after
the ceremonious fashion of the Romanists. Thirdly, they refused to do, what
Austin required, Beda histor. lib. 2. cap. 2.
neither would they acknowledge him their Archbishop, though sent from Rome by
the Bishop there. Fourthly, both the Britains, Scots, and Irish Bishops so
utterly rejected the Romish Bishops, Beda lib. 2. ca. 4. Bish. Vshers letter,
page 80.81.82.83.
as Bishop Daganus denied all communion with them, yea, and refused to eat
bread with them in the same Inn; so little regard had they then to the
authority either of the Romish Church, or Romish Bishops. Yea, the Centurists,
Galfridus Monumentisis Centur. 6 p. 689.
and other Protestants have observed out of Galfridus, that before Austines
coming, there was here amongst the Britains, the profession of more pure
Christianity, then that which Austine brought from Rome. Its babbled out by our
adversaries, that this Austin converted this Island: but this is most untrue;
for Saint Aidan, and Saint Finan, were the Lords instruments to gain many here
to Christ.

Saint Aidan recovered from Paganism, Beda lib. 3. Hist. cap. 3.6.
the Kingdom of Northumberland, whereunto belonged (besides Northumberland it
self, the Lands beyond it, unto Edenborow Frith) these Countries, Cumberland,
Westmerland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Durham.

Saint Finan regained not only Essex and Middlesex, Ibi. c. 21.22.24. Bish.
Usher in his late Epistle added to Sir Chr. Sybthorps book.
but also the large Kingdom of Mercia, converted first unto Christianity;
which Kingdom did comprehend under it these Countries; Glostershire,
Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire,
Northamptonshire, Lincolneshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckingamshire,
Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Shropshire, Nottingamshire, Cheshire,
and half Hertfordshire.

These holy men are they, which, under God, are to have the praise, and not
Austin, who brought some, but few in comparison of these, to the profession of
Christ: but withal, besmeared them with Romish superstitions. And such others
as were already Christians, he endeavored to load with humane inventions, and
unnecessary ceremonies, and was (if not the cause) yet the occasion of the
destruction of many, Se Archb. Parker his book de anti. Brit. cap. 18.
and of the miserable and merciless slaughter of the godly Monks at Bangor,
to the number of 1200. for that these poor Monks would not submit to him,
whom they saw to be too proud, and not so humble a man, as a man of God ought
to have been.

V. That this our Religion was here before Austin, it may appear by that
public doctrine of the Church which was taught about the time of Gregory, (who
sent in hither this Austin) concerning the blessed Sacrament, altogether
agreeing with our present doctrine, and plainly opposite to the doctrine of
the now Church of Rome. For in an Homily of the Saxon Tongue, Se Bishop Morton
his Catholic Appeal, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 8. page 11.
appointed to be preached on Easter day, throughout every Church, the bread is
acknowledged to be naturally corruptible bread, and corruptible wine; truly
Christ's body and blood, yet not so bodily, but spiritually; and nothing therein
to be understood bodily, but all spiritually. If this was the public doctrine,
so fully herein agreeing with us, so contrary now to the Romish belief, in
their transubstantiated bread (for denial whereof they have murdered so many,
and now hold it still so maine an article of their Roman belief,) how can it
be otherwise imagined, all things also before considered withal, but that the
Religion then, was our religion now, and not this of the Church of Rome?

VI. It cannot be denied, if our Religion be the same, which was planted by
the Apostles in the Eastern Churches, from which our Religion was brought
hither as is before delivered, but that then this our Religion was before
Austines time. But that ours is the same, the Apostles writings written to the
Churches show. Secondly, an Apostle, or some Apostolical men here taught it.
Thirdly, the writings of the Greek Fathers for 600. years space after Christ
(which is all the space from Christ to this Austin) give testimony to our
Religion in the maine points thereof, as is proved before in the third
argument. Fourthly, it is evident even by those things, which yet the Churches
at this day in those parts do hold with us, and wherein we and they agree
against the now Romish Religion. For the Greeks deny the Popes Supremacy,
Purgatory, Ibidem lib. 1. ca. 12. sec. 1.2.
and Prayer for the deliverance of souls out of it, the necessity of
Auricular Confession, Meritorious satisfaction of the justice of God,
Transubstantiation, carved Images and Statues. They deny, that Saints departed,
hear our Prayers. They administer the Sacraments in both kinds, and allow
Ministers marriage. They mix not water with wine, they use not unleavened
bread. They admit not private Masses, nor the Circumgestation, or Adoration of
the Sacrament, nor the public service in an unknown tongue. They teach the
assurance of salvation in Christ, and renounce the merit of works. All which
are opposite to the now Romish Religion, and are the truths of our Religion,
taught by the Apostles, and holy ancient Fathers, from the beginning, in the
Eastern Churches, wherein they are not fallen from that which at first they
received, as they be in some other things, which they teach and practice.

VII. The Religion which we profess, is the same which was at Rome, at the
time of the three conuersions of England, as they call them; and therefore was
this our Religion before Austines coming, and here professed when he came in.

The first conversion was in the Apostles days; but in their days, was our
religion at Rome, as Saint Paul's Epistle written to the Saints there, and other
of his Epistles declare; as also the Epistles of Saint Peter (whom they would
feign have to have been at Rome) to which our Religion agrees wholly and fully,
wherein soever we now differ from the present doctrine of the Church of Rome.
Let their writings be Judge, See Catol. Test. veritat. page 26. to 69. last
edition, 1608.
from which our adversaries have greatly erred, as is evidently proved in all
the maine points of the Christian Faith. And therefore was it our Religion then
professed at Rome, and not this new Romish Faith.

The second Conversion they make to be in Eleutherius days, who wrote, as
they acknowledge, unto our King here, called Lucius. If here was any conversion
wrought, it was to our Religion, and not to the present Romish Trentisme, as
may be clearly gathered out of that Epistle of Eleutherius, See the Epist. in
the book of the Laws of the Saxon Kings, in the Saxons language.

Also in Fox, Acts and Monum. fol. 69. For the authority of this Epistle, I
take it, as they approve of it, a witness good against themselves.


and which they do approve of, as written to the same Lucius. First,
Eleutherius there tells the King, that he had received the Law and Faith of
Christ. Secondly, (as hereby showing him where this Law and Faith was to be
found) he tells him again immediately upon these former words, that he had
received both the parts of the scriptures. Thirdly, he so commends the
Scriptures to the King and his Council, that thence, by Gods grace, they
themselves might take a Law to rule the Kingdom. This Bishop did not take upon
him to prescribe them Laws, he allows them (being Lay persons, as they now
speak) to meddle with the holy Scriptures, and from thence (and not from him,
nor from his Laws, nor from the Laws of the Romans) to take a Law to live
by. This Bishop therefore held the Scripture sufficient for a direction and
guide to a whole Kingdom; he held them not so obscure, but that the King and
his Council (by Gods grace) though but young Christians, might learn out of
them the will of God, how he would have a Christian Kingdom governed.
Fourthly, this godly Bishop calls Lucius Gods Vicar in his own Kingdom, and
alleges Scripture to prove it; he was not then swollen up with the pride of
Antichristian Supremacy, nor conceited any temporal power over kings, as now
the Popes do. Lastly, he puts wholly the care of the people upon the King, as
a Father to look to his children, to call them to the Faith and Law of Christ,
and to the holy Church, hereby acknowledging the King to be the supreme Head
and Governor in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, and to be Gods
Vicar in his own Realm; which title that Bishop twice names in that Epistle.
Thus we see out of this short Epistle, what we may think of the Religion then
at Rome, and how agreeing to ours now, and differing from theirs at this
present.

The third conversion (for which they magnify so much this Austin, but very
falsely) was in Gregory the Great his days. In which time, though many
corruptions were crept into the Church of Rome: yet the maine points of our
differences, wherein we differ from this present Romish superstition, were then
taught in that Church, as may appear out of the writings of Gregory, as he
did then teach, concerning holy Scriptures, the grace of God, of Freewill, of
the Law, See for all these in Cat. Test. verit. lib. 6. p. 558.
of justification, of Faith, of good Works, also concerning the not
worshipping of Images, likewise of the acknowledging of the two Sacraments,
also his judgment of the Church, of the head of the Church, of Antichrist, of
an universal Bishop, of secular power over Bishops, of Marriage, of souls
departed, and whither they went. Gregory was no Patron of the Romish Mass,
nor of the corporal and transubstantiated bread, See for these Bish. Mortons
Catho. Appeal. l. 1. c. 2.3.4.4.
nor of merit, nor of Papal supremacy, nor of temporal jurisdiction over
Kings and Emperors, nor of the necessity of Ceremonies alike in every Church.
Gregory held not the Machabees canonical, but taught the perfection of
Canonical Scripture; he exhorted Lay men to the study of them, and in his
time the Scriptures were allowed, and prayers were said in a known and vulgar
tongue: he held the Catholic Church to be the elect, and the reprobate out of
it, and was against marriages within degrees forbidden, Leuit. 18.

Thus we see that at the three conuersions, our Religion now, and that at Rome
then, was one and the same. Neither can our adversaries show the contrary from
Scripture, from the uniform consent of ancient Fathers, either Greek or
Latin, or from general Councels within those times, no nor from the Bishops
of Rome themselves, for that space; if they will make conscience to deal
squarely, plainly and honestly in their proofs. And that they may so do, I
would entreat to lay aside, first, all counterfeite Decretall Epistles such as
those be, Doct. Field of the Church, b. 5. cap. 34 Catol. Test. verit. lib. 1.
p. 93.
which are ascribed to the Bishops of Rome in the first 300 years, as our
learned men have proved both by reasons, and from the testimony of the
learned among them. Secondly, those partly corrupted, and partly also
counterfeit Decretall Epistles, in the next 300. years. Thirdly, all the
counterfeite and corrupt Canons of Councels. Fourthly, all the bastard writings
put upon the ancient Fathers. Fifthly, the places corrupted in any of their
writings. If they will cast off this great and wicked deceit, in alleging
these for themselves, the truth of my assertion, That this our Religion was
then at Rome, and not this their present Romish faith, will manifestly appear
to all men not wilfully blinded, for by and worldly respects.

Lastly, the Christian Religion first planted in Ireland, was before Austins
coming in hither. For, as is before spoken, Scottish and Irish Christian
Bishops withstood him at his coming. But that which was then received, and
professed by the ancient Irish, was for substance the very same, which is now
here in England by public authority maintained, as is substantially proved by
a godly learned Father in all Antiquities of the Church, See his Epistle before
named.
the Lord Bishop of Meeth; to which I refer every Reader, which desires to
be satisfied in theirs, and our agreement about Scripture translations,
predestination, freewill, the Law, sin, free remission of sins, justification
by faith only, imperfection of sanctification, merit, purgatory, and souls
departed, about Gods worship, Images, the Mass, communicating in both kinds,
and the mystical receiving of the Sacrament. That Learned man does show, how
we and they do agree in all these things, which are the most maine points of
faith betwixt our aduersaties and us.

And therefore I conclude from this, and all that formerly has been produced
in this fifth Argument, that this our present Religion was here in this Island
before Austines time.

VI. Argument. From God the Author, and continual Preserver of our Religion,
against all oppositions.
THat Religion which is of God, was before Luthers time: for that which is of
God, cannot be ascribed to man; nor so new, as the late days of Luther. For
the true Religion is the most ancient, Ier. 6.14.
and this is the good way to be found in the old ways, and not in new
inventions, and new bypath.

But our Religion is of God, which I thus prove:

It was taught by the Prophets and Apostles, messengers of God: the Prophets
were sent by him, 2. Chron. 36.16. 2. King. 17.13. Ier. 25.4. by whom God
spoke, Heb. 1.1. and they taught and wrote, as the holy Ghost directed them, 2.
Pet. 1.21. 2. Tim. 3.25. The Apostles were sent of God, Matthew. 10.5. Mark.
16.16. Gal. 1.1, 12. and spoke, as God by his Spirit directed them, Matthew.
10.20. Ioh. 14.26. These were the publishers of our Religion, both in the
common truths of our Christianity, as also in the differences from our
adversaries. And for proof, we appeal to the Apostles and Prophets extant
writings. Our Religion is written in those holy Scriptures, the Book of God,
as before is proved. It is propagated and preserved by such means, as be
ordained of God, of which also before. It is received, believed, conscience
made of it, only by the operation of the Spirit of God. It brings men to the
true knowledge of God, to believe only in God, to worship only God, only to
honor God, and to be ruled only after the will of God. Its only vpheld and
preserved by Gods, and not by man's power. This will easily be granted, if men
consider what weak means, in man's judgment, has spread it abroad, and
brought it into esteem with such as profess it truly, (to wit) only
preaching, praying, and constantly suffering in the defense thereof. Also, the
small number, and meandness of the persons for the most part, which have from
the days of Jesus Christ, made profession thereof; and withal, the little
worldly policy used for help to support it. But on the other side, if the
enemies thereof be well considered, who have continued from the beginning of
the Gospel, perpetually endeavoring to undermine our Religion, every one will
yield it to be the very hand of God, that maintains it. The multitude of them
out of the Church are infinite; as Jews, Gentiles, Saracens, Turks, and a
world of other Infidels. The Heretics which have risen up, and gone out from
the true Church, and have labored to shake the very foundation of our
Christian Faith, very many. The Hypocrites and profane, are too many, which
professing the same together with us, yet are deadly enemies to the effectual
operation thereof, denying the power of it, and deriding such as strive to live
strictly, and would express the lively virtue and force of it. What divisions,
what variety of sects and schisms, have, and do yet hinder the growth of our
Religion? And lastly, these last Enemies of it, the Papists, under that
Antichrist of Rome; against whom, if God himself had not fought, and vpheld
our Religion, they had ere this, utterly extinguished it. And who will deny
this, that seriously considers our simplicity, and their deep policy; our
too much distractions, their strong combination; our small strength, their
great power; our mean estates, their abundance of wealth and treasures; our
more then supine carelessness, their continual watchfulness, and daily
endeavors, which possibly Satan can put into their hearts, to root out our holy
profession? as by their cruel Inquisition, merciless persecution, barbarous
Massacres, horrible Treasons, unjust Invasions, bloody Wars, the never to be
forgotten Gunpowder plot, killing of Kings, faithless and treacherous
dealings, playing fast and loose with us by lying Equivocations, and mental
Reseruations, in all covenants, promises, and oaths: besides their shameless
belying our persons, foul and false taxing us of errors and heresies, imputed
to our doctrine and Religion, Libertinisme, Atheism, and other abominations;
their flattering of Kings, and suggestion of falsehoods of disloyalty against
such, as they find best affected to our Religion; their politic framing of
their religion for worldly respects, to every man's humor, to entangle the
sooner men's minds, to get the more to them; besides all those hellish devices
before mentioned in the first argument, among which is the corrupting of
Fathers, and the Writings of learned men, both old and new, that so we might be
altogether destitute of all humane testimonies to witness with us, or any
help of man, but to be left to stand (as indeed we do) by the hand of God,
the only Author of our Faith and Religion, and the only blessed Preserver of
the same hitherto, before Luther was borne; who now also even in these
troublesome times does keep it on foot, against all the power and policy of
our Enemies, praised be his holy Name for ever and ever, Amen.

If our Adversaries think, that here is all that can be said for us, or that
only we can thus prove our Religion, they are much deceived: for much more
may be said, and also otherwise, even by History, may our Religion, and the
Professors be showed at large. This, for the present, is only to confirm
such, as in our Church truly fear God, and make conscience of their ways: for
such doers of Gods will shall know, whether this doctrine be of God, or no,
Ioh. 7.17.

THE AVTHORS FARTHER HELP TO stay the honest-hearted Protestant from Apostacy.
WEl-disposed Reader, thou have an answer to the question, Where our Religion
was before Luther? If yet further they ask thee, Where were the Professors
thereof also before this time? Thou may thence shape them this answer, Even
where the Apostles and Apostolical men did teach it, and where Saints
professed it, and Martyrs dyed for it.

It is not so difficult a matter, as they would make the world believe, to
bring forth in every Age the Professors of this our Christian Faith. A harder
and a more impossible task is it, for them to prove from Christ and his
Apostles, who, and where the persons were, that in every Age made an entire
profession of every point, The Papist cannot make a true Catalogue from Christ,
of their present Religion.
which now this their present Romish Church teaches and practices. We will
do the former, if they will faithfully perform this latter.

They have set out, as they call it, a Catalogue of chief Pastors, General
Councels, and Catholic Professors, of which they much glory, seducing
therewith the simple and unadvised. They do begin with Christ, then follow
they on with Saint Peter, and other Bishops of Rome on the one side: on the
other, they place the Virgin Marie, John Baptist, Saint John the Apostle, with
other Apostles and Evangelists: then they reckon up Christian Churches, as the
Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, and the rest, to whom Saint Paul and Saint
Peter wrote; and so they run on along to the end. Now this is it, that thou
should demand of them, and put them to prove, whether Christ and his
Apostles taught, and all the rest there mentioned, What to demand of them, and
to press them unto.
did learn and practice, all that the Church of Rome now does? If they can
show this but in the first hundred of years, profess thou to be satisfied,
and not to require farther after a continual succession in the Ages following.
Press this home to them, stand only upon this; this is plain dealing, to
begin with them, where they begin. And if they will not endeavor to satisfy
thee in this, certainly the Catalogue of the names of Christ, of his Apostles,
and the rest in the Primitive Church, are put only in the forefront to coozen
thee, if they can. For will they begin it with Christ, Saint Peter, and the
rest, and yet not prove them of their present Religion? If they can, why do
they it not? Why do they seek to put it off? If they cannot, why claim they
these, for the authors and maintainers of this their present Romish Religion? I
say, their present Romish Religion; because there is a great difference
between the Religion once at Rome in the Apostles days, and the Religion of
Rome now; that of the Church then, this of the Court and faction there now. And
here I pray thee well understand this one thing, to wit, what they mean by
their Religion, as we also do by our Religion; we neither side took it only
for that wherein we both do agree, but chiefly because of the distinct
differences thereof either from the other: this observe, that thou may not be
deceived by the Catalogue. And the better to clear thy judgment therein, let
them show thee, that Jesus Christ, What are the things, which in their
Catalogue from Christ, they must prove those in the first Age to have
maintained.
that also his Apostles, with the rest, in the first hundred of years, taught
not only that, wherein we and they do agree (for so they gain nothing to
themselves, but the Catalogue therein serves for us, as well as for them) but
also that they taught and observed all their now present differences from us:
as for example, let them show that then was taught, and the Churches learned;

I. To picture the holy Trinity, to make Images, to worship them, to adore the
Virgin Marie, as our Lady, and the Queen of Heaven: also to pray unto other
Saints and Angels, and to adore their Images and Relics.

II. To hold the Scriptures to be imperfect and obscure, that the Apocryphal
books were of divine Authority, the Latin Translation was to be
authentical, that Traditions were to be added to perfect the Scriptures,
concerning necessary matters of salvation; that the authority of the holy
Scriptures does depend upon the authority of the Church; that they are not to
be made so free, as to be read and studied of all without license.

III. To hold seven Sacraments, that Baptism is to be administered with
hallowed Water, with Chrysme, Salt, Spittle, Coniuring, and other devices.

IV. To believe, that the Priest may receive the Sacrament alone, and yet many
other Christians to be there present looking on: that the Bread without the
Cup, is to be given to the people: that after the words of consecration, the
Bread is turned into the very natural body of Christ, the accidents of Bread
and Wine only remaining, but not the substance: that it is to be adored and
prayed unto, and to be carried about in Procession: that it is to be
administered with such variety of garments, alterations of gestures, and change
of voice: that it is a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead.

V. To make prayer, to administer the Sacraments, and to say all divine Service
in an unknown Tongue; to say the Creed amongst Prayers, the Aue Marie as a
prayer, with the Pater noster upon Beads with Crosses, and that to a certain
number, repeating the Aue Marie forty times, and the Pater noster four times,
with a Creed at the end: that many thus praying, though they understand not the
words which they utter, yet having a good intent, they do a work pleasing to
God.

VI. To hold the Church of Rome to be the Mother Church, the only One, Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church: that it could not err, and that all which
should not believe ever, as it believes, should not be held for sound
Christians, and such as should not submit to her authority, to be held
Heretics.

VII. To hold the Pope of Rome to be Christ's Vicar, and Peter's successor: that
all should depend upon him, as upon their Head: that he as Pope cannot err e
Cathedra: that to him, as of right, belongs the spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction, and so has authority to make Laws, to bind conscience, to
depose Kings, and to dispose of their Kingdoms: that he and his Clergy are
exempt from the authority of Secular power.

VIII. To hold seven degrees of Priesthood: that there are sacrifizing Priests,
in the time of the Gospel: that all the Clergy are to live a single life.

IX. To set up high and worldly dignities in the Church, as Kingly Cardinals,
Prince-like unpreaching Prelates and Pastors over Congregations, not able to
teach them: to allow infinite Orders of Monks, Friars and Nuns.

X. To believe, that there is a Limbus Patrum, a Limbus Infantium, and a place
called Purgatory.

In their Catalogue they are to bring Christ, his Apostles, and all the rest
therein named, for teachers and professors of these things and the like, else
are they not to be reputed of this their present Religion.

Urge them (friendly Reader) unto the proof of these particular differences;
till then, keep thy right standing, and be not moved with a show of names.

In the mean space, that thou may be well assured, Protestants are of the
Catholic Church, though no Romanists.
that thou art a true member of the Catholic Church of Christ, though no
Roman Catholic, have recourse unto thy baptism, and the Covenant which God
made with thee, and thou with him therein. Ask them (when any of them goes
about to seduce thee) whether they think, that thou have received true
baptism? If they say, Yea, (as they cannot answer truly otherwise, though we
were baptized of very condemned Heretics, In Can. 3. de bapt.
as the Trent Council decrees) then demand of them again, Whether true
baptism does admit the baptized into the true Church of God, or no? If it do,
know of them, that then being thereby received into the true Church, why thou
and we so baptized, should not still be of it in their account? Will them to
show, what we teach and believe, differing from them, that has disannulled our
Covenant with God, and how we come to be out of the Church?

Part. 1. Act. 9. cap 10. q. 8.
The Roman Catechism (which with them is of great authority) tells us, that
men are out of the Church, as Infidels, What sorts are out of the Church.
which never were in it; as Heretics, Schismatiks, and Excommunicated persons,
once of it; whereto may be added, such as be Apostates, wholly renouncing
Christ. Taking this for granted, that these be all, and then that we be none of
these, it must needs follow, that we are through Baptism yet in the true
Church.

I hope, our adversaries will not say, that we be either of the first, or last
sort: let them clear us of that, and we will well enough acquit our selves of
the rest.

Protestants no Heretics.
I. We are not (though they so call us commonly) Heretics: If they please, let
the Catholic Moderator plead for us, In his book of equivocation.
or let them believe their own moderate Answerer (to whom my L. of Couentry
and Lichfield makes reply) who says, that he supposes, that no one
particular learned Catholic in this Kingdom, does, or will defend this
opinion, That Protestants are Heretics, and excommunicate. If these on their
side will not be sufficient to clear us, let us learn from them, what an
Heretic is, and so clear our selves thereby. Part. 1. Art. 9. cap. 10. q. 1.
An Heretic (says the Roman Catechism) is he which neglecting the Churches
authority, does maintain impious opinions obstinately. By this we cannot be
proved to be Heretics, this cannot agree to us.

Protestants hold no impious opinions condemned for heresy.
For first, we may demand, What impious opinions either affirmative, or
negative, do we hold, which they can justly task us of? Let them instance what
pleases them, and then prove the same to be heresy: first, by plain and
pregnant places of holy Scripture, which may convince the conscience of
indifferent men. Secondly, by general Councels, or by any one general Council
within 600. years after Christ (in which space were most famous and renowned
Councels) that has condemned any maine doctrine of our Faith for heresy.
Thirdly, by the unanimous consent, and general voice of the Greek and Latin
Fathers, for that space condemning the same for heresy, and for an impious
opinion. Let them, if they be able, show, first, in our faith, that we hold
any thing, against any Article of our Creed, which is the sum of our belief.
Secondly, in our prayers, any thing against the pattern of all true prayers,
commonly called, The Lords Prayer. Thirdly, in our deeds, which we teach to be
done, or bid to be left undone, any thing against any of the Commandments in
the Decalogue, the rule of our obedience. If they can thus fairly and
evidently proceed, they should do well so to convince us.

Secondly, Protestants are not convicted of obstinacy.
if any impious opinions could be found among us, it must be considered,
whether they be broched by private persons, or tenants held of the Church in
her public Records: If the former, then are they not the Churches; if the
Church should hold any such, how can they prove, that she maintains them
obstinately? For obstinacy is not to be imputed unto us, till all lawful,
good, and sufficient means have been used to convince our judgment, and the
same also by such, as have lawful and full authority to judge and determine
thereof. But hitherto this has not been done, neither can it be, but by a
lawful and free general Council, which the Conuenticle of Trent was not: See
the History of the Council of Trent.
till then we are not to be condemned of obstinacy, and so as yet no Heretics.

Protestants do not neglect the authority of the Catholic Church.
Thirdly, we neither have neglected, nor yet do neglect the true Catholic
Churches authority, into which we are received by Baptism. For we very
willingly desire to hear her sentence: but where can that be, except in a
general Councels determination? therein to hear the Catholic Church speaking
to us from the Scriptures, we greatly long for, we readily submit unto. Let her
thus speak, that we may know her Judgment, and we will hearken thereunto.

As for the Church of Romes authority, we do not acknowledge it over us,
because it is not, nor ever was in her best estate, the Catholic Church, but
only a particular Church, which now also is a party questioned. And therefore
her authority for her self against us, is no more of us to be regarded, then
by them our Churches authority for her self against them. Seeing then that by
their definition, we are not convinced of heresy, we are not out of the
Church as Heretics.

Protestants are no Schismatikes.
II. Not as Schismatikes. For albeit we have no departed from this Romish
Church, yet are we no Schismatikes.

First, for that we keep communion with the Catholic Church, into which we by
Baptism were admitted, which is the body of Christ, and we truly members
thereof, in faith and love, Ephesians. 3.20.
through the work of Gods Spirit, being built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Cornerstone.

Secondly, because this Church of Rome has fallen from the faith and obedience
commended by S. Paul, to be in the Church at Rome in his time, as appears in
many particulars before named, which the Church first planted at Rome, never
taught, never believed, nor practiced: Therefore are we no Schismatikes for
leaving her in those things, wherein she has left the true and Apostolic
Church at the beginning.

Thirdly, for that we do not break off from her simply, but in some respect,
that is, as far forth as she has forsaken her former self; so that if she
would return to the Catholic Faith and Religion, and forsake her Trentisme,
Iesuitisme, and Popery, the inventions of her own, added to that which first
she did profess, we want not charity toward her, to unite our selves unto
her again. For otherwise, neither our true love to God, nor true love to his
Church, will suffer us to live with her, so defiled as she is, in the
spiritual bond of sacred love, which knits the true members of Christ one to
another. Heavenly charity, which makes this unity, admits not of such
things into the unity of faith, as be taught and practiced in that Church,
both sinful against God, and pernicious to men's souls, yea, utter destruction
to them, without hearty repentance.

Fourthly, we have a warrant, yea, Let them answer the books which prove her
the great Whore, Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, if any deny these things.
a commandment from God, to separate our selves from her, for that she is
become the great Whore, and spiritual Babylon, Revel. 18.4. This charge of God
freeth us from Schism: for there is no sin, no Schism, in that which God
commands to be done.

Fifthly, we by leaving this Romish Church, do not divide our selves from the
true, Catholic and Apostolic Church, but by this separation do we indeed
return to the unity of it, and to our first blessed estate therein, when
first the Gospel was here planted in this Island by Apostles, or Apostolical
men, which came hither, not from Rome, but from Jerusalem, our Mother Church,
where the Lord and his blessed Apostles first began to teach, and erect a
Church, which is the Church we return unto in doctrine and worship of God:
from which Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, we were drawn by the
usurping and tyrannical power and jurisdiction of the Pope and his faction, and
the general backsliding of this his Church. So as this which they call
Schism, is no Schism in us, but a forsaking of schism in them, and is only a
returning unto, and a recovery of our selves again to our former union with
Christ's true Church, beginning at Jerusalem, and planted here many hundred
years, before the Monk Austin ever came into England.

Sixthly, In summa part. 2. cap. 39. de Schismate.
They are properly called Schismatikes (says Aquinas) which of their own
accord and will, separate themselves from the unity of the Church. If this be
true in the judgment of this their own so greatly honored Doctor, then
certainly we are no Schismatikes.

First, of our own accord and will we make not a separation, but are enforced
thereto by the power of Gods commandment, to come out of this Babylon, to
avoid her sins, Revel. 18.4.
to escape thereby her punishments. She her self has caused division, and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which she once received, as the Epistles of
S. Paul and S. Peter, See for these Catal. Test. verit. pa. 27. to 70. in the
last Edition.
do in many particulars witness against her. The Apostle S. Paul therefore
wills us to avoid her, and such as cause division and offenses, contrary to the
Apostles doctrine, Romans 16.17. It may seem from hence that a faction begun
even then among you.

Secondly, we do not separate from the Church, that is, from the universal
Catholic Church, but from a Church, that is, the particular Church of Rome:
for Thomas does not say, He is a Schismatike, which separateth from a Church,
but from the unity of the Church, to wit, the Church universal, which is but
one. For indeed, no reason can be given, why any should divide themselves from
the true Catholic Church: but good reasons may be given, why a particular
Church may be, and ought to be forsaken; as we do give, for our departing
from the Church of Rome: for we are commanded to forsake Idolaters, 1. Cor.
5.11. Heretics, Tit. 3.10. such as bring not the doctrine of Christ, and do
not abide therein, 2. Ioh. 10. and her that is called Babylon, Revel. 18.4.

Thirdly, before we can be Schismatikes, we must forsake the unity of the
Church. Now wherein stands this unity? Stands it only in affection of love,
or also in the faith of the truth? For both these graces the Apostle commends
the Churches, Ephesians. 1.15. 2. These. 1.3. and faith is preferred to the first
place in both Scriptures. We have not forsaken the unity of the Faith, of
which S. Paul speaks, Ephesians 4.13. For we teach the doctrine of the Apostles, and
no other in any thing, when we differ from this present Church of Rome, which
has lost her first faith, of truth in many things. Now, can true divine love
be there kept, where faith is lost? or can there be charity to unite, where
doctrine does divide? Can light and darkness, truth and falsehood cohabite in
love? Truth and love only dwell together; and for truths sake, love separateth
from falsehood, wheresoever she finds it. And therefore except they can prove,
that we have lost the unity of faith, we have not forsaken the unity of the
Church in love, as the former reasons show.

To conclude, were the Priests and Levites Schismatikes, which left the people
of Israel, 2. Chapter 11.13, 14
once the people of God in David's and Salomons days, and many hundred years
before, when Idolatry, under pretense to worship no false, but the true God,
was set up, and they not suffered then to do their office unto the Lord, as
their office required? If they were not, no more are we. For why do we forsake
the Romish Church? Is it not, because she has set up a new manner of service
unto God, new kinds of Priests, new Holy Days, new Sacraments, new Orders, and
will not permit the Lords Servants and Ministers to do their Offices unto the
Lord, as he has by his written Word prescribed?

Therefore seeing we are not guilty of Schism, we are not as Schismatikes out
of the Church, into which by Baptism we are received.

III. Not as excommunicate persons. Protestants not excommunicate persons.
For if we be neither Heretics, nor Schismatikes, upon what other ground will
they judge us to be proceeded against? There are other causes, for which men
are excommunicate: but in this question our adversaries cannot plead any such.
Again, I ask, if we be excommunicate, who has pronounced the sentence? Is
it the Romish Church? By what authority? Their Church is not the Catholic
Church, but only a particular, as ours is, and it is by us questioned, and
therefore in reason it cannot be both a Party accused, and also a Judge
against us in her own cause. Thirdly, we do appeal from her unrighteous
judgment, to a lawful general Council, where, upon earth, our cause is
only to be heard and decided lawfully. Till which time, we (for any censure
of this Church of Rome) do remain in the true Church, into which by Baptism
we are admitted; out of which, as yet, we are not lawfully judged to be, by
any lawful and supreme authority, as either Heretics, Schismatikes, or as
excommunicate persons.

Therefore (Christian-harted Reader) thou that art a member of the Church of
England, though thou be no Romanist, assure thy soul, that thou art of that
Church, which is undoubtedly a member of the True, Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, in which abiding, thou may, through the merits of thy
blessed Savior, obtain eternal life, if thou so believing do demean thy
self, as it becomes a good Christian, and a Protestant in earnest.

And for thine own more certain assurance and stable abiding, let me advise
thee to a few things. How a man must be qualified, which will continue in the
truth.
Have a care to keep thy Covenant in thy Baptism, that thou may be better
persuaded, that God keeps his with thee, and so to be one of his in the true
Church. Labor to fear God, for it is the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 1.
and the secrets of the Lord are with such as fear him, and he will show them
his covenant, Psalm. 25.14. Have ever a love of the truth, and God will not give
thee over to believe lies: 2. These. 2.10, 11, 12. Ioh. 7.17.
for this is a judgment befalling such as love not the truth, believe it not,
but take pleasure in unrighteousness. Be a doer of the Word, and thou shall
know the doctrine, whether it be of God, or no. Beware of affected ignorance,
and careless neglect of knowledge, but use the means appointed to attain
unto it. Iam. 1.5. Luke 11.13.
Exercise thy self much in prayer, beg of God wisdom, and he will give it
thee; his Spirit, and he will vouchsafe it thee; pray against sedition, and God
will keep thee; frequent the company of such as have knowledge, the fear of
God before them, the love of the truth in them, and make conscience of their
ways. Ask advice of faithful Teachers, listen not to false Teachers, fear
to be seduced.

By what helps to oppose the adversaries. Plain Scriptures.

Aug. l. 2. de. doct. Chr. cap. 6. Chrysostom. 3. hom. in 2. These. Lib. 4. de
verbo Dei non scripto, cap. 11.


And further, that thou may both defend the truth, and also be able according
to thy measure received, to resist the adversaries;

I. Learn carefully the truths of God, necessary to salvation, set down in
holy Scriptures. Such truths are very manifestly and plainly delivered, either
in express terms, or by an undoubted consequent drawn from thence: and all
such necessary points as concern all, are written in the Scriptures, as their
Bellarmine confesses.

With these Scriptures acquaint thy self, and being an ordinary Christian,
do not trouble thy self about obscure places: for plain and easy places
will be sufficient to confirm thy faith in any thing necessary for thee, to
believe and practice in the way of salvation.

The parts of the Catechism.
II. Be well grounded in the Catechism, the parts whereof are the Creed, the
Lords Prayer, the Decalogue, and the doctrine of the Sacraments: for these are
the compendium, or short sum of all Christianity. These well understood,
will furnish thee with reasons to withstand seducers. There is not any thing of
which they shall speak, but the same may be brought to some head in
Catechism, as either concerning Faith, and so referred to the Creed, or
concerning Prayer, and so referred to the Lords Prayer, or concerning
obedience, and so referred to the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, or else
touching the Sacraments, the Seals of our Faith.

III. Add to these, certain considerations, by which thou may defend the
truth, and overthrow falsehood, Nine considerations.
as the common law of Nature, common reason, right use of senses, common
experience, common equity, common charity, common honesty, the witness of
known Martyrs; whereto add the corruption of our nature, allowing or
disliking of any thing. By the plain evidence of Scripture, by the Catechism,
and by these considerations, may thou try all things, which be necessary
for thee to stand upon.

If a seducer come to thee, Observe two things in the adversaries dealing with
thee.
and that he will needs deal with thee, observe two things; first, not to
regard what he says; if it be not about necessary points. Secondly, see that
his confirmation, or confutation, be only by either some, or all these three
aforenamed; to wit, plain Scriptures, the parts of the Catechism, and those
considerations, from whence if he cannot prove his assertions, believe him
not. Three things beyond ordinary men's capacity, which they must take heed,
they be not deceived by.
If he begin to tell thee of Councels, ancient Fathers, and the Churches
custom in all Ages: answer him, first, that the three former are known to
thee, the Bible common at hand, the Catechism in thy remembrance, and the
consideration of such as are without difficulty: but as for these three last,
great reading, and learning, and knowledge in History, are required to
understand them well, and to cite them truly. They are for the best learned of
the world, and not for any of the common sort: ordinary men cannot judge
aright by them, neither will any such presume, to think such ability to be in
them, if they would take notice of diverse things concerning Councels, Fathers,
and the Churches custom.

I. Touching Councels, they must know, Ordinary me^ cannot judge of Councels,
and why?
that they are not only subject to error, but also have erred: that they have
contradicted one another: that some of them have been carried by a strong
faction: that ancient Fathers would not rest ever upon the sole authority of
Councels: that Papists themselves, though they pretend them, yet do not wholly
resign their judgment unto them: that there are some counterfeite and forged
Councels, and counterfeite Canons added to true Councels. Can an ordinary man
then judge of these things? And if he cannot, let him not be deceived by
pretense of them.

Not of the allegation of Fathers, and why?
II. Touching the ancient Fathers, this they must know, that they are found to
be of differing opinions, and had contentions among themselves: that they held
not their own judgments infallible, nor submitted to one another otherwise
then men godly and learned do now, but only as by good reason and authority
they were overcome: that they have erred; and this is acknowledged by most
learned men on both sides: that our adversaries of the greatest note, do often
shake off their authority, when they are against them: that of the Fathers
writings, some are doubted of, some are corrupted, and many counterfeites are
put out under their names: that the judgment of all the Fathers cannot be had
for all our controversies. These things being so, how idle is it then for
ordinary men to be talking of Fathers, of the opinion of all the Fathers, or
for any such men to be carried away with such a sound, which is not possible
for them to understand, seeing our adversaries allege them for their selves,
and we more truly for our selves?

Not of the allegation of the Churches custom, and why?
III. Concerning the Churches custom and path in every age, let them consider,
that this is very uncertain. Historians have not always in every relation bin
found faithful: that every Age has not had in it such as have truly written
of the Church: that a man may spend his whole life, in seeking out the whole
Churches course, and yet not be able to find it out. I suppose, I err not, if
I say, that all men now living, cannot do it exactly in every Age. And
therefore its but a gulling flourish of our adversaries, to boast of the whole
Church in every Age, and yet withal, so boasting fraudulently to mean their
own particular Roman Church.

By alleging then these arguments, to wit, Councels, Fathers, and the general
custom of the whole Church, the conscience of an ordinary Christian cannot
be thoroughly satisfied, his knowledge cannot herein be certain to convince
his judgment, these are beyond his reach and capacity. Be advised therefore
not to be drawn with these reasons, which are to thee so uncertain, but rest
upon the other which be plain and easy, within thy capacity, and certain
unto thee; by which thou may, through Gods help, maintain that which thou
professest, and confute the adversaries untruths, or at least, gather thence
such strength, as they shall not easily draw thee to believe them: as for
instance, in some particulars I will show thee.

They say, that the Pope is the head of the Catholic Church. Against the Popes
headship.
There is no plain Scripture for this. We find Jesus Christ to be called the
Head of the Church, but no other. Its no Article of our Creed; therefore thou
art not bound to believe it. But I add this, that what we believe, is
invisible, Heb. 11.1. and not seen, 2. Cor. 5.7. If therefore the Pope be the
Head, there must be a visible head, of an invisible body. Again, the head
immediately gives life, motion, and direction to its true body, which the Pope
cannot do to Christ's Church. Its also unreasonable to think, two heads to be
for one body; whether one besides another, or one under another, it is a
monstrousity. Common experience testifies against the Popes inabilitie to
perform the true office of the true Head to Gods Church.

They say, that he cannot err. Against his unerring spirit.
Let it be taken in the best sense they can conceive it, there is no plain
Scripture which gives this, to any one particular person. Its no Article of
our Creed to believe it, experience has found him to have erred foully.

They say, that after the words of consecration, Against transubstantiation.
the bread is turned into the very body of Christ, and the wine into his blood,
so as Jesus Christ is there corporally, as he was borne of the Virgin Marie,
under the accidents of bread and wine. In holy Scripture there is no such thing
taught, there is a sacramental phrase, This is my Body; and the like used in
the Sacraments of the old Testament, This is my Covenant, Genesis 17.10. This is
the Lords Passover, Exo. 12.11. The Rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10.4. but yet no
turning one substance into another. The Creed teaches us to believe him to be
in heaven, and thence to expect his coming, when he shall appear to judge
the quick and the dead. This transubstantiation therefore is no part of our
Faith. Its against reason, for a true body, and continued quantity, to be in
two places, yea, in a thousand mouths at once. The Angels reason unto Marie,
Mat. 28.6. confuteth this gross opinion; for he said to her, when she with the
other Marie came to seek Christ; He is not here, for he is risen: that is, He
is not in this place, because he is elsewhere in another. If Christ could have
been in two places at once, the Angels argument had been of no force; remember
that this is an Angell-reason, which know we how to reason truly. This opinion
is against our senses, we see not, feel not, nor taste not flesh and blood.
Now God never deluded man's senses, whenever he turned one substance into
another: Exodus 4.3. and 7.10, 20, 21, 24. and 8.17. Ioh. 2.9, 10.
Moses staff was made a Serpent, dust was Lice, the water blood, and water was
wine, and all these sensible. No Scripture, nor any other approved testimony
can be produced, to show undoubtedly the contrary. Yea, this is certain, that
the true body of Christ is discernable by sense to be a true body wheresoever
it is; therefore when the Disciples doubted at his sudden appearing, Luke 24.39.
he said, It is I my self. And to prove this, he wills them to use their
senses, saying, Handle me, and see; that so they might discern his true body,
flesh and bones: and so might it be in the Sacrament, if indeed and truth he
were there corporally. It has been witnessed against by the blood or many
Martyrs: but where be so many in defense of our adversaries gross opinion?
Which of them have ever hitherto, The evil of the doctrine of
transubstantiation.
or dare to suffer for this their opinion, as ours have done against it? This
opinion of our adversaries is to be detested for, first, the falsehood thereof;
secondly, for the gross idolatry committed through it, even a piece of bread
adored for Almighty Jesus Christ himself. Thirdly, for the bloody cruelty,
which for the upholding of it, has been done with furious rage upon the bodies
of Gods Saints, because they would not believe this false doctrine, nor commit
this abominable idolatry. Fourthly, all such as thus believe, sin not only
in the act damnably (for Idolaters perish everlastingly, Revel. 21.8.) but also
irrepentantly, because they be persuaded, that in so believing and worshipping,
they do not only not sin, but do a most excellent work, and meritorious
service to God.

Against Purgatory.
They teach, that there is a Purgatory, a place of torment. In holy Scriptures
we find plainly, Heaven, Earth, Hell, and Sea; but no plain name of
Purgatory, nor Limbus Patrum, nor Limbus Infantium. In the Decalogue we find
Heaven, Earth, and Waters under the Earth; and in the Lords Prayer, Heaven and
Earth; in the Creed, Heaven, Earth and Hell; but none of the other devised and
feigned places. This Purgatory for satisfaction is against common equity: for
they say, the sin is pardoned by Christ: and can then in equity the party be
punished? A Creditor forgiues freely to a man all his debt: can he then with
equity after lay him in Jail to make any satisfaction for the same?

They say, that Images may be set up to be adored. Against Images, and their
worship.
The Scriptures are plain against them, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 19. Esaias 40.18. Act.
17.20. Romans 1.23. The second Commandment, in the Decalogue, forbids them,
which our adversaries bid from the people in their vulgar Catechismes. Our
corrupt nature is apt to these things, and therefore the less to be liked of.

They teach to pray unto the Virgin Marie, to Saints and Angels. Against
praying to Saints.
The Scriptures afford no precept for this, nor any evident example: prayers
there are taught to be made unto God: Angels are not to be worshipped, Col.
2.18. Revel. 19.10. and 22.9. The Lords Prayer, the perfect rule of prayer,
Matthew. 6.
teaches us to pray to God our Father in Heaven, whenever we pray: now can
we say to the Virgin Marie, to Saint, or Angel, Our Father which art in
Heaven? Can we pray to any of them, and say, Thy Name be hallowed, thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven? Can we pray any one of
them, to give us daily bread, to forgive us our sins, to deliver us from
evil? Can we ascribe to any one of them, and say, Thine is Kingdom, power and
glory for ever? Yet this prayer warrants us, that to whom in Heaven we may
pray, to him may we say all this: but if not to the Virgin Marie, not to Saint,
nor Angel, then may we not pray to them by any warrant of this prayer. Our
Creed teaches us to believe in none, but God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Now the Scripture plainly tells us, that we cannot pray to any, but
in whom we believe, Romans 10.14. Therefore then not to the Virgin Marie, nor to
Saint nor Angel, because we are not to believe in them.

They tell thee, Against the Romanists, condemning all that are not of their
Church.
that thou must believe the Romane-Catholik Church, and to be also a member
thereof, else thou can not be saved. The Scriptures tell us plainly, that
God added to the Church such as should be saved, Acts 2.47. but not a word
there of the Roman Church. In our Creed, we are taught to believe the
Catholic Church, and that we be members of it, but to be of any Roman
Catholic Church, is no Article of our Creed. Besides the speech is absurd, and
it is against reason, to call a particular Church the general, or the general
a particular, as the Church of Rome in the best estate of it never was other.
And can the object of faith be the object of sight, as it is the object of
faith? Now we believe the Catholic Church, but the Papists tell us, that their
Church is ever visible to the eye. This also which they say, is against common
charity: for must all out of the Church of Rome, be without hope of salvation?
In the planting of the Gospel, there was a Church at Jerusalem, before any at
Rome, and many Churches planted by Saint Paul, which never had dependence upon
the Church of Rome; many Churches in the East, and other parts of the World,
which are not within the Roman jurisdiction, nor do acknowledge it; must
needs all these be without salvation, because the Roman Pope is not
domineering over them? Now God forbid.

Against their urging as necesary, to make a Catalogue of our professors in all
Ages.
They will tell thee, that thou must be able to show thy Church, and the
professors thereof in every age, else thou art not of the true Church. But the
holy Scriptures never bound any to such a task, neither Christ, nor his
Apostles in all the new Testament ever charged any Christian Church, much less
any believer with this. It is an Article of thy Faith, to believe that there is
a Church of God, here and there dispersed abroad in the world. This is a man
bound to believe, but not that every one, or any other for him, should be able
to make a Catalogue of all that went before in the same profession in every
Age. One ignorant of this, may yet be of the true Church, neither shall the
ignorance thereof damn him.

Against their error of venial sins.
They will tell thee, that there are some sins in Nature venial in
themselves, not deserving eternal death. The Scripture teaches otherwise,
Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, no exception of any at all. Yea, the
consent of sin is worthy of death, Romans 1.23. In the Lords Prayer, when we
crave pardon of our trespasses without exception, we thereby acknowledge, that
every kind of trespass offends God, stands need of forgiveness, and
therefore what else would follow, if he did not forgive it, but death? This
false distinction gives liberty to our corrupt nature to sin, as experience
tells every of us, even in our adversaries, wallowing licenciously in their
supposed venial sins. It may seem unreasonable, if there be sins venial
in their own nature, that such a horrible scorching fire, as they make that in
Purgatory to be, should be prepared to plague souls for the same. The
greatest torments in the world, as they say, are not comparable to the torments
there: How can it then be possibly imagined, that venial sins, which, as
they say, do not break friendship with God, should be so terribly punished,
by way of satisfaction, and yet God remain to him, who is so punished, a sure
friend?

They teach, that a man has power to do Gods will, and to avoid evil, and
not be overcome thereof, if he will. The Scriptures tell us, Against man's power
to do well.
that it is God that works the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. and makes all
our sufficiency to be of him, 2. Cor. 3.5. In the Lords Prayer, we are taught
to beg of God ability to do his will, and his grace, to deliver us from
evil: under will, is comprehended all good, and under evil, is contained
whatsoever is sinful, so as its not in us to do good, nor to avoid evil,
but both is Gods work in us. Every man feels this inabilitie in himself by
experience; yea, these also which do maintain this power in man, if they
would confess it. And why are they not all most holy, if they have this power?
Their damnation is more just, when they sin in any measure, then such as want
this power, though they fall by infirmity into greater sins.

They teach, that a man may fulfill the whole Law, and so merit. Against their
error of man's ability to fulfill the Law.
The Scripture teaches otherwise, Luke 17.10. Eccles. 7.20. Prou. 20.9. Psalm.
130.3. Job 9.20. 1. Ioh. 1.8. Iam. 3.2. In the Lords Prayer, we ask all of us
forgiveness. In the Creed we are taught, not to dream here of perfection, or
of merit; but to believe the forgiveness of sins. And in reading the Law
truly understood, it does cause a man's conscience, even in the best, to
acknowledge himself guilty.

I might here go through many other points which they teach, to which from
either plain Scriptures, or from the Catechism, or from these considerations,
thou may make answer in thine own defense. But yet for all this (though
thou also have gotten help to stand for thy self) beware of Seducers, run not
easily into disputes with them, but rather put them over to learned men to be
answered. It is not good for Eve for to fall into conference with the subtle
Serpent. Be bold upon these grounds with ordinary Papists, if they will
attempt to set upon thee: but consider thy ability, presume not above thy
measure, continue in Gods Word, and the Lord will uphold thee. To whose blessed
guide and Fatherly protection, I commit thee. Pray we all continually.

FINIS.

