TWO SERMONS DELIVERED AT St. Peter's in Exeter.

BY Rychard Peck, Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods word, at Columpton in
Devon.



LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper for Ambrose Ritherdon, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1632.

THE GREAT DAY DAWNING. OR, CHRIST'S NEERENES to Judgment.

Delivered in a Sermon before the Judges, at the Lent Assizes in Exeter. Anno
1632.

BY Rychard Peck Master of Arts and Minister (...)

Mica. 2. 7. Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?

(...). Chrysostom. Hom. in 2. Aduent Dom. Sis semper pavidus mi homo pro
Tribunali sedentem communem Dominum cernens.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for Ambrose Ritherdon, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Bull head. 1632.

Errata.
Page 7 line 7. (...) p. 24. l. 29. r. (...). p. 26. l. 6. r. that rack. p. 33.
l. 30 (...) p. 35. l. 2 and 3. r. (...) for (...) p. 35. l. 26. r. do not fit.
p. 37. l. 29 Y for (...).

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Edmund Arscot, Esquire, High Sheriff of the County
of Devon, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
Right Worshipful,
IT befell this Sermon in its delivery, what some pregnant animals does
sometime in theirs Times orifice was so strait, affairs of public
Judicature, like impatient Midwiues, so violent to have all soon out, that
limbs not a few were left behind. This after birth (extorted by friends
importunity) has brought out all, and presents you the whole Foetus with its
intended integrals, though weak I confess, and very feeble. My humblest
entreaty now is but the hire of a room or two under the roof of your
Affections for shelter a little, or if I may presume it) education. Perhaps (so
the Lord give life and power to it) it may become, if no instrument of much
good abroad, yet (like King Philips Seruitour with his dead-mans skull) as a
domestique Monitor to serve in daily to your thoughts some (...) or timely
watchword for preparation against the great Judge his coming. We are all too
apt by Satan's guiles, the deceits of sin, and bewitching cares and profits of
this life, as by some Mercuries pipe, Argos-like to be sung asleep, and so
like foolish Virgins out-sleeping seasons of getting oil in our lamps, to be
cast behind hand: How seasonable then some thorn at securities breast to keep
it waking, that when the Judge appears, our lamps be trimmed, our loins girt
up, our lights burning. Worthy Sir, if this Infant-attempt may prove auayl-some
to such an end, either on your own or any others soul, take it, it is yours,
use it. Here will be enough for me. My Master shall have glory, you boldness
in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Your Worships very obseruant Chaplayn, Rychard Peck.
Columpton April 30. 1632.
James 5. 9. Behold, the Judge stands before the door.
GOds Ministers are like David's watchmen up over the City gate, (2 Samuel 18. 24)
set on high, as from some Watchtower for the peoples safety, to ken abroad who
be going and coming. Our Apostle here seems such a Watchman; his tidings
(among other) these: Behold, the Judge stands before the door.

The words (if you mind their reference to what goes before) are an
enforcement of a reason brought by the Apostle for deterring Christians from
uncharitable grudging and impatient stomaking one against another upon mutual
illations of wrongs and injuries. The frame they are set in stands up thus
ioynted;

1 a Disswasion: Grudge not one against another. 2 a Reason of that disswasion.
1 Intimated in specifying or rather cautioning the judgment or danger thereby
incurred: Lest ye be condemned. 2 Enforced from the near appropinquation of
the Judge that may inflict that judgment: Behold, the Judge stands before
the door.

Or (if you will rather (...), and in gross) thus, (...), Grudge not one
against another; there is the sin dissuaded: (...), that ye be not condemned
(of the Lord namely, say Interpreters) there is Paraeus. Others
the ground or reason of that disswasion. Where on, to strike deeper
impression, for more advised notice of what he said, he forewarness them of
the Judge (that both can and will condemn them) now not so far off, but that
(ere they think on) may light on their skirts, and take them tardy. Behold, the
Judge stands before the door.

You have had the connection of the words with former. Now do ye but vnioynt
this frame a little, and cull the words from the rest apart by themselves, and
they are a preadmonition of the instant neernesse of the great Judge to
judgment; Behold, the Judge stands before the door: Where the parts are two,

1 An acclamation (as I may so say) in that demonstratiue, Behold. 2 A
Proclamation. The Judge stands before the door.
For the first, the Acclamation, I Will touch that but lightly, and lay it aside:
Ecce, Behold, a word that stands at the head of my Text, not for a cipher to
fill up the number of words only, but like a Comet portending some ensuing
matter of much consequence: or like some Trumpet blown up before a
Proclamation to call and lure off men's thoughts from other objects for the more
intent attention, and has that use here in the entrance that David's Selah (say
some) Alsted. Encycl.
has in the end of a sentence: as if thus the Apostle, Sensibus hoc imis (res
non est parva) repone, It Is a matter not a little worthy your deepest notice,
think on it, take notice of it. Behold.

Lo the benumbed deadness of our stupid hearts; Use
the earthly mindedness of our dunghill affections; how suffer we them to be
swallowed up into the insatiably-deuouring gulfes of the pleasures of sin and
profits of the world! whereby so unapt become we to look about us in things
conducing to our everlasting welfare, that no less then some rattling alarm
must be first struck up, ere we will open our ears to hear, or our eyes to
Behold the Judge standing before the door. But

I intend not to detain your patience in the porch: Let me unlock the door,
and lead your thoughts in under the main roof and masterpiece of my Text, the
Proclamation. Th Judge stands before the door.

The parts here are two, Quis, or 1 a Subject, The Judge Quid, 2 a Predicate or
Attribute, stands before the door.

About which parts ere I lanch forth into the stream of my intendment, give
me leave to use this double method, (...), Resolution, Composition. By the
first I Will open them in giving the sense and meaning of the words: by the other
reunite and sum them up again together into some Doctrinall Thesis. This
done, I Will get a board and set forth.

For the first, Resolution of parts, I Will finish that in the Solution of two
queries. First, on the Subject, 1
who and what this Judge is. Secondly, on the Attribute, what means his
standing before the door.

First, who and what this Judge is? Quest. 1.


Answ. No ordinary and common Judge (be sure) whose skill and acts of
judicature comparatively are at best but imperfect, limited, and reach no
further then (...), a few matters of fact amongst men; no but a Judge (...),
one by an (...), or transcendent excellency infinitely every way surpassing all
others. No temporal or earthly Judge liable to like frailties that are other
men, and meriting ofttimes Gods (...), his revenging eye as well as Homer
Batrach.
others: But one of whom we may say most truly what Papists falsely of their
holy father the Pope, Omnis judicans, a nemine judicandus; one who iudgeeth
Did. 14. Can. Si Papa.
all men, but to be judged of none; yea, the very Judge of Judges. No mere or
simple man neither, no nor Saint or Angel, but one to whom both Saints and
Angels do acknowledge homage, and very devils crouch; (...), one both God and
man, Phil. 2. 7. Psalm. 22. 6. Isa. 53. 3.
Christ; blessed for ever. Who though while on earth a servant, (...) a worm
and no man, most vile, contemptible, yea himself like a malefactor accused,
arraygn'd, condemned; yet now invested with Mat 28 18. Phil. 2. 9.
all Regal power both in heaven and earth; now exalted above every name that is
named, is by the authority of God his father ministerially (in respect of
manhood namely) deputed the visible and general Judge at last of the whole
world, And would ye know what a Judge this is? It Is one for power almighty,
none shall withstand him; for wisdom wonderful, Act. 17. 38.
none shall deceive him; for majesty dreadful, none shall outface him; for
judgment most just, none shall trip him; (...), one that will search 1 Chro.
28. 9. Acts 1. 24
the very reins of men, and dig open the hidden cauernes of every heart;
(...), one irrespectlesse Romans 2. 11.
of persons, that will judge impartially according to each our works: whom no
bribes shall corrupt, nor greatness brow*beat; whom entreaties shall not move,
nor tears deflect: that will take a most strict account of all men's ways, and
will not put up the wilful transgressions of his laws; that blessed and only
Potentate, that King of Kings, and Lord of 1 Timothy 6. 15. Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
Lords; in whose power it is to kill and to keep alive, to save or to damn
eternally: who descending at last 1 These 4. 16. Mat. 25. 31.
day from heaven with a shout, enroab'd with shining glory, attended with a
train of Angels, and riding upon the wings of flaming fire, shall by the voice
of an Arch-angell and with the trump of God rouse up the dead from their beds
of dust, and by a general summons both of quick and dead gathering all before
him, shall from his Throne of judgment erect Mat. 25. 32. Mat. ibid.
in the air, plead with all flesh. Where sheep and goats, good and bad one
severed from the other, and all the books both of nature, Scripture, conscience,
and of Gods omniscience shall be opened, and every one judged out of those
things which shall be written in Reu. 20. 12
those books according to their works. This done, an eternal doom and
sentence shall he pass of glorification upon his elect and faithful, Venite
benedicti, Come ye blessed, etc. of condemnation upon impenitent reprobates,
Ite maledicti, Go ye cursed, etc. Mat. 25. 34. 41.


You have seen the Judge. But what of him? He stands before the door.

What Is that? that is the second question. Quest 2.


Answ. There are two doors in Scripture mentioned, before which Christ
stands: the one within us, the other without. Christ stands at the one to
tender grace; at the other to bring in judgment. Man's heart's the one, whereat
Christ daily presents himself, and by the preaching of his word knocks for
entrance. Behold, I stand before the door and knock, Reu. 3. 20. The other
that of Christ's great Iudgement*hall, and meant in my Text; before which (in a
borrowed form of speech) Christ may be said to stand, when as his exceeding
neerenesse unto judgment is to be noted, intimated. For as in usual speech,
that stranger we say, is come very nigh our house, that is now standing before
our door: So here; so nigh proclaims our Apostle this great Judge his
approach to judgment, as of one already before the door: Nay, and that not
sitting neither, much less retiring back again, as foreslowing entrance, but
standing as one awayting, and ready instantly to step in as soon as but the
door is opened. Thus briefly for resolution of parts.

In their Synthesis or composition, secondly, I Will do but this, set and join
them again together, and that 2
into this doctrinall frame;

That the coming of Christ the great Judge of the Doctr.
world is not far off, but very near at hand.

Beloved, take not the proposition as intimating any intendment of enquiry
after the definite and exact point of this great Judge his neerenesse: our
Savior checks such curious scrutiny, when Acts 1. 7. (...), it is not for you
(says he) to know the times and seasons which the father has put in his own
hand; Mar. 13. 32.
and auerres the knowledge of the very day and hour a depth beyond the fathom
either of men or Angels. My aim is, minding no deeper wading then along the
shore of Scripture, to stay my discourse only upon the indefinite and
indeterminate neerenesse of this Judge his coming, and thus sense it. It Is not
far off, but very nigh at hand; though how near for hour, day, month, or
year I dare not with some to attempt to calculate.

And here let me demand your thoughts. Can we think that he (whose approach
speeds daily onwards) can after sixteen hundred years standing before the
door, be by this time far off from stepping in? or that he (who promised
concerning this his second coming, B hold I come quickly; and again, Reu. 22.
12 Ioh. 16. 16
a little while, and ye shall see me;) that he can now be any great way off,
since so many hundred years of that little while or quickly is already spent?
No, if Saint John in his time said truth, 'twas (...) 1 Ioh, 2 18. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
Phil 4. 4. Heb. 11. 37.
(...), the last time; Saint Peter in his time, (...), the end of all things is
at hand; Saint Paul in his time, (...), the Lord is nigh, (...), yet but a
little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; then
surely after so long flux of time since that, must it now be much more true,
that the coming of Christ the great Judge of the world is not far off, but
very near at hand.

Would you have me attempt any farther euiction of this verity; I Will not borrow
any helping hand from Rabbi Eliahs dream in the Jewish Talmud, of Vid.
Galatinum de arcanis catholice veritatis, lib. 4 cap 20.
the worlds lasting but six thousand years, whereof (...) etc. 2000 empty
without Law written, 2000 under the Law, 2000 under the Messiah, (of which last
2000 are 1630 already gone) and for the many iniquities of men (says he) some
of that time shall not be expired. Neither will I press you with Lactantius
or Saint Ieromes conjectures, who Hier. in Ps. 98. Lactan. Inst. Divin. l. 7.
c. 14. 2 Pet. 3 8.
because, says Peter, a thousand years with the Lord are as one day, have
therefore thought, that as the world was six days creating, and then followed
the Sabbath; so answerably that the world should continue for six thousand
years, (as guest the Rabbi before) and then should succeed the eternal
Sabbath, but adding thus; that as the legal Sabbath began (say they) not at
the full end, but in the evening of the sixth day; so that this eternal Sabbath
shall probably begin not just at or after the full end of 6000 years, but a
little before. Neither will I make use of Cusanus fancy, who dreaming that the
distance of Vid. Espenc. in 2 ad Tim page 80.
time between Christ's incarnation and the worlds dissolution should answer
the interstice between the Creation and the Deluge, has conceited, that as the
world from its creation lasted 1656 years, and then was wholly drowned; so
from its re-creation by Christ incarnate, that it shalllikewise last the like
1656 years, and then be dissolved by fire at Christ's second coming. Nor will
I add what Mathematicians, Vid. Aret. Prob. de interitu mundi page 1016.
some will seem to elicit for Christ's neerenesse, either from some late
conjunction of Planets, or specially from the daily decay of the world, who
observing not only in general most things sublunary to decline from their
former virtue, strength, and power; but the very Sun it self (say they) to
want much of its influentiall vigor, that once it had, whose distance from the
center of the earth is 9976 leagues shorter now (say they) then in Ptolomees
days) would hence have more then probably portended the imminent end of all
things. These and the like (...), or empty speculations, for farther euidencing
my propounded Doctrine, I dare not meddle with, contenting my self with S.
Austins modesty, that profess't ingeniously; for our Saviors return to
judgment, Tempora Aug. Epist 78.
dinumerare non audeo; I dare not number or set down the precise times. You
know the sense you must take me in, a neerenesse, to wit, not definite,
determinate, but indeterminate, indefinite; for proof whereof, leaving the
by-ways of men's fancies, the safest road for me to travel in will be such
Topique mediums as plain Scripture lends me. Where that might be Reas. 1. Reu.
12. 12.
prefixed first, that Saint John suggests from the Devils wrath, because his
time's but short; whose rage and fury since every where daily it grows greater
and greater, more furiously now bestirs it self then formerly wont; what
argues it, but the date of his time even almost out, and consequently Christ
the Judge even now at hand: like some ill-minded Tenant (it seems) whom if you
should see to make hauock and spoil of every thing upon his Tenement, fell the
trees, rack out the ground, hew the hedges, tear down the gates, rifle the
house, would you not be ready to think, sure this man's lease is almost expired,
that he plays such reaks: So here, that the Devil now so ruffles abroad as if
he were mad, so stirs up contentions, conspiracies, tumults, wars, so
labors to bring all kind of sin in fashion, to convert the world all into
pride, drunkenness, whoredom, Epicurisme, Atheism, and attempts above former
wont to do all the villainy and mischief that ever he can; what implies it but
that he sees (as indeed it is) Reas 2.
the date of his lease even quite expired, and Christ now at hand to judgment?

I might add secondly that which most modern Scholiasts Pareus, with others.
that I have met with but one Napier, that casts these times under the seventh
Trumpet.
on the Revelation do jointly iump in, that five of the seven Trumpets namely,
mentioned Reu. 8. and 9. have already sounded, and that we of these times are
fallen into the days of the voice of the sixth Trumpet, the seventh and last
being thought will be the Archangels Trumpet that shall sound to judgment:
which if so, our inference then how easy, that Christ cannot be far off now.

But what think you rather thirdly of the accomplishment Reas. 3.
of most those signs foretold in Scripture, as forerunners of Christ's second
coming, betokening not the certainty only, but the undoubted propinquity
thereof, though indeterminate: will not the real and true impletion of these
conclude his neerenesse? Survey particulars, General Apostasy, Revelation of
Antichrist, Reviving of the Gospel, Depth of Security, Ripeness of sin, and
some others.

1 General Apostasy, that which Saint Paul mentions, Sign 1.
as in the (1 Timothy 4. 1. 2.) so especially (2 These. 2. 3.) where treating
somewhat of the day of judgment (whereof the Thessalonians had been by false
teachers half possessed that it should falin their very life time) that day
(says he) shall not come (...), except there come a falling away first. Which
defection if with Ambrose, Haymo and others Ambr. in 2. These Haymo in locu^.
Beda.
you conceive a political only, in the revolt of Kingdoms many from the Roman
Empire; why? such a defection, has it not been long since made; when as (the
Empire having been miserably battered by the Western invasions of Goths and
Vandals, and by the Eastern of Turks and Tartars) those Kingdoms that had
erewhile been brought under its yoke of tribute and subjection (as France,
England, Spain, Lumbardy, Denmark, Sweden, and others) falling therefrom, and
upon this advantage resuming their ancient Polity and State, became as now they
be, vndepending, or absolute Monarchies in themselves? But if an
Ecclesiastical defection or an Doctissimi qui^, Apostasiam hanc interpretantur
de defectione plurimorum a vera catholica Christiana fide and religione. Zanch.
1 Timothy 4 1. (...).
Apostasy spiritual (that which Writers most both modern and ancient do
jointly pitch on as the Apostles meaning) standing in a general defection from
faith and religion catholic, taught in Scriptures; has not such a defection
behapned likewise? I appeal to the Oriental Churches planted first by the
Aposties hands themselves; how ouer*run now with the blasphemous dreams of
their Prophet Mahomet! I appeal to the Occidentall: what a notorious revolt
has there been made from their primitive faith and purity? Is It not evidence
sufficient, the universal leprosy of Heresy and impurity that has so
ouergrowne the whole body of the Church of Rome, that for these many years not
one print almost of pristine soundness can be espied? Is It not evidence
sufficient, those infinite (...), superstitious will worships, and traditionall
inventions of men, that since the first 600 years have by the usurped authority
of the Bishop of Rome prevailed and gotten head in the Western Church? Is It
not evidence sufficient, those innumerable errors not circumstantiall only,
but fundamental, and these expressly or consequentially, so at least, confirmed
now by their Trent Anathemaes, as their resolved doctrines, and the peremptory
Tenants of their Church: (their Justification by works, Popes supremacy and
infallibility, merit, freewill, satisfaction, supererogation, worship and
invocation of Saints, purgatory, prayers to and for the dead, adoration of the
Eucharist, Transubstantiation, private Masses, pardons, indulgences, and
caetera pecora campi) in all which have they not left their first estate?
palpably deuiated from plain rule of Scripture, and fallen from that first
Roman faith and worship taught them once by Paul in his Epistle to Romans?
whereby that Bethel once, how is it become a Bethauen now, and that City that
was once Faithful, now a Strumpet? I spare prolixity in a fact so plain: But
do ye see what issue? The Apostasy by Paul foretold then has already been,
and so one forerunner of Christ's second coming passed; must we not henceforth
then look for Christ? But

2 With this Paul connexeth our second prognostique, Sign 2.
the revelation of Antichrist, the head indeed of that forenam'd Apostasy, when
as (2 These. 2. 3.) that day (says he) shall not come, except first that man of
sin be revealed, that son of perdition. Now can we have him brought plainer
upon the worlds Stage, plainer discovered then he is already? I mean not in 2
These. 2. Reu. 13. and 17.
the Turk (to whom the great Antichrists description made by Paul and John are
not truly competible) I mean not in some individual Jew of the tribe of Dan,
of a virgin borne by the Devils help, to sit at Jerusalem, whom Enoch and
Eliah forsooth returning from the terrestrial Paradise, must buckle with three
years and half before Christ's Coming, Bellarmines Chimera; But that Beast
that Saint John Bellar. De Romans Pont. lib. 3. Reu. 13. 11* Reu. 17.
saw horned like a lamb, buttongu'd like a Dragon; that purple strumpet and
whore of Babylon, that monster of Luciferian pride, mounted upon the
seauen-headed Beast, or seauen-hill'd City, the Pope or Reu. 17. 7. 9. 18.
Papacy of Rome. For I demand who is the Antichrist if not he that sitting in
the Temple of God, and seated in his chair of Pestilence (covertly at least)
opposes Christ in all his offices, and exalts himself above all Kings and
Emperors, that are called gods? Who Is the Antichrist, if not he that being but
a silly man, yet claims all power both in heaven and 2 These. 2. 4:
earth, makes laws of his own to bind men's consciences, and dispenses when
he lists with the breach of Gods? that vsurps authority to forgive sins, to
put down Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms, claymes supremacy Monarchical over
the whole earth, both in spirituals and temporals, as Christ's Vicar general on
earth? Who Is the Antichrist, if not he that sets up a new sacrifice
propitiatory for sin, preferres his Decrees and traditions before Gods
written word, makes himself the infallible Interpreter of holy Scripture, and
supreme Judge of controversies? Who Is the Antichrist, if not he that mangles
Christ's Sacraments as he pleases, adds new of his own, and maintains flat
idolatry both in the breaden host, in the invocation of the dead, and worship
of Saints relics, images: forbids marriage, commands conscientiall abstinence
from meats, seduceth men by lying miracles, and has 1 Timothy 4. 3.
drank himself drunk with the blood of the Saints? If John Bishop of
Constantinople, that for a season Ego fidenter dico, quisquis se u niversalem
Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit. Creg. Papa l. 6. Ep. 30. de Johan. Constantinop.
only claimed the title of Sacerdos universalis, universal Bishop, was by Pope
Gregory's confident assertion Praecursor Antichristi, the Forerunner of
Antichrist; then the Bishops of Rome that since Boniface the third have ever
used this title, are that Antichrist indeed: So that we doubt not with him in
Aventinus to auerre, Papam esse Antichristum, that the Petrus Johan. apud
Aver^inum
Pope is Antichrist: which Antichrist as he was conceived even in the Apostles
days, at what time the mystery of iniquity was working, strove unto birth 2
These 27.
for 300 years after by aspired superiority between the Patriarchall Sees:
borne about Constantius reign, when that sounded from heaven, Seminatum est
venenum in Ecclesia, poison is sown in the Church: Platina in ult. Siluest.
Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. 25. Reu. 13. 18.
Christened (as I may say it) by Irenaeus with the Beasts numerall name,
Lateinos, whose Church has been called the Latin Church, and whose Liturgy
yet is Latin all: So in Boniface the third was he set up in his throne, when
stilled by that parricide Phocas Emperor, Episcopus Oecumenicus, Occumenicall
or universal Bishop: but then especially more openly revealed, then in his
flourishing prime, when afterward out of the Empires ruins or at least
translation increased, with secular dominion, possessed with both the swords,
decreed (...), the infallible In Council Lateran. An. 1516.
and unerring Judge of all controversies, from whom no appeal, and superior to
all general Councels. So then Antichrist is revealed, our second prognostique
of our Saviors second coming. Who as he has been mortally wounded since
Luthers time, by the sincere preaching of the Gospel: so the Lord (we trust)
will go on daily more and more to consume with the spirit of his mouth, and
destroy utterly with the brightness of his coming, which 2 These. 2. 8.
whether the Lord be now about to do, conjectures are not improbable: only I
refer unto your secret thoughts what God is acting by the hand of Sweden.

3 The wonderful reuining of the Gospel in most Sign 3.
parts of the Christian world. I mean not here that preaching of the Gospel
whereof our Savior speaks (Mat. 24. 14.) that the Gospel should be preached
in all the world, and then should the end come; (conceived by some both
Protestants and Papists an undoubted praeludium of Christ's coming to
judgment:) that (says Chrysostom) was fulfilled in the Chrysostom. in Mat. 24.
Apostles days, through whose Ministry the Gospel was come into all the then
inhabited world, and Col. 1. 6.
then came the end that our Savior meant (...) (says Theophilact) (...), not
of the world, Theoph. in Mat.
but of Jerusalem. That reviving rather mean I, even that glorious proruption
of the Gospels light from amidst the foggy mists of Popish darkness, which S.
John foresaw should break out upon the Church toward the end of the world,
intimated by that Angel (Rev. 14. 6. 7.) that in the midst of the beasts or
Antichrists persecution, was sent with the everlasting Gospel to preach to
them that dwelt on the earth to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and
people; saying, fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
judgment is come: Where (in the unanimous judgment of best Scholiasts) the
Gospels new Pareus Omnes in hoc concordant Angelum hunc representare
predicatores Evangelij temporibus Antichristi. in Apoc.
breaking out by the Ministers of reformation is foretold to befall the Church a
little before Christ's hour of judgment. If so, consider thus; Have not the
bright shining beams and Sun light of the Gospel broken wonderfully out for
this last hundred and odd years after its long eclipse and obscuration under
the interposed veyles of Popish errors? Have not the Scriptures of late by Gods
mercy vindicated their primitive liberty after so long imprisonment under a
strange or unknown tongue, false glosses, Munkish postils and interpretations?
Three hundred and threescore years since or upward it dawned in the Waldenses.
Two hundred and threescore years since the Sun arose in Wicklif, and after
successively by Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, others, how it
has (...) shined more and more unto this perfect day? So that now (blessed be
God) it is got up into the very Zenith and vertical point of our Meridian, where
it diffuseth and darts abroad its enlightening and refreshing beams into the
whole Hemisphere of the Christian world, increasing onward daily even unto
savage climates, as if God meant now speedily to finish his work, to cut it
short, and to dispatch with a trice what he meant to do in gathering by his
word those that are to be gathered unto his kingdom. And is this no warrant
for conjecture that Christ's hour of judgment hastneth? It Is a sign (we say)
the day light draws on ward nearer and nearer by how much thicker and thicker
the Cocks of the Village crow: why not this too a probable sign that Christ's
great day is well on toward dawning, when Gods Ministers every where do preach
so frequently?

4 That general sleep of deep security, like that Sign 4. and 5.
of the old world before the Flood, and that fearful Deluge of all-ouerflowing
sin, foretold both of them toward Christ's second coming: the first (Mat.
24. 38.) the other (2 Timothy 3. 2. 3.) Now what prediction in all Gods Book was
ever fulfilled, if not this? Do ye but let loose your thoughts a little and
survey abroad; Did ever any times since the creation of the world sleep so
securely under the hatches of outward peace without fear of imminent storms,
or bathed so fearelesly against the warm Sun of fleshly ease, prosperity,
Epicurisme? Were ever times so generally given up to an insensible
fearelesnesse of the Almighties wrath, so engulft over head and ears in the
dead sea of security, as now they be? Tell, did ever any age attempt such
Babels, such montanous and prodigious proiects of bedlam outrages, let loose
such reins to all heauen-affronting desperate deboistnesse. was so
unrecoverably swallowed up into the insatiable gulf of damned profaneness as
ours now? Let but Drunkenness speak if ever it sunk into that loathsome fog of
brutish baseness as now it does; Let Pride speak if ever it hoyst up such
topsailes, hung out such flanting flags of profeil't vanity; Let Whoredom
speak if ever so shamelesly it ietted the streets, or blushed so little at
discovered filthiness; Let Covetousness, let Usury speak (though it is like
they be loath) if ever their sharp set appetites were so greedily mad upon a
nunquam satis, or triflingly slighted either conscience or Religion, when
standing with profit in competition. Beloved (horresco referens) never was the
Gospel or the sincere and powerful preaching thereof exposed to that scorn
that now it is: Never holiness so disdainfully trampled on both by scums and
great ones as now it is. The Lords day never so irreligiously dashed out of
countenance by profane libertinisme, or groaning under such cart-loads of
countenanc't dishonors as now it does. Surely if ever the world were up to its
full measure of al impiety, the harvest of sin ever full ripe, it is now; and
can we think Christ's sickle then not ready even now to be put in to cut and
hew down this luxuriant crop of the worlds profaneness by his instant approach
to judgment?

I let pass Christ's predictions of earthquakes, wars, and rumors of wars, as
either pertaining to Mat. 24. 7. Acts 2. 19 20.
times preceding Ierusalems destructions, or if to the end of the world, not
more plainly then woefully fulfilled daily. I let pass concomitant signs,
contiguous with our Saviors coming (fearful alterations in the air,
darkning of the Sun, the Moons turning into blood, Stars falling from
heaven) for these Mat 24. 29.
look we when the door is opened, and Christ steps over threshold: A general
calling and conversion of Sign 6.
the Jews, that is thought the last memorable forerunner of Christ's second
coming, that mystery (as it is thought) that Paul would have the Romans not be
ignorant of, for prevention of insultments over the Jews, (Romans 11. 25) But of
this alij atque alij, aliud atque aliud, diverse men diuetsly; Some thus think;
That this mystery is none other but a particular calling D. Williams of the
true Church, l. 5. c. 19 20. Marlorat. ex Hyperio and Musculo.
intimated of an elect remnant that God reserved to himself among them after
their national reiection; which calling is successively to be continued until
the full number of those, that of the Gentiles are to be saved, shall come in,
that is, full to the worlds end, before which time the fullness of the Gentiles
cannot come in. Others otherwise. Not a continued calling Iunius. D. Willet.
Aretius.
at all times, but a general calling into a flourishing Christian Church of
their own in the last times. I Will not set these two opinions together by the
ears. Thus resolve we; If such a calling or conversion of Jews the Apostle
intimates, which has at all times been successively continued since their
general reiection, of some elect indiuiduals namely among them to the faith
(which is not only the judgment of many learned, but very consonant to the
whole Chapters drift) then favors this place no prediction of any thing to
behappen Jews more at the last times then has at any time; and so their
conversion no more a sign of Christ's second coming then is a continued
conversion of some individual Papists to the true faith since the general
revolt. But if on contrary not the continued conversion of some scattered
indiuiduals, but a general recollection of the whole nation into one visible
flourishing Christian Church before Christ's coming be conceived (though
perhaps not necessarily) the Apostles meaning; though we grant it a sign, yet
as for the manner of it no man knows how it may be done, so neither for the
time how soon or suddenly. So that the issue will be, that notwithstanding
this imagined return general of Jews not yet fulfilled, nothing hinders but
that Christ may be very near at hand, even before the door.

Reflect now back.* Unite all together in your thoughts. And now that you see
all but one at most of Christ's forerunners passed, (...) know that he is near,
even at the door. Mat. 24. 33.

But what mean I ranging in such spacious fields of evidence for this truth,
since that (as Paul said to Agrippa) (...), I know you believe it. Give Acts
26. 27.
leave to draw homeward then, and from these premises to lodge some practique
inferences in your souls and consciences.

And here (Beloved) shall I begin with that use of our Saviors neernesse, that
Saint Peter presses (2 Pet. 3. 11.) What manner of persons namely ought we
then to be in all manner of conversation and godliness? or with that which
Paul and James suggest, (Heb. 10. 30. 37. Iam. 5. 7. 8.) Patience therefore,
courage, cheerfulness, resolution, constancy under cross, for that the
coming of the Lord draws nigh, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry: or with that which Saint John intimates (Rev. 22. 20.) doubling of
our desires therefore, and of our spiritual faintings and longings after
Christ's glorious appearing in act? I confess these uses as for deduction
genuine natural, so for contemplation sweetly comfortable, for Christian
practice needfully considerable; But thus,

First, what floods of terror should this Doctrine Use 1.
of the great Judge his neernesse sluice into the flintiest heart of any
impenitent Belialist that lies yet wallowing in the stinking puddle of his
resolved profaneness under the insensible guilt and spreading gangrene of his
sins unpurged, unreformed? A guilty malefactor do but tell him of the Judge
in circuit, and how trembles he at the tiding? and can such hear of Christ's
near approach, the dreadful Judge of all the world, and not quake and
tremble? What City's that, that when some irresistible and all conquering Genesis
18. 25.
enemy is got nigh the gates, and ready to enter will not begin to startle and
bestirre themselves? and can such stretched out on the bed of security, take
such deep naps in their sins when Christ their victorious enemy, the Almighty
conqueror of the whole world stands now before the door, and with his rod of
iron (unless repentance prevent) is ready Psalm. 2. 9.
to crush their bones in pieces, and as a Judge implacable turn them headlong
into the horrid and easlesse dungeon of everlasting darkness? O that I were
some strong-lung'd Trumpeter amidst the armies of Israel, some able Belman that
could ring this peale but loud enough in the deaf ears of all such graceless
and ungodly securelings, that thus put far from them this evil day, that
letting all thought of future Amos 6. 3.
summons to Christ's great Assize, run at six and seuens, mind naught for the
present but their bathing and drenching in the full streams of pleasure,
bravery, profits, and other fleshly contentments, never dream of judgment, or
of Christ's neerenesse to it? Howsoever, stands here any such that looks me now
Sic loquuntur Rabbini cum auditorem ad diligentem rei considerationem invitare
solent Schiudl. Isa. 28. 1. Isa. 5. 22.
in face, or hears me speaking, (...) come and hear. Stand forth a while, and
let me bespeak your thoughts a little.

You drunkards of Ephraim first, and tospots Aleknights, that are so mighty to
yot down drink, and to tun up Ale by gollons into your fleshy barrels; that
relish no felicity beyond an Ale-bench, and empty out all both your gifts and
means and credit into the pot and pipe; O that your thoughts when afafter your
drunken naps returned to themselves again, could but look forth a little and
ken this neernesse of Christ the general Judge of men, that ere long will dash
all your pots in pieces, will strat your merriments, dissolve your drunken
crews, and send you packing where not a drop either of small drink or water to
cool your bladdering tongues. The like thought made Belshazzar tremble, and
will it not you?

You proud Fantastiques next, you generation of Dan. 5. 6.
light* skirt Fashionists that by your mostrous disguised trappings have clean
dashed modesty out of countenance, and for want of virtue, the ancient Iuy of
true Nobility, have naught else to show for Gentilities challenge but slashes,
cuts, louelocks, strips and gorgets, etc. O could you but believe Christ's
instant neernesse! but believe the hastening of his day of vengeance, when all
your changeable bravery and flanting vanity must be taken down, your bushy
plumes be made ly in dust, your hayry fleeces be torn from your heads as fit
tow for fire, and your new* fangled immodest fashions (whose weekly variety
has well nigh non-plust the devils quick'st invention) shall be plucked off
your backs, and your selves stripped naked of all your ornaments, be made stand
pewling, howling at his bar of judgment. Paul's bare discourse of this same
judgment, though far off then, made proud Foelix tremble. Cannot the real
neernesse of it now, make your hearts to quiver? Acts 24. 25.


You unclean Aldulterers and impure Libidinists whose eyes are full of lusts,
and hearts mind nothing 2 Pets 2. 14.
but the bed of strange love; you that wayt for the twilight when none may see,
skulk into corners to Job. 24. 15.
conceal your dalliance, and assemble your selves by troops into harlots
houses. What a cooling card Ier. 5. 7.
should this doctrine be to your lustful heates, your day of account that is
just at hand, Christ the dreadful Judge that stands now at door! at whose
fearful appearing the filthy books of your polluted consciences must be al
vnclaspt, your hidden works of darkness to your eternal shame be laid all
open to the world, and your selves, that now so burn with the fire of lust, be
burnt ere long in the fire of hell.

You irreligious Sabbath-libertines, you that so nauciate Gods sacred
ordinances, and as if the Sabbath were but a ceremony, or rather some feast of
Bacchus, do by your vncurb'd disorders make the Lords day the devils, the
market day of your souls a play day for your lusts; come hear and tremble.
Behold that Judge at hand, even at your heels, who himself will vindicate the
dishonours of his day, convert your pastimes into the sad dumps of horror, and
for the holy rests that you have denied him, adiudge you to eternal
restlesnesse in the lake of hell.

You black wide-mouthed swearers, that from the open sepulchers of your impure
throats belch out vnmeasurably the Sulphurious damps of blasphemies, oaths and
curses, that have more of God and Christ the Judge in your tongues then in your
hearts, and think that discourse wants grace that wants oaths; come, dare
ye any longer spit such dishonours in the face of him that is now at hand, as a
swift witness against you, and will exact a most Mal. 3. 5. Mat. 12. 36.
strict account even of every idle word: Or can you hear of him (whom you so
often by your oaths and curses rampant have attempted as it were to pluck down
from heaven) now ready in flaming fire to break through the clouds, to erect
his Throne for 2 These. 2. 8.
judgment, to summon you all to his great Assize, and your silent thoughts
within you not gush or tremble?

You flinty hard-hearted Usurers, you that have enlarged your desires as hell,
that are as death and are never satisfied, that lend your money to men, but
Hab* 2. 5.
your souls to the Devil, the Devils chief stewards, or rather Thieves, that
have skild your selves for theeuery, from Magic Principles (it is like) and
have learned to rob by the black Art: when sitting warmclad in your counting
house, or at the fire, not wagging a foot, to any man's seeming, can yet play
the thieves twenty, forty, an hundred miles off. You that with your iron teeth
and brazen nails, do grind the faces of the poor, and raven like Vultures
upon the Isa. 3. 15.
guts of the needy; that can gallop post to hell, though as heavy laden with
poor men's curses, as your coffers with bags. Oh that your hearts were but
capable of my Texts impression! or could believe the exceeding neerenesse of
the great Judge his coming, who (if you run on) is sure to meet you (far
worse then did the Angel, Balaam) with a vengeance: at Numb. 22.
which time, what, O what a terrible thing will it be eternally to be adjudged
to that fiery furnace, where your souls must burn, your bodies fry, your
coin melt, your bills, and bonds, and pawnes, and morgages, Mat. 13. 42.
be cast in to add fuel for a greater blaze: and where a guilty stinging
conscience, as a greedy worm must be ever gnawing upon your fresh bleeding
hearts, as here your remorselesse consciences did like vultures gnaw upon
poor men's bones.

You graceles scoffers, and persecutors of the Saints, you sons of Ismael,
and brood of Herod, that with the malice of your railing tongues slat up the
dirt of reproach into the face of purity, and flout at that in others without
which your selves shall never see God, that brand the sincere and discreetest
endeavors Heb. 12. 14.
of a mortified life with the opprobrious stigme of needless preciseness, and
(to make it more odious) Puritanisme, though nere so Canonical. Come hear and
know you first borne and elder sons of Belial, your judgment sleeps not. For
he comes, Psalm. 96. 13:
for he comes that will judge the earth, before whom mockers shall be made
to know that holiness, not Atheism, is the way to heaven; when those whom now
you run such descants on, and with bitterest sarcasmes laugh out of
countenance, accounting their lives (with the fools in Wisdom) Wisd. 5.
madness, your own eyes shall with envy and wonder see numbered among the
children of God, and their lot to be among the Saints.

You covetous pinching muck-wormes that pant Amos 2. 7.
so after the dust of the earth, and bury your hearts in dunghils, that make
the world your God, and your slave your master, that make gold your hope, and
say of fine gold, thou art our confidence; that thirst after profit as your
sweetest happiness, and sell a good Job. 31, 24.
conscience for a thing of naught; that are indebted to none more then your
selves, and do run in arrerages to their backs and bellies that depend upon
you; that close up your ears as fast as your purses from the cries of the
poor, and bethink each ex*pence by your life time to a pious use as the nex
way to bring both you and yours to the parish. Lo the Judge at hand that will
require an account how you employed his talents, and can your hearts endure or
can your hands be strong in the day that the Lord will deal with you, when from
his dreadful Throne he Ezekiel 22. 14.
shall thunder, saying, Come, where is the honor you have done your maker with
any your substance? Pro. 3. 9.
where is any my members that you have sed when Mat. 25.
hungry, that you have clothed when naked, that you have visited when sick?
when you for anguish hanging your heads, shall curse your covetousness to the
pit of hell. Your own experience shall tell you then, how little good 'twill
do you to have had the whole world when (alas) you must lose your souls? Mar.
8. 36.


You griping Nimrods and kine of Bashan, that oppress the poor and crush the
needy, that build houses Amos 4. 1.
by unrighteousness, and chambers by wrong, that raise your estates out of
others ruins, that use your neighbors service without wages, and give him not
for his work, rack your rents on tenter-hookes, Ier. 22. 13. Ibid.
and extract fuel out of your tenants brows and bones for your excessive
pride and bravery; that couetmens fields with Ahab, and will take them by
deceit or violence; that even eat the flesh of the people, and fley their skin
from off them, that break the backs of your neighbors, and chop them in pieces
as for the pot. With what face dare you longer Mic. 3. 3.
lift up your horns, and like cloud brushing Cedars so insolently ouer-looke
your near bordering shrubs, and thickets of the forest? Well, know that he is
at hand whose coming is terrible as an army with banners, before whom the very
mountains quake, and heavens tremble: he is at hand that will Cant. 6. 10.
put bridles between your teeth, and bo^e your jaws with hooks, that will
chase you for fear, and for Ezekiel. 38. 4.
the glory of his majesty into the holes of rocks, and into the caves of the
earth, when he shall but once arise to shake terribly the earth. Isa. 2. 19.


But whither swim I in particulars? would God (in a word) both you and all such
others as never yet laid their ways to heart to put away the evil from before
their eyes, could no more but this, call off your thoughts a little from all
other objects, and in some silent night enforce upon your hearts some lively
apprehension, but either of that general summons ere long before Christ the
Judge, whence none exempted, or but that strict examination of each your ways,
where not a thought shall escape, or but your unanswerable conviction, when not
the least excuse shall be found; or but Christ's thundering prolation of that
most just and deserved Sentence, Go ye cursed, etc. or rather the merciless
and horrid execution of that sentence upon all wicked and impenitent
reprobates; when from the place of judgment, roaring, blaspheming, cursing,
they shall be haled and dragged by their tormented tormentors, the grisly hags
and devils of hell, into that burning Tophes, that lake of fire and brimstone,
where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out. Would not these
thoughts Mar. 9. 44:
go nigh to undo the covenant between you and hell, call home your wandering
affections from the pleasures of sin, and gally back your galloping
resolutions from out of the broad way to hell? Or but thus, suppose (a
supposition too, that for any thing we know, some of us that stand here living,
may in esse see ere long) suppose (I say) that at this instant, while I am
speaking and your selves hearing, you should look suddenly up, and lo both
heaven and earth beginning to blaze, the Sun darkning, the Moon becoming
blood, and Christ the Judge in flaming fire, with his train of Angels
appearing in the clouds, the white Throne now setting, the Archangell sent out,
the Trumpet sounding, the summons given, and the dead over whom ye now sit or
stand peering up from out their graves by little and little, (their heads
first, then their shoulders, their whole bodies next) ready to go forth the
Church to meet Christ in the air; would not your blood gush, the reds of your
guilty consciences rise hereat? would not the lockings of your joints be ready
unloose, and your knees smite one against another? would you not stand as men
struck in head, or as people at your wits end for fear what would become of
you, be ready to run every one (who could) to seek holes to hide in? How, O
how would now your sins allowed, vnpurg'd, unrepented, rise up in arms
suddenly, and making with full speed toward each your minds and memories,
raise vproares there and hurliburlies inexpressible! How would you now cry out,
what, O what have we done, woe, woe, unto us, for the day Ier. 8. 6. Reu 6. 17.
of the Lord is come, even the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand? Would these things (were they really in act) thus startle your
thoughts, and shall their undoubted imminency or neernes deter you nothing from
your sins! Well, thus I dismiss you. Resolutions to sin without speedy
repentance shall find that day of Christ's appearing (...), as Chrysostom
terms it a Chrysostom. Hom. in Secund. Aduent. Dom.
heavy day, yea the hea^iest day that ever was not of feasting, be sure, but
mourning; not of laughter, but howling: a day not of mercy, butiustice, wrath,
distress, trouble, desolation, darkness, gloomynes, even to all such foolish
virgins as neglecting tendered Zeph. 1 15. Mat. 25. 3.
opportunities, shall without the oil of repentance and faith in their lamps,
be found unready, unprovided. But

Secondly, howeuer this doctrine of our Saviors neerenesse sounds little
comfort to any impenitent Use 2.
wretches that ly secure in the indulged practice of continual sinning, yet am
I not a messenger of sweetest tidings to every penitent and humbled soul among
you reconciled to God in Christ? What, O what refreshing torrents of
transporting gladness may the meditation hereof (me thinks) stream into the
channel of his heart? Why come then, rouse up your thoughts a little, and
contemplate a while upon that heavenly and sweetest happiness of yours ready
now to be revealed. What? is Christ so near? even at the door? Think then
with me but on your tedious warfare that shall now be accomplished, your Isa.
40. 2. Reu. 7. 17.
painful sufferings that now shall end, your invincible though heart-sadding
corruptions that now shall vanish, your tears of sorrow that shall be now
wiped off, your vnpittied grieuances that now shall be all remedied. Think
with me, but upon your crown of righteousness that shall be now put on, that
neuer-setting day of happy eternity that shall now arise, your heavenly triumph
that shall now begin, your happy exchange of the rags of sinful frailty for
the welcome roabes of refining glory. O that glorious procession of yours ere
long amid the singing Saints, going forth to meet him coming to be your Judge,
who came at first to be your Savior! O those extaticall leapes of your
rejoicing hearts at the first aspect of the face of Christ, those silent holy
wonders at that dazzling majesty that was once so clouded with deep obscurity?
Or think if you will but upon those rauishing embracements that then shall be
be tween Christ and you, those Angelical welcomes, those Hierarchique
greetings between Christ's train and you, those melodious raptures and songs of
deliverance wherewith the whole army of Angels and crowned Saints shall with
you congratulate the approach of Christ. Are these no motives to fire your
hearts with holy gladness at our Saviors neernesse? I let pass the sights
that shall then be seen, the splendour of Christ's Throne that shall be then
erected, the admirable order of his Judiciary proceedings that shall then be
used, Christ's gracing your persons in the very face of your foes by your high
adua^cement, when taken up to be Assessours with him in judgment upon the
wicked, privileges of bliss transcendent beyond expression. Tell me then, can
a betrothed virgin that longs for union with her beloved, grieve at the near
approach of her marriage day, a captive be heavy when his day of deliverance is
come, a weather-beaten mariner be pensive at the sight of his haven, an exile
be sad when his coronation day draws near? and should any penitent renewed
humble soul that has made peace with God be less then triumphantly joyous at
Christ's near approach, that is his haven after so many tempests, his crown
after his disconsolate banishment, his mystical, yet sweetly familiar husband
that unto all eternity will communicate the delights of that heavenly love that
passes knowledge. What Hosannaes were sung at Christ's riding to Jerusalem but
upon an Ass, Mat. 21. 9.
and meanly, and no Halleluiahs now at his hastened coming in the clouds
mounted on the wings of the wind, and crowned with the refulgent beams of
sparkling glory? when but the Arc of the covenant of the Lord came into the
camp of Israel, what echoes rang the earth at their rejoicing shouts! But now
a greater then the Arc is coming, Christ the 1 Samuel 4. 5.
son of God himself, and not as at first, poor, mean, contemptible, but
clothed and decked with majesty and excellency, arrayed with glory and beauty,
and this to pronounce that gladsome sentence Job. 40. 10.
that shall put you into the eternal abode of bliss unchangeable, Come ye
blessed of my father, inherit the Mar. 25. 34.
kingdom etc. and should we not (...) Luke 21. 28.
(...), look up, lift up our heads for joy, as knowing the day of our
consummate redemption hereby draws nigh? Go let Haman alone with his
Courtpreferments, Belshazzar make merry with his magnificent Hest. 3. 1. Dan.
5. 1. 1 Samuel 25. 2.
feasts, let Nabal alone gladding himself with his wealthy in comes: Christ,
when but once appearing in his glory, brings thee other aduancements then in
the Courts of Princes, other dainties then at great men's tables, other riches
then in the chests of worldlings, that soule-sweetning peace that passes all
understanding, that enrauishing joy that is unspeakable, and full of glory.
Come, what is it that Phil. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
should hinder then from swallowing down this doctrine of our Saviors
neerenesse to judgment, as the sweetest cordial that was ever taken. But let
me ad to your thoughts; Is not the day approaching, when no sooner shall
Christ, that stands now at the door, step in to judgment, but that your
mortality shall be quite swallowed up of life, and your souls and bodies 2
Cor. 5. 4.
set fully free from all sin and suffering, from all fear of hell, of Satan,
and loss of Gods love, shall with Iubiles and songs of triumph from the Throne
of judgment be vsher'd along through the clouds into the great Kings orient
Presence chamber of sweet eternity: where once set, O the golden paue*ments
that your feet shall walk on! the beauteous objects that your eyes shall feed
on! the sweetest harmonies that your ears shall hear, and be enamored on!
the fullness of content that your souls shall joy in! the heavenly companies
with whom (locking arm in arm) you shall follow the Lamb where ere he goes! O
those palms of victory that shall be put in your hands, those rich massy
Diadems that shall be set on your heads, those long white roabes of purity that
shall be put on your bodies, O those Crystal streams of undefiled pleasure
that your souls shall swim in; running sweetly-fresh along the banks of
eternity from out that inexhaust fountain of life and beauty, the
neuer-too-much-admired Trinity! Come, can you hear of this, and your hearts
not be enlarged with joy, or your mouths with songs at the undoubted tidings
of Christ's instant neernesse, when the happy fruition of all these privileges,
with thousands more, shall be fully exhibited? Peter enrauished, said, It Is good
to be here, when he saw but Mat. 17. 4.
a glimpse; what will you say when at Christ's appearing you shall have the full
view, nay and fruition too of all his glory?

But now for general instruction, thirdly. Since Christ's so near, even at
the door, let me advise with Use 3.
Amos, (...) prepare to meet thy God O Israel. High time to look about when
the enemy Amos 4. 12.
stands at gate, and for malefactors to study or prepare their answer when the
Judge is ready to sit. You have been praemoniti, forewarned; be now
praemuniti, forearm'd too, like wise virgins, with your lamps trimmed, your
loins girt, your lights burning, to watch and await his coming. Once thus.
That day cannot be far, and like a thief in the night, it will
comesuddenly; which if it prevent our preparation, actum est, we are undone for
ever. Come then in all humble boldness in my masters name, I Reu. 16. 15.
challenge all your resolutions to the speedy practice of these specialties.

1 Preaduertency. Make Christ's coming the continual subject of your watching
thoughts; be ever musing on it in time ^^orehand. (...) minus visa eminus,
dangers forethought are better escaped; and Cities are safest when still
imagining the enemy at hand. (...) said a Father of the meditation Chrysostom.
of judgment, it preuents its danger as foresight of a pit the falling into
it. Set ye then Saint Ieromes Bell to each your ears, let that be always
pealing in your sleepy thoughts, a Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium, arise ye
dead, and come to judgment. It kept him waking; so it may do you.

2 Selfe-inspection. Officers if but coming to search, many hye home to see if
any thing be there like to be found upon them that is not fitting: Should we
not do so here? The Judge of all the world is even now at hand to search and
take view of all our ways. Go, speed you home then into your selves, (...)
lay each your hearts upon your ways. Take the candle of Gods word go
instantly, Hag. 1. 7.
look into the closets of each your consciences, search every corner of your
hearts, turn and toss up all the out rooms of your lives; see if any sin
lic lurking there indulged, allowed, cherished; pride hypocrisy, lust,
drunkenness, bribery, oppression, covetousness. No looking the Judge in face
with comfort, where none of Gods but the devils goods shall be found upon you.

3 Humiliation. He that would not then suffer for sin, must now sorrow for
sin. Go turn your heads into waters, and your eyes into fountains of
tears, (...) says Chrysostom. Before the Thrones be set up, set up Threnes,
or lamentations for your sins, both of hearts and lives. Go humble your
selves for the pride of your hearts, away with the spoils of the poor out of
your houses, mourn in secret for your oppressions: (...), be revenged of your
lusts in sackcloth and ashes: let your eyes run down with tears, and your
eyelids gush down with water that have erred through wine, and through strong
drink have been out of the way. With the Israelites lament after Isa. 28. 7.
1 Samuel 7. 2.
the Lord, sue out for peace ere the decree come forth; seek reconcilement
while he is yet in the way: enter resolutions, covenants of final farewels even
to the very darlings of your bosoms; (...), thus prevent the Judge his
coming. Nay slack no time. Too late to sue for peace when the battell's begun:
to stand wiping out blots and blurs when the bills must be taken, or think upon
weeding, when Christ's sickle shall be in a reaping.

4 Adherence to Christ crucified: Chicken, how hasten they when the Kite is
coming, under the wings of the Hen; and Doves to the clefts of the rocks when
the Eagle's in sight. So run you by faith unto Christ your Savior that
desire to speed well before Christ the Judge. Do thus in a word. Let your
humbled souls groaning under the heartpinching burdens of all your sins,
deuolue and throw themselves into the meritorious arms of your indulgent
Savior, bleeding for you on his cross: with wrestling Jacob enclaspe this
Angel of the New Genesis 32.
covenant, let not go til you have got his blessing. Send out your faith like
some Noah's Dove to return you Genesis 8. 11.
tidings by the Olive leaf of inward peace, whether the waters of Gods wrath
be all exhaled and dried up by him the Sun of righteousness: with good
Iehosaphat what ere troops be coming, say, (...) yet our eyes are upon thee.
Christ in the Gospel is Gods present to penitent sinners: make faith your hand
to reach out and take him. Christ is that brazen Serpent lift up for healing;
let faith be the eye of your sin-bitten souls to look up unto him. Christ is
a rock, your faith must hide you in its clefts. Christ is the branch, your
faith must lodge you under its shadow. He Is a Vine, your faith must insert you
into its stock. No condemnation to them that are thus by faith in Christ, (come
when he will) but passage rather from death to life.

5 Moderation. It Was Christ's own caveat; Take heed to your selves lest at any
time your hearts be ouercharg'd Luke 21. 34.
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares. Go then, lure off the eager and greedy Vultures of
your immoderate appetites from the carions of fleshly contents, pluck off your
horse-leech affections from the breasts of the world; pin up, diet your
insatiable desires from glutting on these things below; thrust through the
loins of your earthly-distracting cares; crucify, strangle your delights in
the bewitching pleasures and profits of this life. Full stomachs dispose to
sleep, do not fit for watching; and woe be to you if Christ step in and take
you napping.

6 Sanctity. You must now walk with God, that would then sit with Christ; now
sow in the spirit, Gal 6. 8.
that would then reap life; now write up the fair characters of good works in
the books of your consciences that would have them fayrely legible at the day
of account, to your everlasting comfort. Go on then like wise Merchants,
emproue your stocks of grace, adorn your high calling with all saving
fruitfulnes in well doing. (...) (says an Ancient) outrun your sins (as
John did Peter to Chrysostom. Ioh. 20. 4.
our Saviors Sepulcher) by an unwearied coursing on in the paths of piety to
God, mercy and love to your brethren. Calls not the Apostle eternal life the
crown of righteousness? righteousness must then 2 Timothy 4 8.
precede where the crown must follow; and if according to our works judgment
shall at last be executed, Romans 2. 6. Mat. 3 10.
that Axe, be sure, will spare no tree that bears bad fruit.

7 Time makes me let go a seventh; (...) Colos. 4. 2.
(...), continued assiduity in prayer, that which keeps in the fire of
habitual graces, and enliuens desires of Christ's second coming.

8 Faithful attendance on each your places, that is the eighth and last.
School boys when but hearing their Master's coming, how hye they to their
places, and ply their books, lest taken tardy: and stands it not us in hand
now that Christ stands at the door, with the strayned nerves of our best
industry and faithfulness to be doing in our places, those especially wherein
God has set us for special advancement of his glory? Account must be given
up of Luc. 16. 2. Mat. 25. 19. Mat. 24 46.
each our Stewardships, the employment of each our talents must be most
strictly looked into. Blessed, O blessed then shall that servant be whom when
his Master comes, he shall find so doing.

Go on then first ye sons of Levi, who have submitted your shoulders to the
great work of preparing souls for the judgment of the great day, go on (...),
as good workmen that shall not need at that day to be ashamed; approve both
your selves and 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Cor 4. 2. Heb. 13. 17. Zach. 11. 7.
doctrine to God and your peoples consciences; (...), as they that must give
account. Take to you Zacharies two staves Beauty, Bands, Mercy and Judgment,
and feed your slocks. Preach the word. Be instant in it, in season, and out of
season, that is, as the Syriaque ((...) bezabno wadlo zabno) seem 2 Timothy 4. 2.
to sound it, as well when the people will not abide to hear it, as when they
will. Let your Bells be heard in your sound of doctrine, your Pomegranates
seen in your patterns of godliness. Beloved, our Lord and Master is now
returning after his long absence, and stands at the door. His reward is with
him, either a crown incorruptible Reu 22. 12.
for our faithful labors in his Vineyard, or fullvials of wrath to bring upon
our heads, the blood of all those souls that through our insufficiency, Ezekiel.
33. 6.
lasinesse, scandalousnesse have miscarried, perished.

Go on you Heroes, you Ancients of the people, our worthy Magistrates, that
have taken the sword into your hands, and the government upon your shoulders;
vnhood your eyes to the sight of sin; vnsheath your swords and hew it in
pieces; do valiantly, as Gods Vicegerents, in your Masters cause, not fearing
the face of sin or men. Know this, Your places al with your exact accounts of
them must be given up before Christ the Judge that is now at the door, and ere
long will enter. And here give leave a little to be speak you Reverend and our
Learned Worthies, whom clad in Scarlet Majesty the supreme Judge of men has
placed as Judges on his political bench of judicature. What Iehosaphat to his,
let me to you our Judges, (...) take heed what ye do. It Is not for man but 2 Chronicles. 19 6.
for the Lord ye judge, whom be sure you have presentem inspectorem, futurum
Iudicem, your present be holder, and future Judge Set, continue then his fear
before your eyes. Take to you Heroiquespirits and rise up stoutly against the
monsters of this age, drunkenness, whoredom, murders, blasphemies, Sabbath
libertinisme, filching, swearing; Stand you in the stream a little, stop you
the current of the time. Be like this great Judge your Master, (...), whom
intuition neither of persons may sway, nor of gifts corrupt Let judge meant run
down as water (that is free for any) and righteousness as Amos 5. 24. Ephesians. 6.
9.
a mighty river (that fears no colors.) I Will add but this, what Paul to
Masters in behalf of servants, (...), so here, (...). Even you have a Judge in
heaven too, before whose judgment ere long your selves must stand as do
others here before yours.

And you our worthy Justices let me bespeak you too; Go on I beseech you to
make good your noble Titles by your practice, Doing Justice; We yield you your
honorable style, Custodes utriusque Tabuae. But Isa. 56. 1.
seek the promovall of Gods honor then; advance his worship in whose room
you be, and before whose dreadful Throne your selves must appear ere long.
Encourage virtue, look big on vice, set the point of your swords at the
breasts of those capcaine sins, dunken nesse, and profanation of the Lords
day. Let the attracting Loadstones of your good examples draw or rather win
conformity from the people; and practice not in your selves what you should
punish in others.

You learned Lawyers, Counselors, Atturneyes, Iury-men, and who ever else
whose concurrence needs for furthering an Assize, suffer you too (I beseech
you) a word in season. You are now preparing, to solicit causes some, some to
plead, some to search and enquire out matters of fact and misdemeanors: Take
this memento to the Castle with you. Christ's near at hand, even at the door,
and these for ought you know may be the very last acts, matters, causes, that
ever you are like to deal on. Do then uprightly; Fingite adstantem Judicem,
imagine Christ before you always, and as a Judge opening the door, and
stepping in to judgment. In a word, Consult with conscience, con science with
the word of God, lest when you have done pleading or dealing for others, none
at Christ's coming be found to plead for you. Take all in sum. Christ the
Judge stands before the door, will enter suddenly; in his hands the keys of
life and death, of salvation or damnation to every man woman and child in the
world. Be wise Amos 6. 31 Mar. 13. 37:
in time then, put not this evil day too far off. And what I say unto you, I
say unto all, watch. O Lord make, O make us fit and ready for this thy coming,
and then come when thou will, Even so come Lord Reu. 22. 20.
Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.
THE SPIRITVALL PLOWMAN. OR, THE ART OF Spiritual Fallowing.

Delivered in a Sermon at St Peter's in Exon, June 24. 1631 BY Rychard Peck,
Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods word at Columpton, in Devon.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for Ambrose Ritherdon, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Bull-head. 1632.

TO THE BEST AFFECTIoned, Mrs Mary Arscot, wife to the Right Worshipful Edmund
Arscot Esquire, High Sheriff of the County of Devon, true grace and glory.
Worthy Mistress,
IT may seem unsuitable with your Sex and Rank to commend a Treatise of
Fallowing to a Woman, such a Woman. But no matter. Women somewhere pretend this
way as much skill as men, and shame not sometimes to go forth into the field
to hacking. This poor messenger therefore admit I beseech you as from my
Master sent to hire you to work as well as others; if not to plowing, at lest
to hacking; but thus interpreting. The field you must work in must be your
heart; the furrows to be beaten up, your sins, corruptions, lusts; the sword
of the spirit (Gods word) your mattock; your task mortification. If wages you
look for, no doubt at Evening, when your work is ended, the Penny-Royall of
eternal life. Come, shame not such honest pains for your spiritual living;
We stick not oft-times other ways to bestow much more on temporal.

Your Worships in the best bond, Rychard Peck.
Columpton April 30. 1632.
Hosea 10. 12. Break up your fallow ground.
Man's heart in its first integrity was of so rich a mould, that as a field
which the Lord had blessed, without enforcement by any supernatural dressing,
it freely yielded the most goodly crops of all, even the fairest graces;
created (it seems) and and put into so divine a temper, that grace became as
natural then, and propagable as corruption now. Soon after when as that old
thief the Devil had by his serpentine subtilty beguiled man of this his
field, as Ahab Naboth of his Vineyard, and had but got it in possession, 'twas
marred instantly; of a fruitful field it became a wilderness, and ruinous
heaps of a well-watred garden. Since when, instead of the good wholesome fruit
of grace and righteousness, the natural burden thereof in all mankind has
been none else but the filthy stinking weeds of all sin and wickedness. So
that now, if ever we expect the harvest of any future happiness, we must bid
final farewell to all hopes of any inherent strength and natural power
thereunto, and must cast about for extrinsecall and aduentitiall helps, in
fallowing and plowing of this field up, whereby prepared and fitted for the
seed of saving grace, it may bring forth at last the happy harvest of eternal
peace, and joy, and glory. Break up your fallow ground.

For coherence of which words with former, I mind not to draw your thoughts
farther then this present verse, which is spent in two maine generals,

1 An Exhortation. 2 a Motive.
1 In the Exhortation the Prophetinuites the Jews to repentance and newness
of life under a threefold continued Metaphor of plowing, sowing, reaping. (Sow
to your selves righteousness, reap in mercy, break up your fallow ground,)

2 The Motive is an importuning opportunity; (for it is time,) amplified by its

1 Quid, what to do, (to seek the Lord) 2 Quousque, how long, (till he come
and rain righteousness upon you.)
You see now in what rank stands my Text: a branch namely of the Prophets
exhortation, and indeed the first for order of nature, but for order of words
the last: (...). Whose Logical sense and order conceive thus. Sew in
righteousness, reap in mercy: and to the end you may so, both sow and reap,
do this; break up your fallow ground.

The parts of the words are two,

1 A painful act, (break up) 2 A tough object, (your fallow ground.)
In handling whereof here is all I Will do,

1 Explain the words by resolving the Allegory. 2 Next give their sum in
some doctrine all proposition, and so lanch forth.
For the first, that shall be dispatched in the answer 1
of three questions.

1 What Is this ground we are to break up? Quest. 1. Answ.


It Is answered. Our hearts: called ground perhaps for these or the like causes.

1 For site and position of place. The ground or earth is the center of the
great world: the heart is the middle center of man the little world.

2 For natural temper and constitution. The ground naturally is cold and dry;
so naturally our hearts: icy-cold in good things, without feruency, heat or
warmth of affection in holy duties: and dry for want of the sap and moisture
of original righteous-nesse, whereby like dry earth, they are unapt wholly (in
regard of any inherent active power) to take any impression of grace.

3 For natural tendency and motion. The earth naturally tends always
downward. So naturally, our hearts downwards, only to the world and earthly
things.

4 For its indeterminate and general aptitude of bearing and bringing forth.
The ground (you know) is always in travel to bring forth one thing or other, if
not good, yet bad, and that of diverse kinds: thorns, briars, nettles, thistles,
dockes etc. So naturally, our hearts, prone to produce one thing or other,
though not good, yet certainly bad, and that of diverse sorts too. Pride,
hypocrisy, lust, envy, covetousness, reuengefulnesse, etc.

5 Lastly, for its need of culture or manuring unto fructification. The ground
with us naturally sends forth nothing but weeds. No fruit nor corn without
pains in dunging, liming, dressing, plowing, planting, sowing: So neither our
hearts without pains in mortification, any saving fruits of good life. There Is
the first question, what is the ground.

2 If this ground be our hearts, in what sense then fallow, fallow ground?

Let me premise somewhat for settling the literal sense, and then the answer.
Fallow ground to be broken up, in the natural sense of the word, is not
(here) that ground that is already fallowed, and now a second time to be broken,
as the English translation would at first sight imply it: but such ground as
being not before plowed, must be now new broken up, and lie fallow till
seed-time, as the original (...) do seem to sound it, which signify the
fallowing or breaking up of such a piece of ground as was not before either at
all or lately, at least, plowed up: and so the words to be taken as if set into
this frame, Novellate fallow or break up a new your fallow ground: that is,
that ground of yours that is to lie for fallow.

This premised, now take the answer. Our hearts may be called fallow for the
resemblance perhaps between what things must be done to our hearts, and what
is done to ground in fallowing. Ground that has layn leigh (as Plowmen call
it) and is intended for corn the next year after, Husbandmen at the Spring
before do break and plow it up, where lying till seed-time turned up against
the Summer Sun, the weeds do die, the spine rots, the sower earth that was
under sweetens, and the soil becomes more breeth and open to receive seed.
Here Is fallowing, and ground thus dealt with, fallow ground. Now so must our
hearts be served. Up must they be plowed and broken, that after some exposall
to the influentiall operation of the spirit of bondage, the crusty spine of
their natural hardness may hereby be mollified, the weeds of their lusts
withered, their sower leaven of malice sweetened, themselves with Lydiaes Acts
16. 14.
opened; and in a word, fitted, prepared, seasoned, to receive with efficacy
the seed of the Gospel, that engraffed word, that is able to save our souls,
I am, 1. 21. Romans 6. 22.
and so may have our fruit unto holiness, and our end everlasting life.
There Is the second question, why our hearts are called fallow.

3 What Is distinctly meant by this fallowing or Quest. 3.
breaking up of the ground of our hearts, or how is it done?

This will be known, in spiritualibus, if we first Spirituale:
consider what is needfully required to the act of fallowing or plowing in
agrestibus. Them I conceive Field-businesse
these four; 1 The plow to break with. 2 The Plowman to hold the plow. 3 The
teem to draw. 4 The goad-inch to drive. The like must here concur to our
spiritual plowing.

1 The plow. This may be and is sometimes the outward cross: more ordinarily
the doctrine of the Law, whose plow-share is its commanding divine authority
that enters and pierces into the soul and spirit: its culter the threatenings,
that as a sharp twoedged Heb 4. 12.
sword diuides and cuts the heart in pieces.

2 The Plowman, we may conceive two of these,

1 Primary. 2 Coadiuvant.
Primary (I mean in ordine mediorum Primary) is Phil. 2. 16.
the Minister, that holds forth the word of life, and in a faithful and
constant ministry presses the word on the hearers hearts, turning and
directing the same variously on this hand and that hand, as he sees need,
either of exhortation or reproof of Doctrine, correction or instruction.

Coadiuuant (and whom my text means specially) is every hearer himself, who
from the Ministers Mal. 2. 7.
lips must by faith, general and particular, take this plow in hand, apply and
put it into the ground of his heart, and there let it work after the manner of
a plow, ripping, rending, breaking up.

3 The Teem that draws. They these?

1 The Understanding. That goes foremost, without whose foregoing intellection
or apprehension, nothing can be done at all for conueying or drawing of the
word into the heart.

2 The Will. That follows the Understanding by its elicite acts, willing and
embracing what the Understanding has apprehended, and by its imperate
commanding and moving the feet to come, the cares to hear, the whole body to
wait and stay it out.

3 The Memory. By whose trusty help the plow of the Word is kept and held fast
when once it is in the heart.

4 The Affections, (as reverence, fear, love, hatred, anger, sorrow, etc.
These being stirred enforce deeper impression upon the heart. All which Teem
united together with the yoke of the spirit of bondage, fastened to Historical
faith, concur jointly to the pulling or drawing in of the Law into the heart.

4 The Goad-inch that drives. That Is the conscience, by whose checking,
pricking, and smiting power as by a Goad, the Understanding, Will, Memory, and
Affections are stirred up to do their duty.

On all this now the breaking up of the ground of our hearts will be this, even
as that properly is plowing, when the ground or soil (by some Sool or Plow set
thereunto, guided by the Plowmans hand, drawn by Oxen fitted and stirred
thereto) is broken and turned up. So here when by the terrors of the Law in the
ministry of the word discreetly and powerfully pressed, we by the active
powers of our minds and consciences applying and enforcing the same upon our
natural and stony hearts, do cut and break them up, and with a kind of
violence do pluck in sunder our hearts, and lusts one from the other, making
rents, ruptures, and divisions in the very thoughts and motions of the same;
you may take this in brief the spiritual fallowing and breaking up of the
fallow ground of our hearts. Break up your fallow ground. Thus of the questions
for explanation of the words. The next thing that we are to fall upon, is 2
the sum of the words in some doctrinall conclusion. Be that this. That

Every Christian must become a Plowman.

Beloved, take me none otherwise then you must Doctr.
take the Prophet, spiritually, and the meaning thus. That we must deal with
our hearts in humbling them, as Plowmen with their ground in fallowing. We must
rend them, (says Joel) must mortify them, Joel 2. 13. Romans 8. 136 1 Pet. 5.
6. Gal. 5. 24.
(says Paul) must humble them, (says Peter) must crucify their affections
and lusts, (says the Apostle) must circumcise and take away the foreskin of
them, (says Jeremy) In a word, must break them up, (says Ier 4. 4.
our Prophet here.) But demand you how in plain propriety of speech without
Allegory? Thus.

If first we can enforce upon our hearts the through sense and feeling of our
damnable and forlorn plight by nature.

If secondly by a free and full acknowledgment of our wretched condition, we
can impartially accuse, arraigne, and condemn our selves for the very least of
our sins, as guilty of being damned for ever.

If thirdly upon this sense and full acknowledgement our hearts within being
pricked, can sigh with bitterness, can melt with sorrow, can cry for grief of
heart, and mourn greatly.

If fourthly upon all this our hearts becoming sensible both of the need and
sweetness of Gods mercy, 1 Samuel 7. 2.
with the Israelites can lament after the Lord, and with David's hear can bray
and pant after the waterbrookes Psalm. 42. 1.
of his refreshing mercy in the blood of Christ.

If fistly as in the old creation the Firmament divided the waters from the
waters. So if in this beginning Genesis 1. 6.
of new creation, this sorrow for our sins and thirst of pardon can make such
divisions in our resolutions within, and carriages without, that we can truly
say of our selves, as the young man in the story of himself to an enticing
harlot, Ego non sum ego; Both hearts and lives are changed and altered. Here Is
the Art and method of rending, mortifying, crucisying, humbling, circumcising,
and fallowing of our hearts, or of dealing with them as Plowmen with their
ground in fallowing. So that as in regard of Evangelical grace to be now
sown, we had need be Seeds-men, in regard of the crop of future glory, we
desire to be Harvest men: so in regard of our barren hearts to be here broken
up, we must turn Plowmen: You look for reason.

1 Why? are we not servants at our Lord and Masters Reas. 1.
beck? subjects and vassals at our Kings command? It Is he commands us to put
our hands to Plow. Thus says the Lord of bosts to the men of Judah Ier 4. 3.
and Jerusalem: Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns: and
shall we not resolve obedience. The Centurion (you know) says to his servant,
Mat. 8. 9.
but go, and he goes; to another but come, and he comes; to another doc
this, and he does it: and should we like untamed Heyfers draw back from the
yoke; nay, when he that made us bids us, when he that bought us with the
inualuable price of his own blood, commands us? But if the Lords command be no
sufficient tie

2 Let our own necessity be a second reason to Reas. 2.
cuince the duty. And here doc ye but think with me on these three
specialties, 1 The natural indisposition of our hearts unto any fruitfulness
in weldoing, without this plowing. 2 Our loss of labor in sowing upon neglect
of plowing. 3 Our hopelesnesse of harvest in case we plow not, and thence judge
our necessity of becoming Plowmen.

1 The naturail indisposition of our hearts unto Branch 1
any fruitfulness in weldoing. I appeal to the cleanest heart of the dearest
of all Gods Saints, if out of its abundant selfe-experience it will not say
with the Leper, Leu. 13. 45.
unclean, unclean: if out of its truest sense of its own secret inherent
filth and rottenness it will not proclayme it self unapt utterly for the
least crop or handful of saving goodness. You know what the Prophet says of
it; The heart is deceitful above all Ier. 17. 9.
things, yea and desperately wicked. You know what the Lord observed it to be;
Only evil, and that continually. Genesis 6. 5.
Which howeuer in its primitive purity, fair as the Moon, fruitful as
Lebanon, as a valley spread forth, as a garden by the rivers side, as a tree
which the Lord has planted, like Nebuchadnezzars tree, whole leaves were
fair, and the Number. 24 6. Dan 4. 12.
fruit thereof much: Yet now since Adams fall, both Scripture and woeful
experience can too truly tell us, that naught but the nettles of revenge,
impatience, wrath; naught but the docks of pride, lust, hypocrisy; naught but
the thorns of covetousness, worldlimindednesse, and the like are the natural
burdens this ground now bears: nay, suppose that restrayning enforcement,
that civil culture or education yields, yet what can all this? perhaps nip
the tops of these weeds a little: but that their stalks or at least their
roots, that they without this initiall work of Gods spirit, should be plucked
up or quelled and killed ((...) I say) it cannot be. Had we not need become
Plowment then and plow, and breakvp our hearts? But here is not all:

2 The loss of labor in sowing the seed of the Branch 2.
Gospel upon our hearts while they lie vnfallowed, and not broken up, see that
next. And here consider, will not the weeds and briars of vumortified lusts in
our unbroken hearts so choke the seed, that it will not comevp? so suck and
draw away the moisture of holy thoughts, motions, eiaculations, prayer, that it
will not nourish the roots? so keep off the Sunnebeames and showers of all
sensible influence of spiritual comforts, that they will not cherish the
blades? so clip and cling about the stems of outward performances, that they
will not sauingly either spring or spread? At least, will not the unsavory and
stinking weeds of our corruptions by this means suffered, multiply, grow
bigger and stronger, till the whole field of our hearts ouerrun here with,
become naught but a receptacle for snakes, a possession for the Cormorant and
Bitterne, an habitation for Dragons, and a covert for Owls. Undoubtedly, that
field that is Isa. 34. 13.
cloyed with these inconveniences, whateuer seed the Husbandman bestows
thereon, will bring in but poor profit at the years end. Is there no need of
plowing then and breaking this field up?

3 Add lastly our hopelesnesse of any harvest else. Branch 3.
Beloved, did ever any reap where no ground was tilled? does God exalt where
none are humbled? raise where none dejected? or crown where none has
suffered? So neither is the harvest of true joy and peace either inchoate here,
or consummate heareafter to be expected in our natural and carnal hearts not
first tilled and broken up. The harvest of spiritual joy grows not but out of
the seed of tears; and this seed takes root kindly no where but in the Psalm.
126. 5.
ground of sorrow for sin. Therefore he that would Ver. 6.
bring his sheaues in his bosom with him, must first go on this way weeping.
He that would have his heart bound up in the bundle of life, must have it
first thus broken. He that would earne a rich and everlasting living indeed,
must ply this calling: and he that would shout as with the joy of harvest, must
set about this plowing. Was it not thus in the convert Iaylour? Acts 16. 34.
he joys you know as in the day of harvest, but the plow had first been in his
heart. Sirs what shall I Ver. 30.
do to be saved? So the convert Jews (Act. 2. 47.) A plentiful crop (it is
like) they reapt of spiritual gladness. But Saint Peter's plow had first been
in Ver. 37.
and pricked their hearts. They had plowed and sown in tears before they reapt
in joy; and truly to say what both Scripture and true experience yields, it is
a granted maxim with me, that that peace and joy whereby is hatched in us the
beginning of heaven here, even that peace of conscience which passes all
understanding, and that joy that is unspeakable, and full of glory, are in all
Gods elect (Adult) the Phil. 4. 7. 1 Pet 18.
undoubted consequents (propinque at least) of this initiall sorrow for sin:
and without this antecedent, all seeming joy and peace in true esteem but
bastards. Now tell then, is there no need of plowing, where such a crop is
looked for?

O yes; but it is God must do it; (may some object) Object.
the arm of our own strength is not sufficient for this kind of plowing.

True; but will he that made thee without thee, save thee without thee, or are
we as stocks without Solut.
all obedientiall capability, that Gods beginning and working by us as
instruments should exclude all voluntary (though actiu'd) agency in us? or
what? must Gods sole efficiency be a plea for our sluggishnesse? No; Nos
operamur (says Austin) it is we that work; so here, it is we that must plow:
quanquam Deus in nobis operetur operari; though God does work all this our
work both in and by us. And Isa. 26 12.
since we be simply passive only in the first, not in the vlteriour instants
and acts of this spiritual plowing, shall we with Solomon's sluggard hide our
hands of endeavor in our bosoms, and look when this harvest Pro. 19. 24.
will drop into our mouths sleeping? Well then, unite all together that has
been said, and return word on what equity the doctrine stands, That every
Christian had need turn Plowman. But we hasten now to some use of all. And

1 For Information. Must every Christian become Use 1.
a Plowman? deal with his heart by humbling it, as Plowmen with their ground
in fallowing? the truth then of two principles will be from hence apparent,
the one whereof Speculatiue, the other Practique.

1 The Speculatiue, this doctrinall Aphorism. That the ordinary (...) or
preparatiue to true and sound Evangelicall conversion, is by having our hearts
first humbled and broken up by the Law. We must first have this Plow to break
the clods of our hard hearts before the seed of the Gospel will take kindly.
As the needle makes way for the thread; so here must the Law for the Gospel:
and the Gospel comforts not soundly where the Law has not first humbled
thoroughly. So that it is a wonder with me what our Antinomists mean by their
rejecting of the moral Law as needless now. For judge with me; does not he
give most glory to Christ's fullness by believing, that has felt most
emptiness in himself? But this the Law occasions, while pressing exact
obedience it discouers our inability, showing what we should do, but cannot
perform. Is any privileged with the remission of sins, but he that is
truly touched with sorrow for sin? And can any be truly sorry for what he
knows not of? But this knowledge of sin is by the Law. Who can so feelingly
Romans 3. 20.
hunger after Christ, as he that most sees what need he has of him? Who will
bid sweeter welcome to the promises of pardon and eternal life, then he that
has felt himself a condemned man, or in a most damnable estate by nature? Who
will so sweetly joy in the appeased countenance of God his reconciled father in
Christ, as he that has first apprehended him as angry Judge in Adam: But to
all this serves the Law, when from this effect it is called sometimes a killing
letter, sometimes the ministration of death 2 Cor. 3. 6 7 9.
and condemnation. In a word, what makes us more capable of grace, then that
which most humbles? what more humbles, then that which strips us of all matter
of pride? now what does this (initially I mean) more then the Law, while it
lays open all our spiritual nakedness, and as a Schoolmaster whips us out
of our selves, thus leading us to Christ. Gal. 3. 24.
The Gospel, that brings us the alone exhilerating cordials and sovereign
physic of our souls; but the Law prepares our stomachs.

2 The Practique; viz. this moral verity. That God will have none of his be
idlers; turn Plowmen rather then do nothing. Adam in Paradise lives Genesis 2.
15. Genesis 9. 20. 1 Reg. 19. 19.
not idle, he delues his Eden; Noah becomes an Husbandman, and plants a
Vineyard; Elisha, he goes to plow; and we that have such barren fields within
us have good cause (I think) to be doing too. It Is not for nothing (it seems)
that we are so often called on to be sometimes laborers in the Lords
Vineyard, Mat. 20. 1. Iud. 20. Ephesians. 6. Mar. 13. 37. Mat 20. 6.
sometimes builders, sometimes soldiers, watchmen sometimes, and here plowmen,
because no place in the market of this world for standing all day idle.
Beloved, we carry that about us in our breasts that would easily silence all
idlers complaints on want of work; when as the poorest beggar that has not
one foot of ground besides, if he has but an heart, has enough (if he be
willing to work) to keep him out of idleness all his lifelong. But what mean
I by lighting this dim candle of Information in such intelligent rooms where
tapers burn. I Will blow it out, and light one rather up in the closets of your
consciences by a second use, and that of

2 Examination. And here let me make bold to entreat Use 2.
you every one that hears me speaking, but to turn aside a little with me
into the same closets, your souls and consciences, and there make search how
it stands with you about the point propounded. Two questions would be here
demanded: 1 For thy profession, whether a spiritual Plowman yea or no? 2 For
thy practice in this profession, what thou do herein, whether thy heart be
actually thus broken up or no?

For the first. Whether such a Plowman as the 1
holy Ghost means in my Text. This will be thus euidenced,

1 By the Tools. Artificers in Lacedemonia (if the Marks of a spiritual
Plowman.
story fail me not) were distinguished when they went the streets by tools
severally peculiar to each Handicraft: the Smith by his Hammer, the Tailor by
his Sheares, the Carpenter by his Rule, the Plowman by his Goad or
Paddle-staffe. So here thy profession will be discerned by thy tools; if a
Plowman, by thy Goad or Paddle-staffe; that is, by thy conscience, thy
practique acquaintance with the word, fasting, selfe-examination, prayer,
resolutions against sin, exercises of humiliation, mortification, and the
like instruments of spiritual plowing. Now thus. Would thou go for a good
Plowman, a good and true honest Christian? where be thy tools, and what be
they? what? carriest a good tender conscience about thee? make conscience in
all thy courses? art stored with real knowledge in the word of God? make use
of prayer both in Church and family? meditation, fasting, selfe-searching,
often renewed resolutions against thy sins, and such like badges of this thy
Christian occupation? I yield thee for thy profession one of the Lords Plowmen.
But if on contrary, a stranger to these, or which is more, an enemy: thou
may be any thing else besides, but what thou should be.

2 By the subject, matter of thy employments. If we see a fellow, come when a
man will, with boots or shoes in his hand either cutting, sowing, or mending
them, we will say, sure this man's a Shoemaker; or one always either making,
righting, handling, or holding Plowes, or Plow-stuffe, we will say, such a man's
a Plowman. So here. Would thou have me say, thou art a spiritual Plowman?
Let me see the thing and matter whereabout thou art busied most? what? is it
this? the consideration of thy ways? the crossing of thy lusts? the conquering
of thy passions? the weakening of thy corruptions? the mortifying of thy bosom
and beloved sins? Is It tender of mercy and compassion to the poor Saints?
Is It acts of spiritual improuement, as hearing, reading, pondring, conference,
prayer? Is It private thoughtfulness how in such and such things thou may
keep a good conscience, and not sin against God? Truly I cannot deem thee
but such a Plowman as my Text means, and the Lord would have thee. But if on
contrary, instead of these, the things thou art most taken up in be
company-keeping, drinking, whoring, gaming, cozening, scoffing, Sabbath
breaking, roaring, swaggering, ruffianising: go thou may for an impure
carnalist, or Swineheard as thou art; but for a spiritual Plowman, or
true-professed Christian, certainly yet thou art none.

3 By thy continued customarinesse in exercises pertaining to thy profession.
We deigne not him the name of a Plowman that has held the Sool but once or
twice, or never turned up but a furrow or two, but him that makes plowing his
usual practice. So thee here a spiritual Plowman, not if thou do but
seldom lay Gods word to heart, but seldom visit Gods house, but seldom take
thy heart to task, break'st off but some lusts, kil'st but some sins, and
those less beloved ones perhaps, and there gin'st over. But if this task of
spiritual plowing be even every days work, customary at least, renewed often
as the trade thy spiritual life's maintaind by.

4 By thine appetite. If thou have a Plowmans stomach. You know the proverb on
one that eats heartily, that he feeds like a Plowman; implying in them a
greater appetite then in others ordinarily, which well may be, because of their
speedier digestion through cold and labor. So here; observe thine appetite.
Have an hungry appetite after the Manna from heaven, the Word and Sacraments?
Can, when this food is set before thee, feed hungrily, even on the courser
morsels, threatenings and judgments, as well as the finer bits, the promises,
and comforts? Can swallow them down greedily? hide them in thy heart, and
be ready to look for more when that is down? Certainly as thou have the
stomach, so take the name too of a spiritual Plowman. But if thine appetite
be so cloyd and glutted with other dainties, the profits and pleasures of this
life, that thou have no relish this way? If thy corrupt and queasie stomach be
so nice and dainty, that it is ready to rise at every cross word, unable to
digest strong meat, or the tarter dishes of Gods threatenings and judgments
against thy sins: truly there is none can think thee a Plowman by thy
stomach.

5 Lastly, by thy skill and knowledge in the Art. He that would be a Plowman
must have knowledge in three things incident to that profession. 1 In driving
the Oxen. 2 In ordering the tackling. 3 In holding the Sool. So here. Try. For
thy driving first. Know how by thy Goad of conscience to prick up all the
powers of thy soul (as Mind, Memory, Will, Affections) to do their joint and
several parts for the drawing of the word into the ground of thy heart, not
putting thy Understanding on running too fast by quickness of apprehension; in
mean while suffering thy Affections to leg but slowly and coldly after? For
ordering thy tackling; know how to order thy prayers, resolutions, vows,
selfeexaminations, fastings, exercises of humiliation? or can with
discreetnesse right them when ere defective for matter, manner, circumstances?
For thy holding the Sool; can hold the doctrine of the Law in thy heart so
steddily and strongly, that it come not up or rise out of thy heart, till got
to lands end, gone through its work? know when to plow deep, when more
shallow in thy heart, as deeper in thine inueterate, grounded and habitual
lusts, more shallow perhaps in new-come sins? know how to ouerturne the
furrows and clods of thy earthly and fleshly desires, that they fall not back
in again? Try, have skill in these things? have competent knowledge this way?
In my poor judgment a sufficient Plowman. But if on contrary this Practique
skill be wanting, what ere thy Notionall be, whether in Divinity, Law, Physic,
Philosophy, or Tongues, thou art yet no complete, but half a Plowman. Thus
far for thy profession; whether a spiritual Plowman, yea or no.

Now for thy practice secondly, trial must be 2
made what thou have done as a spiritual Plowman unto the ground of thy heart.
In a word, whether that heart of thine be fallowed and broken up or no. Find
that out by these Landmarks following.

1 The real feeling of the Law stirring in thy heart. The earth, had it but
sensitive life, it would certainly feel the piercing, cutting, and stirring of
the Plow, when it so rips and rends its entrals. Howeuer, yet this truth's
undoubted in conscientiall Divinity, that if the Law be stirring in the heart,
or has by its wou^ding, terrifying and humbling power made any rips or
breaches in it, it will surely feel. For albeit a child of God in some swound
of spiritual desertion may be much on the mending hand, and under the healing
plasters of the Gospel, and not sensibly feel the same: yet real
humblednesse under the Law or this broken-heartenesse, that cannot be without
some reflectiue feeling: because things distasteful to sense are by nature more
easily impressiue then things pleasing: as of sickness we are more sensible
then of health. Thus then. Try. Have ever really felt the terrors of the Law
stirring and working to sound purpose upon thy corruptions? have ever felt the
pills of its threatenings, like Physic in thy stomach, make thy heart to wamble?
have ever felt how thy secret vilenesses discovered to thine eyes have made the
reds of thy conscience rise? have ever felt how the enforcement thereof, both
in the public ministry, and in thy secret musings has cast thy retired
thoughts upon serious selfe-enquiry and debatement, how, and upon what ground
thou stand, in what case thou art, which way thou art trudging, what is to
be done to be saved? have had such feelings? then certainly has the Law been
stirring in thee, and thine heart been broken somewhat; though here is not all
required. But if instead of these, thou have no more feeling of Gods wrath for
thy sins threatened in the Law, then has an anuile of the hammers blows;
can hear noyses of judgments thundered in the word against thy resolved
profaneness, and like some Smiths dog sleeping under the anuile, do not so
much as budge at it? as a block without any sense or feeling? thy heart
certainly is an vnfallowed, an unbroken heart as yet.

2 Intestine divisions made in thy heart. As when the earth is fallowed and
broken up, one part is divided, ripped, and plucked from the other. So here; if thy
heart be a broken heart, there will be divisions, rents, and ruptures made
within: thy corruptions will be pulled in sunder, bills of divorce will be sued
out against them; eternal separations plodded: two contrary factions (as
twere) will be set up in thee, Flesh and Spirit the Captains: the underling
thoughts, motions variously siding, some with the Flesh, some with the Spirit;
and thy heart falling at ods with those domestique enemies, thy lusts, will
disclaim all farther league, hate, dislike, threaten, plod and conspire
against them. But if on contrary, the strong man has all things in peace, all
be quiet within, no Luke 11. 21.
mutiny, no wrangling between thy heart and lusts, no noise so much within of
civil discords and spiritual combats, thine heart yet is no broken heart.

3 The mastery and upper hand of thine inordinate passions. As in plowing of
ground the spine and weeds that were upward first are so turned over; that they
fall down under, whereby they rot, die, and wither. So here: Have thou brought
under thy unruly passions, wrath, revenge, envy, frowardness, impatience,
discontentednesse, saying of them as Debora Judge. 5. 21:
of her enemies, O my soul thou have trodden down strength; have conquered
and trod upon the neck of thy rebellious appetite? have laid thy adulterous
lustfulnesse under thy feet a bleeding? have killed and quelled the life and
power of thy corrupt affections, thy immoderate love of the world, thy delight
in fleshly pleasures, thy selfe-admiration and affectation of disguised attire
and light-skirt immodest fashions? Thou may with comfort conclude to thy
self, thy heart's a broken heart. But if on contrary, thou be one that art
carried after the unbridled swinge of unruly lusts, whirld about which way the
impetuous blasts of thy passions drive thee, without resistance? drink'st in
vanity as a fish does water; a shrewd argument of an heart as yet unmortified,
an heart not broken up.

4 Softness of heart and tenderness. Ground (you know) that before the
plowing could be hardly pierced with a stick or iron, when broken up, it is soft
and crummy, that you may easily thrust your finger into it. So here. If thy
heart be a broken heart, it will be soft, relentiue, tender. Try then. Is thy
heart mollified? is it ready melt at the experimental sense of the spiritual
sweetness of Gods love to thee in Christ? Does it tremble at his word? does it
dread his judgments? Is It easily penetrable with Gods finger of correction,
that before as Adamant resisted the blows of his rod of iron? is it tenderly
compassionate, relentingly pitiful toward the miseries and necessities of the
poor? a gracious mark of a broken heart. But if on contrary that heart of
thine be yet brawnd over with insensible hardness, incapable yet of any
distinct impression either of mercy or judgment, promises or threatenings,
heaven or hell, God or the devil; thick listed as yet at the cries of the
poor? If in a word, insensibly hardened against all reproof, thou runst
headlong on in drunkenness, whoring, Sabbath breaking, blafpheming, swearing,
theeuing, lying, scoffing, fashion flanting, swaggering, and this with
greediness? a poor evidence (God knows) of any broken heartedness.

5 Changednesse of heart. A field you know when it is newly broken up, it is quite
of another hue and color from what it was before, all green before, now all
red, or somewhat like. So here. If thy heart be a broken heart, twill be also
another heart, a changed heart (for quality I mean, not substance.) Let me
demand thee then, Can find an alteration in thy heart, a change in thy life,
the old man off, the new man on? Stands the bent of thy disposions quite
contrary to the point that before they did, loving now what before thou
hatedst, God, his word, his children? hating now what before thou likedst, the
pleasures of sin, and deeds of darkness? A drunkard before, an whoremaster;
now continent, sober, chaste: an Usurer before, a gamester, a Sabbath breaker,
a rayler, a persecutor; now are claimed man, as forward now and zealous in acts
of holiness as before violent in sin and wickedness? A fair character of a
broken heart. But if on contrary, no such change be to be found; art the same
man that thou were long since; a tospot then, and so art yet; a wencher then,
and so art yet; an old hell-scraping usurer then, and so abidest; a scoffer, a
persecuter then, and so continuest; a pinching greedy earth worm then, and so
remaynest. Certainly thou art yet as far from a broken heart as thou art from
heaven, and that is far enough.

6 Lastly. Discovery of new corruptions before vnspyed. A field, you know, when
it is broken up how many stones, and moors, and worms shall you see appear
that you neither saw before, nor thought perhaps to have had been there. So
here. If thy heart be truly broken, many secret lusts and corruptions that
lurkt before unspied, will now begin to show themselves. Consider thus then;
How stands it with thee? do in thy daily exercises of spiritual pursuit
start new corruptions as strange wild beasts that thou never saw before?
do spy armies in ambush peep out that thou never so much as dreamst of
before? Upon thy retired selfe-inspections comes that to thy view thou never
feltst, at least took'st no tice of in thy self before; farther touches of
spiritual pride, of privy hypocrisy; more sense of secret un willingness to
good duties, of wandringnesse of thoughts in prayer, hearing, meditation? more
sense then before of hanging incliningnesse to the love of the world after
regeneration, with the like original spawnes of thy defiled nature? In a word,
do in thy sequestered task of privy searching discover daily more and more
the rotten silthinesse of thy polluted heart, and this with grief? what, O
what a sweet (...) is this or mark of a circumcised and broken heart. But if
on contrary, thou see no more stones nor roots, nor worms, no more secret
hardness, guilt, rottenness in thee then before, no farther sense nor
acquaintance in the towardness of thy corrupt nature, no new lurking
corruption presented to thy view, but all under the lukewarm hide of general
hopes, good intents and meanings unspied, undiscovered, it may well be
questioned whether that heart of thine as yet, be as a field broken up or no.

I beseech you search your selves in these alleged specialties, and consider
what I have said, take advice and speak your minds. But

3 For reprehension. Must Christians be such Use 3.
Plowmen as my Text means? deal with their hearts as Plowmen with their
ground in fallowing, rip, rend, and break them up? What just rebuke then do
you bad husbands merit, that never minding any such spiritual tillage, suffer
the barren ground of your stony hearts to lie from year to year like the
sluggards field in the Proverbs, all ouergrowne with Pro. 14. 31.
nettles, docks, thistles, rams-clawes, thorns, briars; ignorance, pride,
revenge, worldliness, usury, oppression, lust, hypocrisy, superstition,
drunkenness, whoredom, fraud, dissoluteness. What mean you I wonder? can
you look for an happy harvest that intend no pains at all in plowing? for any
joyous crop of glory, that never go about to fit your hearts for grace? Would
you have new wine to be put into old vessels, Physic be applied without
preparatiues? a thread be forced to enter where the needle has made no way? a
field to bear corn, that was never tilled? or your hearts become sauingly
gracious, that were never humbled? Haruests perhaps of peace and joy you look
for equal with Gods painefullest labour-men; but where will you have them grow
I wonder? what? in the unmanured ground of those your heats, ouerrunne as yet
with the rancksmelling weeds of lust, covetousness, pride, prophanesle?
Certainly if mariners may gain their haven without sailing; soldiers their
conquest without fighting; coursers their prize without running; then may you
that harvest without this plowing: But if no entrance at the strait gate, but
first by striving; Luke 13. 24. Mat. 23. 12. Isa. 61. 1.
no exaltation, but first by humbling; no healing nor binding up, but first by
breaking and wounding; no Evangelical joy, but first by legal sorrow
predisposing; then no harvest of heavenly happiness, but first by this
spiritual plowing of our hearts in the course of mortification. Come, why
neglect you then so maine a duty? tell me, what is it you stand on? is it a fair
season that you would have to plow in? alas, how many have you already
slighted, and do you yet look for fairer? Do You know how easily upon such
delays, either the frosts of Gods farther judgments may so encrust and harden
your hearts that the plow of his word preached will not be able to enter; or
the too much rain, at least, of his punitiue indulgence deliver them up into
the mire and puddle of all uncleanness, to the commitment of sin with
greediness, that no Plow neither Law nor Gospel with make any work in you?
why defer you to set your limbs to work then? The want of Plowes (with you)
can be no excuse where every Parish has a Plow in common. The want of skill
no plea, when as habits being gotten by preuious acts reiterated, and skill
being the daughter of use and exercise; if you did but set your limbs to plow,
skill would follow. Want of leisure can be no pretense, when so many vacancies
are often offered you in your shops, and when for time you can for your selves
cut out so many idle hours for cards, dice, tables, dancing, bibling,
smoking, bowling, tricking, trimming, curling. But let me demand you; Is It not
your pride rather and contempt of purity that hinders, who having all your life
long lived people of good fashion in the world, do now think scorn to turn
Plowmen? or is it not shame and fear of disgrace that lets you, who liking the
trade perhaps could be content to prosesse it, but because so lasht at by the
scoffs of the world, have resolved rather to die beggars, then live by
plowing? or is it some hopes of doing it well enough hereafter? Yes, you will
resolve with the foolish Virgins then to be buying Mat. 25. 10.
oil when the wise are entering, then to be plowing when others are reaping; or
what? is it none of these, but only your love of ease, and conceit of difficulty
in the work that hinders, hard you think it to deny your selves, to abridge
your liberty, to forgo your pleasures, to forsake your carnal merriments,
your drunken crues, your beloved profits, your right eyes, hands, and feet, to
enforce your selves on taskes of humiliation, hearing, self examination,
prayer, with such like Lions in the way. Well, suppose this plowing Pro. 26. 13.
painful (as indeed it is) but is not the wages great, and the harvest
gainful, joy at last unspeakable, and full of glory? Suppose it painful, but
will not grace facilitate what is harsh to nature? nay, much of the pain were
past, were you but willing once: Well, I Will suppose you willing, and so will
leave Reproving and Use.

4 Instruction. And here Beloved, if ye be willing to become spiritual
Plowmen, and your hearts Use 4.
Gods good corne-fields to furnish that great barn, whose builder and maker is
God; give me leave to lecture you some few principles for your best
furtherance and improuement in it? The whole Art may be abridged into these
three short Lectures.

First. In the entrance of this Art two things (as Lect. 1.
precognitaes) must be preconsidered. 1 The nature of the ground to be
fallowed or plowed up. 2 The best season when to fallow.

1 For the nature of the ground, whether stony, clayey, or sandy: whether the
stony ground of an open profane heart, so called for its hardness; or the
clayey ground of a civil heart, so called for its smoothness and toughness;
or the sandy ground of an hypocritical heart, so called for its discontinued
nesse of parts, being a double heart, an heart, and an heart. They all need a
good strong Plow; a sound powerful ministry to pierce, and rend, and make
divisions within: but of three the hypocritical being deepest, needs deepest
plowing, as eluding easily a shallow and vnsearching ministry. Next to that
the civil heart, whose smooth, yet tough and thick spine of external
uprightness in broken duties of the second Table, easily scaping the shallow
skirrings of a weak and cold ministry, needs well nigh, if notequally, as full
and powerful a searching as the hypocritical does. The hardened and
open-prophane heart lastly, that (as the first fallowing at least) needs more
might and vehemence then depth.

2 For the best season for fallowing. That Is the Spring. It Is so in proper
fallowing, that so by the benefit of all the Summers heat till seed time, the
sowernesse of the soil may sweeten, the spine rot, and weeds wither. It must
be so here in the spiritual fallowing of thy heart, the Springtide of thy
youth is the fittest season, that through some time and continuance had under
the Sun beams or means of grace, through some proficiency in a godly life,
thy corruptions may the more thoroughly be mortified, die, rot, and wither
before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. Eccl. 1^. 1^ Lect. 1.


Secondly: Let thy acquainrance with these praecognita be seconded with this
seauen-fold practice.

1 As a Plow must not be drawn along upon the surface or top of the earth, but
be immitted or put into the very bowels of it; so here; see that the word do
not tickle thine ears only a little, or in at one ear and out at the other:
but with David hide, and cause it to enter into thy very heart.

2 As a Plow when put into the earth, must not there stand still, but be put
on working. So here. The word or Law in thy heart must not lie idle, but be
active, like good Physic for thy soul, must be made to stir and work upon
thy conscience, will, affections.

3 As a Plow though in the earth and stirring, yet must be guided and applied
to and fro by the Plowmans hand. So here. The word in thy heart held by thy
Memory, must be guided by thy Understanding, and by thy conscience applied
this way and that way; this judgment against this sin, that against that;
this promise to this act of obedience, that to that; this rule of direction to
this practice, that to that, etc.

4 As a Plowman is not wont to stop and turn at half way his furrows, but
goes through to lands end, ere he turns again. So here in fallowing of thy
heart, thou must not break up the furrows of thy lusts at halues, mortifying
one half, but cherishing the other. But when thou take a furrow, a sin in
hand, go through stitch with it; see the yonder end of that sin before thou
turn back from pursuing it.

5 As a Plowman turns up his furrows in order, not confusedly, by heaps, or
all together; but orderly one after another. So here, thy sins must be
thrown up not by confused heaps, in gross only (as saying we are all
sinners) as if that were enough, but by distinct and particular acknowledgement
of them, that their distinct filthiness espied may better further humiliation.

6 As the Plow goes unhappily to work then when the Oxen either are unequally
matched, or draw not jointly together. So here in this spiritual plowing, the
Word in thy heart works ineffectually when the understanding and preiudicate
opinion, when the will and sensual appetite be yokt like an Ox and an Ass
together; or when the understanding draws one way, and the will another, the
affections a third. Heed must be had then that in their proper places they
follow each the other. The understanding foremost, having apprehended the word
of truth, let the will desire, the affections embrace, the memory keep, and the
outward man conforming execute.

7 As the Plowman in plowing makes use of his Paddle-staffe, wherewith he rids
and digs off stroyl that choaks the Culter. So here; take thy Paddlestaffe in
hand, daily examination, and often renewed selfe-inspection, and be ever and
anon digging off herewith the stroyl of insinuating hypocrisy, and greediness
upon worldly profit, that will be ever hanging and sticking on, and choke, and
dull the edge of the word, that it shall neither pierce nor cut. Thus for thy
practice.

Now thirdly let me but suggest a fourefold Resolution Lect. 3.
that must attend this practice, and this Use is ended.

1 Be painful. Beloved, plowing is no easy task. It requires the strayned
nerves of your best industry. Rebellious lusts are not so easily mastered, nor
unruly passions tamed. Corruptions are not plucked out of their warm beds with
a wet finger; multa tulit, fecitg, there must be much tugging and toyling in
the often reiterated acts of humiliation used about these stony, rotten and
deceitful hearts of ours before they will be thoroughly fitted for sound
fruitfulness in saving grace. Resolve then to be painful, or never take plow
in hand.

2 Be early at it. It Is not the least of a Plowmans praises to be an early
riser. His Oxen, you know, must be fed early, and prepared for labor; his work
must be begun early, lest late setting out in the morning cast him behind hand
all day after. So here, resolve to arise and to be doing early. Let mind and
memory timely, while yet in the morning of thy younger days, be plied with the
food of knowledge and other spiritual provision. Set out a plowing while
others are yet sleeping in their security and sins. No small comfort twill be
to have thy work aforehand. Delays till the day of thine age be declining
will bring forth scarce half the work, perhaps hazard the whole wages.

3 Be intentive. Do what thou have to do herein with all thy might. As a
Plowman if he mind not Eccl. 9. 10.
earnestly what he has in hand, but goes on gaping and gazing about, the Plow
miscarries, either it leaps up out of the earth, or runs awry; either goes
too deep, or else too shallow. So here; having once put thy hand to this plow,
thou must, hoc agere, mind thy work, not look back. No glancing (with Lots
Luke 9. 42. Genesis 19. 26.
wise) of the eyes of thy affections back upon the world, thy profits,
preferments, sinful pleasures, delights, pastimes. It Is a work that will need
the intention of the whole man; a work wherein heedlesse and needless
excursions of the mind about the superfluities of this life, breed usually
such distractions as will make the word either ho up again, and vanish out of
thy heart, or but work impertinenly, confusedly, coldly.

4 Be constant. Hold out this practice to thy end. Never give over the trade.
Man (says the Psalmist) or a Plowman (if you will) goes forth to his work Ps.
104. 23:
and to his labor until the evening. So here, until the very evening of thy
old age, nay the dark night of death must thou be busy plowing thy heart. No
half holidayes to be kept at this task, to leave work at noones. For upon
what terms is the promise of reaping made? not if we plow but for a spurt or
so, and grow weary of well-doing; but in due season we shall reap if we faint
not. And here is the difference Gal. 6. 9.
between temporal and us spiritual plowmen. They can plow but till seed
time; but we must keep plowing until harvest.

Brethren, I know not how far I have entrencht upon your patience in regard
of time. I beseech you vouchsafe me but a Plowmans liberty, who of a whole
close, if he has but one or two short ridges more to plow, though it be time
to leave work, and he be looked for home, yet is easily dispenst with for so
small a piece rather then to come away and leave so little undone. So here; I
have but one little short ridge, one short use more, and my whole days work is
ended. Wherefore suffer now

5 And lastly, the words of Exhortation. Beloved, Use 5.
I beseech you then a wake and rouse up your selves out of the sleepy bed of
sluggish security, come cry no longer, a little more sleep, a little more
slumber, a Pro. 6. 10.
little more folding of the hands, but arise, gird up your loins, and away to
plowing. Break up your fallow hearts, nay make deep and long your furrows.
Have you any mind to the motion? do you like it? or tell, could you find in
your hearts to be bound Apprentices at this trade and calling to the Lord, the
best Master in the world to his servants? Well, I know not what your minds
are; how ere I truly wish it: Nay (as Paul sometimes to Agrippa) Acts 26. 29.
I would to God that you all that hear me this day, were not only almost, but
altogether such as my Text means, and God would have you be, spiritual
Plowmen. Would God all you Merchants were in this sense Plowmen: all you
Clothyers, Shoomakers, Tailors, Grocers, Chandlers, Hatters, Sadlers, Plowmen.
All you Ministers, Magistrates, Officers, Plowmen: nay your whole City Plowmen,
('twould hinder none your traffic) nay, no shame for the King himself to be
such a Plowman. But above all, how could I wish our idle roaring Ruffians,
phantastique Gallants, and Gentlemen without a calling, that they would be
pleased to turn Plowmen, at least, but some of that time they so waste in
smoking, they would spend in plowing. And here, O had I but a motive that
might ouercomeal your thoughts for intendment this way. Would you have me
discover you

1 The benefits first that attend this practice? I am Motives.
not able; yet O the sweenesse of that soule-enlarging joy and peace wherewith
(through this heart-fallowing Art) the valleys of your consciences shall be so
filled as with corn, that they shall laugh and sing! O the sweetness of those
mutual welcomes, and gladdest greetings that shall be between the Gospels
glad tidings and your hearts thus broken! those enrauishing embracements and
holy burning conferences that shall be between Christ and your souls when
he shall come down to dine, and sup, and lodge, and dwell in your hearts thus
broken! O the sweetness of those dazzling glimpses of heavens very beauty,
light, and glory that will break out oft-times through the opened clouds of
your hearts thus broken! those various, dropping influences of truest comforts,
that as rain into a fleece of wool will distill oft-times into the thirsty
ground of your hearts thus broken! privileges transcendent, beyond expression,
yet the prosperous issues of this spiritual plowing. Come, let it be enough,
that the Lord accepts and will not despise your broken hearts. Let it be
enough, that Ps. 51 17. Isa. 66. 2.
God casts his gracious looks upon you and upon your spirits thus broken. Let
it be enough, that this spiritual heartbreaking is the only preparatiue to
sound conversion and an holy mortifyed life. Let it Icr. 31. 19.
be enough, that this spiritual plowing is the very next step to the
preferment of grace, the best of all Iam 14. 6.
preferments in the world. Elisha plowing was made a Prophet; but you thus
plowing, Priests, Kings, 1 King. 19. Reu. 1. 6.
and Prophets. What will you that I add more? undoubtedly, you that thus break
up and till the land of your hearts, when others as runagates do beg their
bread, you shall have plenty; and when others Pro. 28. 19. Isa. 65. 13.
be hungry, ye shall eat. O fortunatos nimiam bona si sua norint Agricolas! If
this prevail not, I have done, if

2 The danger secondly on the neglect will not overcome. And here Beloved look
with me but on two things:

1 The rank weed of your indulged corruptions, and know, that the longer they
grow, and are let a lone vnmortifyed, the stronger, longer, and bigger will the
cart-ropes and cables be, that the Devil will twist of them, to pull you into
hell with; such threefold cords as will not be easily broken by your weak
Eccl. 4. 12.
arms when either old or dying.

2 Look next on your vnfallowed ground, your unbroken hearts themselves, and
think on this. That as naturally or temporally there is no reaping, but where
has been sowing first: no sowing but where has been plowing first: So
neither spiritually any crop of bliss in heaven, but the rakeings of shame in
hell must be looked for of that sluggard that will not set to plow and break
up his heart by the word on earth. The sluggard that will not plow by reason of
the cold, shall beg in harvest, and have nothing. Consider Pro. 20. 4:
what I have said; and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Errata.
Page 4 line 13 read (...) ibib. l. 18. r. Nouellate p 5. l. 16. r. them. p. 8.
l. 13. r. Heart. p. 10. l. 3. dele those of. p 23. l 15. r moares p. 24. l. 8.
r. untowardnesse. p. 26. l. 10. r. bibbing. p. 27. l. 26. r. of the three.


