The A. B. C.
A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y z.

A a b c d e f g h i k m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z. and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.

A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z. and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q ^ S T V W X Y Z

a^. e^. i^. o^. u^. st. sh. ye. y^. y^. (...).

a e i o u ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud af of if of uf ag eg ig
og ug ak ek ik ok uk al el il ol ul

a e i o u an en in on un ap ep ip op up ar er ir or ur as es is os us at et it
ot ut au eu iu ou uu ax ex ix ox ux

In the name of the Father, and of the, Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen

The vow and promise made in Baptism.
Master. WHat is your name?


Scholar. N. or M.


M. Who gave you this name?


S. My Godfathers, and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was mad^ a member
of Christ; the child of God, ^ an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven


M. What did your Godfathers, and Godm^thers then for you?


S. They did promise and vow thr^^ things in my name.

First, that I should forsake the Diue^ and all his works, and pomps, the
vanities of the wicked World, and all t^ sinful lusts of the flesh.

Secondly, that I should believe the Articles of the christian faith.

And thirdly, that I should keep (...) ^ly will and commandments (...)
walkein the same all the days of my life.


M. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do as they
have promised for thee?


S. Yes verily. And by Gods help so I will. And I heartily thank our heavenly
Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Savior. And I pray God to give me his grace that I may continue in the
same unto my lives end.


M. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.


S. I Believe in God, the Father almighty, maker of Heaven and earth. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was concei^ed by the holy Ghost.
Borne of the Virgin Marie. Suffered under Ponce P^late. Was crucified, dead,
and buried. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.
He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The Communion of Saints. The
forgiveness of sins, The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting,
Amen.


M. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief?


S. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all the
World.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me and all the elect people
of GOD.


M. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods commandments: tell me how many there be?


S. Ten.


M. Which be they?


THe same which God spoke in the xx. Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord
thy GOD, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.

i. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this Law. ii. Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the
earth. Thou shall not bow down to the^, nor worship the^. For I ye Lord thy God
am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon their children, unto
ye third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands of them ye love me, and keep my Commandments.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. iii. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the Saboath
day, Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do. But ye
seventh day is the Saboath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner
of work, thou and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid
servant, thy cattle and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six
days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all yt in them is, and
rested the seventh day: wherefore ye lord blessed ye seventh day, and hallowed
it.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. v. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy
days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. vi. Thou shall do no murder.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. viii. Thou shall not steal.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against
thy Neighbor.

Lord have mercy upon us, etc. x. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house.
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor
his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.

Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts we
beseech thee.
M. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?


S. I learn two things. My duty toward god. And my duty toward my neighbor.


M. What is thy duty toward GOD?


S. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him,
with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength. To worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him: to
call upon him: to honor his holy name and his word: and to serve him truly all
the days of my life.


M. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?


S. My duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self. And to do to
all men as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my Father
and Mother. To honor, and obey the Queen, and her Ministers. To submit my
self to all my governors, teachers, spiritual Pastors, and Ministers. To
order my self lowly, and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no body by word
nor deed. To be true and just in all my dealing. To bear no malice nor hatred
in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing. And my tongue from
evil speaking, lying and slandering, to keep my body in temperance,
soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's goods: but learn
and labor truly to get my own living, and to do my duty in that state of
life, unto which it shall please God to call me.


M. My good Child know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him without his
especial grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer: let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords prayer.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever and ever, Amen.
M. What desire thou of God in this prayer?


S. I desire my Lord God our heavenly father, who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me and unto all people. That we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he will send
us al things that be needful both for our souls and bodies. And that he will
be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins. And that it will please him to
save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily. And that he will keep us
from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting
death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.


May. I would my good Child hear of thee yet more largely the special
duties of certain persons: and first of those duties that do stand chiefly in
obedience, and virtue, (by reason of thine age and condition) specially
appertaining unto thee. Tell me therefore first, what is the duty of Subjects
toward their Prince?


Scholar. The holy Apostles saint Paul and saint Peter declaring that the
higher powers are ordained of god, and that whosoever do resist the power,
resist the ordinance of God, and do purchase to themselves damnation: do
straightly charge all Subjects to fear, love, and to honor their Prince.
Humbly to obey all their Princes Laws, Commandments, and Ministers or
Officers. And that not for fear only, but for conscience sake also. To pay
all Tributes, and Subsidies due to their Prince. And with all their goods and
body, faithfully to serve their Prince. Heartily to pray to God for their
Prince, that he may continue, and increase in all goodness and godliness, Or for
his amendment if it chance that he be evil. And in all things to be
themselves good Subjects, that they may the better deserve to have a good
Prince.


M. Now tell me the duties of Children toward their Parents.


S. The holy Scriptures do teach Children to obey their Parents, and to serve
them, to fear, love, honor, and reverence them, not only in word and deed,
but in their hearts and minds also. To follow their good precepts and examples
of life. And patiently to take correction at their hands. And to make
continual and hearty prayers to God for them. And to relieve and nourish their
Parents in case they shall fall into poverty or decay. And in all points (by
showing themselves obedient and good children) to move their parents to be
loving and good to them.


M. I would now have thee to show me what thou have learned concerning the
duty of spiritual Children, as Parishioners and Hearers, toward their
Pastors and Preachers, as their spiritual Fathers.


S. Parishioners and Hearers are commanded in the word of GOD, to give double
honor unto their Pastors, and preachers, that is, as well to reverence and obey
them, as also to assist and aid them in word and deed. And they ought to take
great care, that the good seed of Gods word by them sown, through the lack
of their good heed taking, and following of the same, do not perish, as cast
into stony and barren grounds.


M. Declare now the duty of Servants.


S. Servants are thus taught their duties to their Masters in the holy
Scriptures: servants obey them that are your bodily Masters in all things with
fear and trembling, in singlenes of your heart as unto Christ, not with eye
service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, and whatsoever you do,
do it as the will of God, heartily and with good will, as serving the Lord and
not men: Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive ye reward of inheritance,
for ye serve the Lord Christ.


M. Now my good Child, though thou by age have as yet more need of thy precepts
of obedience, then of government, yet because God may and will I trust make
thee a good old man, I would not have thee ignorant how to behave thy self in
any estate of life, whereunto God may call thee hereafter. Wherefore I would
have thee to tell me, what on the other part thou have learned touching the
duties of Parents, Masters, or Houshoulders, and also of Husbands and Wives:
and first what is the duty of Parents toward their Children?


S. The duty of Parents toward their children (as the same Apostle S. Paul
teaches) is to bring them up even from the cradle, in the fear and nurture of
the Lord, in shamefastness, hatred of vice, and love of all virtue. And to be
themselves unto their children, examples of all godliness, and vertuousnes. And
they ought to see their children kept from idleness, the Mother of all
mischiefs, and brought up either in learning, or in some good science or Art,
whereby they may get their livings with honstye and truth, when they do come
to age.


M. Proceed now to the duties of Masters and Houshoulders.


S. I have learned that Masters and Houshoulders, as they are become in the
stead of Parents to their Servants and families, so ought they to refrain them
from idleness, and by diligent instruction and good example, to bring up their
servants and housholdes in honest and comely manners, and in all virtue. And
they ought to instruct their Apprentices in the knowledge of their occupatio^s,
even as Parents would teach their own Children, without all fraud, delaying,
or concealing: and when correction is necessary, they ought to give it the^
with such discretion, pity, and desire of their amendment, as loving Parents
use to deal with their dear children, remembering always that they have also a
Master in Heaven.


M. Tell me now the duty of Husbands toward their Wives.


S. I have learned that the holy Apostle Saint Peter, (who was himself a
married man) and S. Paul also, do teach married men to live with their wives
discreetlie, according unto knowledge and without all bitterness. And to love,
cherish, and to nourish their wives, even as their own bodies. Yea that
Husbands ought to love their wives even as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it to sanctify it.


M. Show me now how Wives ought to behave themselves toward their Husbands.


S. I have learned also, that the same holy Apostles S. Paul and S. Peter do
teach that wives ought to reverence their Husbands, and that they should submit
themselves, and be obedient unto their own husbands, as unto the Lord: for the
Husband is the Wives head, even as Christ is the head of the Church. Therefore
as the Church or Congregation is subject unto Christ: so likewise the Wives
also should be in subjection unto their own Husbands in all things as is
convenient in the Lord, even as Sara obayed Abraham and called him Lord. And
Wives are forbidden in the holy scriptures to wear gorgious or sumptuous
apparel, or broydred hair trimmed with gold. But that after the example of
holy women that trusted in god, they should be sober in outward apparel and be
decked inwardly with virtues of their minds, as with gentleness, meekenes,
quietness, and chastity, which are most precious things in the sight of god.


M. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?


S. Two. Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.


M. What meanest you by this word Sacrament?


S. I mean an outward and visible sign, representing an inward and invisible
spiritual grace, ordained by Christ himself, to testify Gods good will and
bountifulnes toward us, through the same Christ our Savior, by the which Gods
promises, touching forgiveness of sins, and eternal salvation, given through
Christ, are as it were sealed, and the truth of them is more certainly
confirmed in our hearts.


M. How many parts then be there in a Sacrament?


S. Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.


M. What is the outward sign or form in Baptism?


S. Water, wherein the person Baptized is dipped or sprinkled with it, in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.


M. What is the secret and spiritual grace?


S. Forgiveness of sins, and regeneration or new birth. Both which we have by
ye death and resurrection of Christ, and thereof we have a pledge and seal in
this Sacrament.


M. Show me the effect of Baptism yet more plainly.


S. Where by nature we are none of Gods Church or household, but through sin
are the children of wrath, most worthy of eternal damnation: we are by
baptism received into the Church, and assured that we are now the Children of
God, joined and grafted into the body of Christ, and become his members, and
do grow into one body with him.


M. What is required of persons to be baptized?


S. Faith and Repentance.


M. Declare this more largely.


S. First, we must earnestly repent us of our former wicked life, and believe
assuredly that we are cleansed from our sins by the blood of Christ, and so
made acceptable to God, and that his holy spirit dwells in us. And according
to our profession and promise made in baptism, we ought to endeavor our
selves to mortify our flesh, and by our godly life to show that we have put on
Christ, and have his spirit given us.


M. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age, they
cannot yet perform these things?


S. Because they belong to GODS Church, and Gods blessing and promise made to
the Church by Christ, in the faith of the which Christ our Savior they are
baptized, pertayneth unto the^. Which when they come to age, they must
themselves learn, believe, and acknowledge, and endeavor in their lives to
express the duty at their baptism professed and promised.


M. What is the order of the Lords Supper?


S. The same which the Lord Christ did institute, who in the same night that he
was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and gave
it to his disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body which is given for
you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after Supper, he took the cup,
and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them saying: Drink ye all of this,
for this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you and for many,
for remission of sins: do this as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance
of me. This form and order we ought to hold, truly to keep, and to celebrate
devoutly till he come again.


M. To what use?


S. For a continual thankful remembrance of his death, and the benefits
that we receive thereby. And that as in baptism we are borne again, so with
the Lords Supper we are always fed and sustained to spiritual and everlasting
life. And therefore it is enough to be once baptized, as to be once borne: but
as we need often to be fed, so is the Lords Supper often to be received.


M. What are the parts and matter of this Sacrament?


S. The matter and parts hereof, even as of baptism, are of two sorts: the one
is earthly and sensible, the other is heavenly and removed from all outward
senses.


M. What is the earthly and sensible part?


S. Bread and Wine: both which matters, the Lord has expressly commanded all to
receive.


M. What is the heavenly part and matter removed from all outward senses?


S. The body and blod of Christ, which are given, taken, eaten, and drunken of
the faithful in the Lords supper, only after a heavenly and spiritual manner,
but yet verily and indeed. Insomuch that as the Bread nourishes our bodies: so
Christ's body has most singular force spiritually by faith to feed our souls.
And as with wine men's hearts are cheered, and their strengths confirmed, so
with his blood our souls are refreshed through faith, which is the mean
whereby the body and blood of Christ are received in the Supper. And that
Christ as surely makes them that believe in him, partakers of his body and
blood, as they surely know that they have received the bread and wine with
their mouths and stomachs.


M. Is then the bread and wine changed into the substance of the body and blood
of Christ?


S. No. For that were to destroy the nature of a sacrament, which must consist
both of heavenly and earthly matter.


M. Was this Supper ordained of Christ to be offered as a Sacrifice to God the
Father for remission of sins?


S. No. For the burden of sin, and damnation due unto it, is so great and
horrible that the son of God Jesus Christ only was able to offer sacrifice
for our deliverance from the same. When Christ therefore our Savior died upon
the cross, he once for all fully made that everlasting sacrifice acceptable
to God the Father, for the propitiation of sin, washing us from the same in
his blood for our salvation for ever: and has left nothing for us to do, but
firmly to fix our faith in him, and thankefully to take the use and benefit
of that eternal sacrifice which we chiefly do in the Lords Supper.


M. What is our duty to do, that we may come rightly to the Lords Supper.


S. To examine our selves whether we be true members of Christ.


M. By what token shall we know this?


S. First, if we heartily repent us of our sins. Next, if we stay our selves
and rest in a sure hope of Gods mercy through Christ, with a thankful
remem^rance of our redemption purchased by his ^eath. Moreover, if we conceive
an ear^est mind and determinate purpose to lead ^ur life godly hereafter.
Finally, if seeing (...) the Lords Supper is contained a to^en of friendship and
love among men, we ^eare brotherly love to our neighbors, that is, to all
men, without any evil will ^r hatred.


The end of the Catechism.
Godly Graces to be said before or after meat
Grace before meat.
THe eyes of all things do look up and trust in thee O Lord, thou give thy
meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every
living thing, Good Lord ^lesse us and all thy gifts which we receive of thy
^ounteous liberality, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Our Father which art. etc. Grace after meat.
THe King of eternal glory make us partakers of his heavenly table, Amen.

God save his Church, our Queen, and the Realm, and send us peace in Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Grace before meat.
Whether ye eat or drink (says Saint Paul) or whatsoever ye do else,
let a^ be done to the praise and glory of God, Amen.

Grace after meat.
Glory, honor, and praise be given to thee O Lord, which have fed us from our
tender age and give sustenance to every living thing: replenish our hearts
with joy and gladness, that we always having sufficient, may be rich and
plentiful in all good works, through our Lord Jesus Christ So be it. God save
his Church our Queen, etc.

Grace before meat.
Grant, O most merciful Father, that hunger and thirst being satisfied with
moderate use of these thy gifts sanctified with thy holy word, both our bodies
and minds may so be refreshed, that we may be made more apt and able to do
good works, to the glory of thy holy name, Amen.

Grace after meat.
WE yield our hearty thanks unto thee most loving father, by whose bountiful
goodness our bodies are continually refreshed: beseeching thee to refresh our
souls also with thy heavenly grace, and with thy lively bread of thy most holy
word, and true faith in the same, and with certain hope of life everlasting:
through our Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all
honor and glory, Amen.

Grace before meat.
THe Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, give us grace to consent
together in^o the knowledge of his truth, that we may with one mind and one
mouth, glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Grace after meat.
THanks be unto thee O Lord God almighty, most dear Father of Heaven, for
bringing again from death our Lord Jesus Christ, the great sheapeheard of thy
sheep, through ye blood of the everlasting Testament. And we beseech thee to
make us parfit to do his will, woorking in us that which is pleasant in his
sight, that we be not only the speakers of his word, but the unfeigned
followers of the same, Amen.

Grace before meat.
CHrist which at his last Supper gave himself unto us, promising his body to
be crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins, bless us and our meat,
Amen.

Grace after meat.
THanks be unto thee O Lord God almighty, most dear Father of Heaven, which
at this time have fed us with meat not only ye perishes, but with ye word
which abides into everlasting life. Grant most merciful Father, we hauin^
the knowledge of thy word, may also practice the same in our conversation, that
we both intierl^ loving and unfeignedly believing thy holy word may after this
life, live with thee for ever, Ame^.

Grace before meat.
Receive your meat without grudging,
Take heed ye never abuse the same:
Give thanks to God for every thing,
And always praise his holy name:
Who does not so, is sore to blame.
No evil example see that ye give,
Thus does gods word teach us to live.
Grace after meat.
Whatsoever ye do either in word or deed, do all in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. giving thanks unto God the Father by him.

Blessing, glory wisdom, thanks, honor, power, and might be unto our God,
for evermore, Amen.

This little Catechism learned,
by heart, (for so it ought:)
The Primer next commanded is
for Children to be taught.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for th'assignes of Richard Day.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. Forbidding all other to print this
Catechism. 1601.

woodcut of the adoration of the magi


