ENGLANDS PVRGINGE FIRE.

Conteyninge two Petitions, the one to the Kings most excellent Majesty, the
other to the High Court of Parliament held at this time in England.

Shewinge in diverse perticulers, how the Church in England might be ordered,
yet more consormably to the will of God reveiled in his Word, then at this day
it is.

Herewithall is declared, the evell and lamentable effects of our unable and
negligent Ministers: and the happy fruict of our learned and painful Pastors.

A work most needful for these times, as servinge to turn away the wrath
and Judgments of God from this Land, through the removinge, (according to
the Advertisements herein given) such disorders and evells, as for which the
wrath of God may be, and is, kindled against this Land, and the Church therein.

IER. 6, 16. Thus faith the Lord, stand in the ways, and behold, and ask of
the ancient paths, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your Souls. 16^^.

ENGLANDS PVRGINGE FIRE.
To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the upper
House, with the Knights and Burgesses of the lovver house, assembled in the
high Court of Parliament.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT pleased the Kings most excellent Mastie, very lately to confess among you,
that in the Civil affairs off this Kingdom, he found not things answerable
to that face, which our excellent Government would induce any man to have hope
of; Might it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, to examine the State of
this Land, in Spiritual affairs also, we then the subjects of this happy
Kingedome may well have comforteable hope, of your happy success in these as
in those. It is truly a great measure of Happiness to this Kingdom: it is
also to be acknowledged to our King as a singular Grace off his unto us, that
the Gospel of our Lord and Redeemer is freely preached in this Kingdom,
Solemn Divine Service maintained, and people pressed to resort on the
Sabbath to both; but because the prevailinge of the Gospel, in the lives and
conversations of men is most acceptable to God: and because our people are not
answereable herein to the face of that excellent Government which our Church
carries, I most humbly pray that I may petition this Court, for an entringe
into an examination hereof also. For my part, I havinge here in this Land
drawn my first breath of this mortal life, think my self bound, to employ
whatsoever Grace my God has given me for the Good thereof; therefore I have
adventured to expose my self to danger, in movinge you to vouchsafe your
examination, of the State also of the Church in this Kingedome. This high, (and
worthily High) Court, has here to fore taken care, that God be both
solemnly worshipped, and also served in this Land by peoples obedience,
acknowledginge that this is the Means to put away punishments and plagues from
this Land: As therefore the Gospel is not sent by God to be heard only by
our people, but to be obeyed also, by their ordering their life and
conversation thereafter, or otherwise serves unto condemnation, rather then to
Salvation, so surely it will turn from us punishments and plagues, and
insteade of them will bring upon us holy favors and Blessings, if you take
care of the peoples livinge as becomes Saints. For the furtheringe whereof,
I by a writing adventured many years since to petition his sacred Majesty,
declaringe therein the perticulers wherein I petitioned his Roy all Assistance:
If it shall please you (Right Honorable) that I, for discharge of my
Conscience, may exhibit unto you the copy (well near) of the same, that so
both his sacred Majesty may be put in remembrance thereof, in this so sit a
time for this motion: and also you may be occasioned, as you professedly
tender, so now also to further, the good of this Church, you shall show to me a
Christian favor, and I shall pray for you, that God will second with happy
succrss all your pious endeavors.

Your Lopps in all bounden Duty. THOMAS PROCTOR.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
TO my hearts joy, and to the joy of all good Christians, have you (my most
gracious Lord and King) made known to the world by writing, your
knowledge of the office of a Christian King. As where you write, That
Christian Kings within their own Dominions, are, to Govern the Church, to
command obedience to be given to the word of God, yea and to Reform
Religion, according to Gods prescribed will. Which Office, (most mighty, and
dread Sovereign) well may you perform: long may you live, well to
perform the same, within these your most flourishinge Kingedomes.
Imitatinge herein the good Kings of Israel and Judah, whom and whose
Actions in Governinge the Church, your Majestly has set before Christian
Kings and Princes as examples unto them, for their rulinge over the Christian
Church, within their several Dominions. Which excellent knowledge and
religious Care of your Majesty's so made evident to the world, put me in good
hope that it would not be displeasinge unto you, if collectinge out of
Scripture some of the special Acts of those good Kings of Israel and Judah,
I thereby took occasion to write unto your Majesty of some things of great
importance, wherein the Church of God in England needs the redress of your
powerful hand. Which thing (Dread Sovereign) I have not done, either with
any vain conceit, thinking to better by instruction your excellent
knowledge: or with any insufferable presumption, in pressinge your execution
of Royal Duties with more have then convenience; but only, that I might
discharge a Christian Duty, by petitioninge your powerful Assistance in some
things, wherein your tymely help may greatly further the good of the Church
of God. Neither truly is there any thing better besittinge your Royal hand,
then is the yeildinge succor to the Church of God, in those things wherein
she greatly needs in these times your aid; For, thus to do, is not only
the perfourmance of a very special duty of the kingely office, but also, it is
an eterniznge of your fame, in the eternal continuance of the Church. How
precious a Name, how long duringe a Fame, have those good Kings of Israel
and Judah obtained, by whose blessed hands tymely assistance was yielded to
the Church of God? What marble Monument of theirs like this? What other Act
of theirs is comparable to this? Their marble monuments are mouldred: and their
other Acts how great and famous so ever, yet make they not their Name and
Memorial so blessed, as does the Record of those things done by them, in
ordeninge the Churches Government according to Gods prescribed will. Hopinge
therefore, both of your Majesty's being like minded with these good Kings,
and also of your gracious acceptance of this my poor writing, written for
the good of this Church of England, I humbly pray, that I may prooceede,
first, to collect out of the Scriptures some of the special Acts of the good
Kings of Israel and Judah concerning this matter of orderinge the Church:
and secondly, (taking occasion therefrom) to show, wherein, or in what
needful perticulers, I, (in all humility) crave your Royal Powerful
Assistance.

I. CHAP.
OF David we read, 1. Chron, 24, 3: That he distributed Zadock of the sons
of Eleazar, and Ahimilech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their Offices
in their Ministration. Again; Of Hezekiah we read, 2. Chron, 31, 2: That he
appointed the courses of the Priests and Levits, by their turns, every man
according to his office, both Priests and Leuits, for the burnts Offerings and
peace Offerings, to Minister, and to give thancks, and to praise, in the gates
of the tents of the Lord. Again, we read of the same King, 2. Chron, 24, 25:
That he appointed also the Levits in the house of the Lord, with Cymbals, with
Viols, and with Harps, according to the commandment of David, and Gad the
Kings Secr, and Nathan the Prophet: for the commandment (notes this
Scripture) was by the Hand of the Lord, and by the hand of his Prophets.

Hence we have evidence, that the Kings Office streatcheth, to order the
Ecclesiastical Ministers and Ministrations, according to the Ordinance or
Commandment of God; therefore Kings are Gods Ministers, to see that such
Ecclesiastical Officers and Offices as God ordained in the Church, be found
in the Church of God within their several Dominions. But how cann Kings
under the Christianity do this, if they have not power over those, in whom
is the power of Ordeyninge Ecclesiastical Ministers, constreyninge them (if
need be) to ordeine such Ministers as need? For Ministers must first be,
before they can be distributed to the several Offices; neither can our Kings
distribute Ministers to the several Offices, if they have not power over those
by who^ ecclesiastical Ordination is conveyed. Under the Law, Ministers were
propagated by Generatio; under the Ghospel they are propagated by Ordination;
therefore where Ministers want to be distributed to due Offices, the King is
Gods Minister to constreine (if need be) the Minister who has power of
Ordination, to ordeine Ministers for needful offices. Such ecclesiastical
Ministers therefore, as God by his word preserved in Scripture, gives us
light and vvarrant for that they ought to be in the Church, we may petition
your Majesty that they be ordained and distributed to their appointed Offices,
if our Clergy in whom is the power of Ordination be herein negligent. True
it is, that this Church has been very happy, in its preservinge in the
Reformation, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: and we of these
times are herein likewise happy, that such are continued in this Church with
your Majesty's gracious allowance; therefore I am not in this Chapter to
petition for the ordeyninge of such Ministers. That which I petition your
Majesty for in this Chapter is: 1. That such ecclesiastical Officers as are
wantinge in our Church, may be ordained in this Church. 2. That Pa^ishes,
Bishopdomes, and Arch Bishopdomes, may be conveniently bounded. 3. That you
continue to free this Church, from all foreign and unlaw full ecclesiastical
usurpations and Powers.


THose ecclesiastical Officers which I accoumpt to want unto our Church, are,
Lay Elders or Governors in every Parrish Church, who, with, though under the
Clergy in that Church, should Govern the Church in that Parrish. But because
these are not only not as yet admitted in this Church, but also are by our
Clergy comtemptuously written of, and spoaken against, therefore I humbly
pray, that I may, first, show by the word of God in Scripture, that God
Orderned such in the Church: and secondly, that I may answer some questions
which may be moved concerning such.

The Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12, 28, says thus: And God has ordained some
in the Church, as first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, then
them that do Miracles: after that, the gifts of healinge, Helpers,
Governors, diversity of tongues. From which Scripture appears, that by Gods
Ordinance there were in those time Governors in the Church, which both were
inferior to Teachers, and also were not Teachers. That they were to be inferior
to Teachers appears, in that they are ranked in order far under Teachers: for
as Teachers here rancked under Apostles in Order, were doubtless inferior to
Apostles, so these Governors thus rancked under Teachers in Order, were
inferior to Teachers. And that they were not Teachers may appear, in that,
verse, 29, the Apostle says: Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all
Teachers? for this manner interrogation of the Apostles proves, that as all
Teachers were not Apostles, so those named after Teachers were not Teachers.
And indeed why says the Apostle, are all Teachers? if it miply not, that
those which follow Teachers were not to be Teachers? I conclude therefore from
this Scripture, that it was Gods own Ordinance, that there should be in the
Church a sort of Governors besides Teachers, and which might not be Teachers.

To this we may add yet a further evidence for this, which we have by another
portion of Scripture, as, 1. Tim. 5, 17, where we thus read: The Elders that
Rule well, are worthy of double Honor: specially they that labor in the
word and Doctrine. Where, the Apostle not proceedinge from Teachinge to
labouringe in Teachinge, but from Rulinge to labouringe in the word, this
argues undeniably, that some for Rulinge well only, were worthy of double
Honor, For when the Apostle says, The Elders that Rule well are vvorthie of
double Honor, who cann deny double honor to these if they only Ruled well,
and Taught not at all? Therefore I cannot but conclude, that in those times
there were Governors in the Church, who for Rulinge well only, though they
labored not in the word, were worthy of double Honor. And indeed if here we
should take the construction which some make of this speech, where they say,
that here the Apostle means that all these Elders are Teachers, and that he
specially commends some of them for labouringe, or taking more pains in the
word then others took then it would follow first, that not for Ruling well
only some were to have double Honor, (which thing is directly against this
Scripture): secondly that some Teachers were worthy of double honor for Rulinge
well only, though they Taught not at all; but this were an error not to be
conceaved in the Apostle, seeing not to Teach but only Rule, is in a Teacher or
Preacher of the Gospel, such a Neglect of a very special Duty, as that such
Teacher is worthy rather of Reproof and Punishment then of double Honor.
Moreover, if the Apostle would have us understande, that some Teachers are
worthy of double Honor for Rulinge well, but specially such as labor more
painefully in Teachinge, then it had benefit he should have said: Those Elders
that teach and Rule well, are worthy of double Honor: specially they that
labor in the word more then others: for verily, it is an unfit skippinge from
Rulinge, to a degree of Comparison in Teachinge Lastly, seeing Preachinge is a
labor, the Apostle might well say, specially they that labor and yet without
making use of any comparison between them and other Teachers; neither indeed
cann it be said, that any one that Teaches at all, labors not in the word
and Doctrine. These things considered, we have good warrant from this
Scripture to collect and affirm: That in as much as none may deny but that by
this speech, some were to have double Honor though they Ruled well only: And
in as much as no Teacher but deserves reproof if he Rule well only and Teach
not; Therefore here is an evidence, That the Christian Church was to have in it
Elders, who were not to be Teachers but Rulers only. This evidence from sacred
Scripture for such Governors considered, how cann any safely oppose the work
of one of the special Angels of the Reformation, even Calvin, in his
restoringe such to the Church of God? Doubtless a special Act of a special
Angel of the Reformation, is no small bond unto the rest of the Churches
Reformed, specially when it has this Light from Scripture, of the
correspondence thereof to the Ordinance of God, in the first and Apostolically
planted Churches. Thus having proved, that Governors who were not Teachers,
were yet ordained by God to be in the Church, I now pray that I may proceed,
to answer certain questions, which may by some be moved co^cerni^^ such
Governors.

Some may say: If these were then in the Church, yet, is there any necessity
that such should be now also in our Church? I answer, Though all Officers and
Offices which we find by Scripture to have been in the Church, be not
necessarily to be now also in our times in the Church, (for we read of
Apostles, Prophets to foretell things, also of workers of Miracles, Speakers
of Tongues, Interpreters of Tongues, etc: all which being by extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit, the Gift failinge, the Office and Officer fails also)
yet, such Offices as might be executed without such extradinary Gifts, were
to be continued in the Church. And indeed why have we Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, if not because such were ordained in the first plantation
of the Church, and might be continued by Ordination without any Need of any
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit? As therefore we are necessarily to follow
the example of Gods Ordinance in the beginning for these, so the same example
is a bond, for the Churches havinge in it also such Governors as now I write
of. To conclude, as in the Reformation we retain such Clergy and Offices, as
which have some evidence in holy Scripture to be planted by Gods Ordinance in
the Church in the first times, so this evidence in Scripture for Governors who
are not to be Teachers, ought to be a bond to the Church, to restore this
Ordinance of God to the Church in the Reformation made. For saying we follow
not Tradition without some evidence in Scripture for other Offices of our
Clergy, we ought not to follow the corruption and neglect of Tradition,
against the Scriptures light yielded us for such Governors as now I write.
Let us not therefore kick against Gods Ordinance: Let us not despise it as a
needeless thing: Let us not bring down visitations upon us for such neglect:
Let us not say all is already well Reformed, when yet such Governors are not
in our Church; but rather let us meekely bear the yoke of this Ordinance of
God also, that so our people and Congregations may hereby be the more
Christianly Governed. Cann we think that the Neglect of such an Ordinance of
God, will not breed a defect in the well Governinge of the Church?
Doubtless, as all the Ordinances of God rended to the furtherance of the
Ghospells out spreadinge, and well Governinge them converted by the Gospel,
so where so speaciall an Ordinance is omitted, as is this of plantinge
Governors who are not Teachers, there, both the Gospel will the less
prevail, and the people also will be the more negligent, to bring fourth the
fruicts thereof in their life and conversation. Do but look upon the
difference of people, and effect of the Gospel, where such Governors are,
and where they are not restored, and by the evidence which experience yields,
be moved to acknowledge the Benefit of restoringe this Ordinance of the Lords.

Again some may say: How have these failed all this time? To this also I
answer, It is indeed uncertain how; but yet, saying we find by the word
of God that by Gods Ordinance such were planted in the Church, we have good
cause to Believe, that by some corruption of Tradition they failed. For my
part, I conceave, That soon after the Apostles times, the Church converted
all Church Officers into Clergy, and by making all Clergy, the use of Lay
Governors falled. Moreover, the convertinge them into Clergy, might occasion
that they were not found in after time in every Church, because of the
insupportable burden of every Church or Congregations maintayninge of its
Charge many Persons.

Again some may say: Are they then to be Lay Men? I answer, yes; for if God
exempt not any as for his Clergy from labouringe for their own Means, but
such as Preach the Gospel, none who are not Preachers of the Gospel are may
be accoumpted Clergy; But these (as before I have proved) were not to be
Teachers or Preachers of the Gospel, therefore they were not to be of the
Clergy, but of the Laiety. And that none but those who Preach the Gospel,
exempted as Gods Clergy from labor, may appear by that which the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 9, 14 says, in these words: So also has the Lord Ordained, that they
which Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And verse, 6, he says:
Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power not to work? who feeds a flock,
and eats not of the milk of the flock? Where we see, that it is the
Ministration of the Gospel, that conferrs upon any this Privilege, that he
is not to work for his livinge, but is to be maintained of the Charge of Gods
People. Now Clergy is as much as Gods Lot, set apart to be maintained of the
Charge of Gods people, for the Service they do to God for others; therefore
none but such may be accoumpted Gods Clergy. Moreover, if the Apostle argue
for this Privilege from any ones Preaching the Gospel, how shall we
vvarrantably ease our selves, of that rabble of Popish Clergy, which by
corruption of Tradition Popery would thrust upon us if we understande not the
Apostle here, that only they who feed the flock by Preaching, are to be
accoumpted for Clergy? If it be now objected, that Deacons are Clergy, and
yet Deacons Preach not until they be licensed, then I answer, That Deacons may
be restreyned, not for that they may not Preach by right, but for that they
should first be tried and proved, least being young Students they preach evell
Doctrine through ignorance. And indeed we fyndinge in Scripture, that Deacons
remayninge Deacons were Preachers, Acts, 6, 8, and, 8, 5, we may well say
that Deacons as Deacons have right to Preach. But here we find Governors who
are not to be Teachers; therefore these cannot claim the Privilege of
Clergy as may Deacons.

I conclvde therefore, that seeing Gods Clergy is as his Lot to be maintained
at the Charge of his People: and seeing the Apostle claims this for Preachinge
the word, therefore these Governors not being to be Teachers, have no right
to be of the Clergy, but are to be Lay Elders.

Again, some may say: But must such be in every Parrish Church? I answer, yes:
For Acts 14, 23. we read thus: And when they had ordained them Elders by
Election in every Church, they commended them to the Lord in whom they
Believed; if then in every Church there were ordained a plurality of Elders,
safest it is to have many Elders in every Church. Moreover, saying here it is
said that Elders (implyinge many) were ordained in every Church: and seeing we
have before proved, that in those times there were in the Church, Elders who
only Ruled, and taught not: and seeing it is not likely that the Apostle, would
so soon Charge every Church with many Clergy; therefore most likely it is,
that these Elders were many, being part Clergy for Rulinge and Teachinge,
part Lay Elders serving so, Rule only. And indeed, seeing the Apostle
commended the Churches to the Lord, it argues, that he had furnished them with
such Elders, as in those times were ordained by God to be in the Church; but I
have before proved, that God ordained Governors who were not Teachers, as well
as Teachers who also Governed; therefore we may not think, that the Apostle
left these Churches defective in either of these. Furthermore, seeing every
Congregation is necessarily to have a Teaching Elder, (for, should a flock be
without a Shephearde) every Congregation is likewise to have such
Ecclesiastical Officers as are under Teachers; for though every Congregation
be not to have those Offices above Teachers, and which are set over Teachers,
such as are Bishops, and Archbishops, yet, such Offices as are under Teachers
every Congregation is necessarily to have.

To conclude, saying a Parrish Church cannot be denied to be a church,
therefore necessarily it ought to have in it, as Elders to Teach, so Elders to
Rule only: for the defect in either of these, would surely produce a defect
in the Governinge of the same. For this cause we may not content our selves with
our Civil Lawyers only, saying they are not in every Church, but only in
the whole church of a Bishopdome, and in the Bishops court only. Neither may
we take our Church wardens and Side Men for these Governors, saying they
have not Power of Judgment and Punishment; whereas Government is lame of one
hand if it have not this Power. Surely therefore, according to Gods Ordinance,
every church which has any Elders in it, is to have a Government by Elders, but
Governinge implies power of Iudginge and Punishinge, therefore every church is
to have this power in it, as it will not be defective in its Government.
Verily, if we look upon our people in England, observinge their life and
conversation in every Parrish, we may well say that here wants the Government
in overy Parrish which here we see the Lord ordained For, our people for the
most part, contentinge themselves to come to church only, and satisfye the
Law by hearing Divine Service and the word Preached, never make conscience
of livinge also thereafter, and this for want of feeling near them the Power
of this Parishionall Government. For whilst at home in their Parrish they may
use unchristian Liberty in their actions and Talks, so long as they keep
themselves from so offendinge, as that the Law takes hold of them, our people
are mervailous careless of observinge in their speech, the holy restreinte of
the Gospel. But if they saw near them in their own Parrish, a Teacher, and
a Deacon, for Clergy, and some of their Neighbors of the Laiety, havinge
Power to call the disorderly to Accoumptes, and to Punish them who live not as
the Gospel requires, then, what with the neereness of the observinge eyes of
these Governors, and what with the sense of their power to Judge and Punish
them, if they observe not the Gospel in their life and Conversation, a holy
Awe would fall upon Gods people in every Parrish, causinge an abstayninge from
unseemely Acts and Conversation. And this much the rather, because these
Governors dwellinge here and there among them, they are near in every quarter
of the Parrish, to have knowledge of such as make no conscience to live and
converse as beseems Christians. Therefore as well for the utility to Gods
people, which would arise by the havinge in every Parrish, diverse of the
Ancient, godly, and honest of the Laiety, to Govern in the Parrish, as for
this evidence from Scripture, that such were ordained in every Church, we
should be moved to receave willingely, the ordeyning of such in every Parrish
Church. If it be objected, that here every City, not every Church is meant,
then I answer, That in those times it is likely, that some Cities had but one
Congregation, and being so, then to say of them, every City, or every Church,
is to one effect; neither truly is it likely, that so soon every City
affoorded many Churches. Moreover, saying it was Churches, not Cities, that
were to be thus ordered, we are rather to understande every Church, then every
City for these reasons I conclude, that it is safest and most proffitable,
that every Parrish-Church have ordained in it, Lay Elders to Govern only,
as well as Clergy Elders, who both are to Teach and Govern. If it be said,
that every Parrish-Church havinge Clergy Elders, as, a Teacher or Pastor, and
a Deacon, then thus Scripture makes nothing for Lay Elders, then to this I
answer, That saying there is evidence, that in those times there were Elders
which Ruled and Taught, and Elders which Ruled only and taught not, therefore
fittest it is, that here we understande not a plurality of Clergy Elders
only, but rather part Clergy part Laiety.

Again, some may say, How many must they be in Number? I answer, saying we
read of Elders ordained, without readinge also any set Number, therefore the
Church is not bound to observe any set or certain Number. As the Parrish
therefore is more or less in circuit of ground or quantety of people, so
these Governors may be more or sewer: for where a Parrish is narrow of
bounds, though it conteyn much people, yet three or four of these Governors
may serve, saying they are near in neighborhood to every one of the Parrish;
whereas where the Parrishe is large of circuit, there it is needful that they
be seven or eight, to the end that their dwellinge may be here and there, to be
near to those of the Parrish in every quarter to observe them.

Again, some may say, What is their Office? I answer, saying they are called
Governors and Rulers, and yet inferior to Teachers, it implies, that they,
with, though under the Clergy of a Parrish, should Govern the people of the
Parrish. And saying Government is lame, where Power of Iudginge and Punishinge
is wantinge, therefore, (as we would not conceave the Lord to give a Lame
Ordinance to his Church) we are to Believe, that these Governors should
assist the Clergy, in Iudginge and Punishinge with ecclesiastical
Punishments, such in the Parrish, as observe not the Gospel in their life and
conversation. If here it be objected, that then I make them: Ministers of the
same Power in bindinge and loosinge, as the Lord committed to the Clergy
only; I answer, No; for there is difference betwixt byndinge and loosinge the
sin its self, and inflictinge or releasinge of Punishments: there is
difference between byndinge a Man in his sin, or loosinge him from it, and
punishinge a Man with ecclesiastical Punishments for offenses, or releasinge
him from the the same. And indeed, the word is, John, 20, 23: Whosoevers
sins ye remit, whosoevers sins ye retain; not whatsoever Punishment you
inflict or remit; therefore in the first of these the Clergy only have
Power, but in the second, the mixed Elders of the Church, as well the Lay as
Clergy Elders have Power. When the incestuous Corinthian was to be
excommunicated, the Apostle commits this to a plurality rather then to any one,
1. Cor. 5, 13: Put away there fore from among your selves that wicked Man; And
in the remission or Absolution he does the like, 2. Cor. 2, 7: Ye ought rather
to forgive him. To conclude then, These Lay Governors Office is, to join
with the Clergy of the Parrish in observinge those of the Parrish, whither
they live and converse as beseems Saints, and where any are faulty, there to
judge of the crime, and to proceed against them as the cause requires. If
these Governors offend in their Government, whither by Negligence, or by
untymely Severity, or disorderly proceedings, they have over them the Bishop
and Archbishop, who are to call them to Accoumpt, and to punish them also for
any evell administration of their office; therefore also so much the rather
such Governors may be admitted in every Church and Kingedome, and not opposed
as in these times, as for a dangerous rabble of rude and turbulent
Busy-Bodies. Neither indeed may any be suffered to Rule contrary to the
Gospel, who have their office by the Gospel, therefore if Pastors and
Bishops must be, 2. Tim. 2, 24, gentle toward all Men, sufferinge the evell
Men patiently, provinge if God at any time will give them repentance, that they
may come to amendment, how much more should these inferior Governors be like
minded? For if Government and Justice be not hindered by this lenity in Pastors
and Bishops, why should this prejudice the same, if these Governors do
likewise? And if Timothy must not receave an Accusation against an Elder, but
under two or three witnesses, I. Tim. 5, 19, much less must these inferior
Governors, hand over head trouble Men, upon every report they hear, or
suspicion they have. And if the Elders of the Church be so to be respected, are
not the Elders of the Kingedome, even Princes and Magistrates to be likewise so
respected? As God tendereth the Elders of the Church, that every report, or
every little evidence of evell, shall not be presently taken hold of to their
disgrace, so we may well think that even such his will is also, concerning the
Civil Magistrates of the Kingdom; therefore the Governors of the Church ought
to be slow in meddling with such. S. Peter also, 1. Pet 5, 3, charge the
Elders Church, that not as though they were Lords over Gods heretage, they
should Govern the same. Whilst this bridle therefore is put into the mouths
of these Governors, and this also by the Ordinance of God, these Governors
need not so to be opposed as some would have it, under pretense that they
would prove in the Kingdom, a sort of ignorant Men, puffed up by this Power
and Authority, and troublers of men upon every the least occasion. True it is,
that we must understande, that as the Kingedome, so the Church, may not so
pervert Justice, as not to lay hold on them that sin openly; therefore where
there is an open sinninge these may not be timorous, under color of
sufferinge the evell men patiently. Yea, I say more, when it is heard
certainly abroad, (as was that 1. Cor. 5, 1.) that such or such a Man is a
Drunkarde, a whore master, fornicator, Adulterer, extortioner, Railer, filthy
speaker, or the like, such fame or report must not be neglected, but rather
must occasion a watchinge over such, and when dut Accusation shall second the
Report, then may they no neglect to proceed against such. To this I may add
as a part of their care and Government, that they see the Church decently kept,
and the Congregation ordered in fit manner, as well for order in sittinge, as
for perfourmance of such Ceremonies as serve to express Reverence at Divine
Service. In a word, they are to see that Men live and converse, as the
ordinance of the Gospel, together with the Churches Canons (not dissonant
from the Ghospells ordinances) require. Surely the Benefit of such Lay
Governors in every Congregation would be great; for by their Elderly Gravity
of years, and Authority which such kind of Eldershipp only carries with it:
and by the plurality of their Number, and their dwellinge in several parts of
the Parrish, not only an Awe of them would fall upon them of that
Congregation, but also a certainety of crimes would the sooner be attained, so
that men could hardly live long disorderly, but they would be known so to do
to some or other of these Governors. Moreover, by such Governors our people
would be bettered, and the Churches State and Majesty would be increased; for
our people saying that the Ancient among them, have Authority even by Gods
Ordinance, to observe, Govern, Judge, and punish them, they will be the more
careful to live and converse as beseems Christians: And the church havinge
the Ancient of the Laiety in every Congregatio, joined with the Clergy in the
Government of the church, and servinge as Governors inferior to the Clergy,
the State and Authority of the church would greatly be augmented To conclude
then, if God sent out the Gospel accompanied with this kind of goveruours
also, (which thing I have before proved from the Scriptures) cann we expect any
other then detriment, yea and punishment, if we deny to admit such governors;
Shall not our Land and Kingedome suffer visitations, for the Neglect and
Opposinge of so holy and necessary an Ordinance of God? Shall the Gospel be
admitted, and its Government kept out? or cann we expect proffit by the Gospel
if thus we do? For doubless Judgments accompany the Gospel, where the
Government ordained to accompany it will not be admitted. For the avoidinge of
Gods judgments therefore, and for the betteringe of our people, yea for the
augmentation of the State and Majesty of our Church of England, let these Lay
Elders be admitted, into the Ecclesiastical Rule and Government. To this I may
add, that as common experience shows, the puttinge Offices of Power and
government into Men's hands, makes them grow in kuowledge of the Laws, and
careful of their Manners, so surely the puttinge this Ecclesiastical Power
and government into the Elders of the Laiety, would both occasion their search
more diligently into the word of God, thereby to increase their knowledge of
the Divine will, and also their careful taking heed unto their Manners, that
they give not offense to them whom they are to govern. Yea the younger Men also
in every Parrish, saying the Credit and honor of such place of government,
would study the Scriptures, and take care of their Manners, that so they may
attain a fame or good report for their honesty and Piety, so to be the fitter
to be employed in such Office of government as their turns may come.

Lastly, some may say, Must these being once employed in this Office, ever
remain in this Office, and not be employed in other Offices of the Kingedome?
I answer, first, that there is great difference between the Ministration of
the word, and the Ministration of government only; the first is not to be
left off; the second may without offense: For the word of God has laid no
such bond on this as on that. Secondly, saying it would be an insufferable
mischeife unto Kingedomes, if many of the Elders thereof in every Parrish,
should be wholly exempted from its employment in Offices needful thereunto,
therefore we may not conceave, that the Lord would send such a Government
ecclesiastical into them, as which should bring with it such an inconvenience
and mischeife. I conclude therefore, that these Lay Governors are not bound
by the Lord, to continue ever in their Office, but now may serve in the
government of the Church, and another time not.

Thus have I (Dread Sovereign) been the more prolixe in my wrytinge of these,
because this our Church of England does hitherto rather oppose then admit of
such; but now havinge showen from the word of God, that of Gods Ordinance
such a kind of Governors or Rulers are to be in the Church; I humbly petition
your Majesty, that you command our Clergy in whom is the Power to confert
ecclesiastical Powers and Offices, that they exercise their Power herein,
ordeyninge some of the ancient and godly of the Laiety, to this Power and
Authority in every of our Parrish Churches. So shall you surely do a work,
acceptable to God, beneficial to the Church, and worthy of that great Name
which you have raised to your self in the Churches of God. Suffer therefore
patiently I humbly pray you, this my petition for the admission of these kind
of Ecclesiastical Governors, that so the Officers ecclesiastical ordained by
God, may be wholly found in this our Church of England. I grante that many
other Offices may be ordained in the Church, as the Change of times, increase
of Magnificence of Gods Divine Service, and other like things may occasion; but
these before written of are such as may not be omitted, because they have
evidence from the word of God, to by the Ordinance of God Apostolically
delivered; therefore also the Clergy in whom is the power of Ordination, are
of duty bound to renew this Ordinance of the Lords in the Church. But havinge
written thus of these ecclesiastical governors. I proceed to write of
extentions also of ecclesiastical jurisdictions.

2. PETITION: That Parishes, Bishopdomes, and Arch-Bishopdomes, may be
conveniently bounded.
SOme of our Parishes are so small, and withal conteyne in them so few people,
that neither the Congregation bears a State befittinge a Church, nor yet cann
a convenient Means or Revenewe be raised therefrom for a Pastor and Deacon his
assistant; And on the contrary, some other Parishes retayninge their very
ancient bounds, conteyne now (by Gods multiplyinge the people in that place)
so many People, that al cannot at one time conveniently assemble in the church.
I therefore petition, that the smaller be made larger, and those which are too
large may be divided, that so neither Gods Ministers be discouraged, by the
smaleness of Revenewe or Means of life, nor Gods people dishartened from
coming to Church, through want of convenient place, when they come there.
Some Parishes also abound with strangers, who are but lodgers for a time, yet
in such places provision were good to be made, that such may have convenient
place in the church, least else it occasion in them, either a wandringe from
the Parrish, or a Neglect to resort to any Church at all. It has in all ages
been seen, that Change of condition of things, has caused change of former
orderinge of things; for it is no disorder to change the antie^t disposure of
things, when to reteyne the same brings with it great disorder and detriment.
Moreover, though Changes carry with them diffently of perfourmance, yet
experience has declared, that when the Magistrates authority concurreth with
the occasion, all difficultyes have readily been overcome, by the peoples
voluntary tendinge their own Benefit, and the Benefit of other. Populous
Congregations are surely most meet, both because a convenient Means may be
better be raised for a Teacher or Pastor, and a Deacon his assistant; and also
a plurality of grave and godly Men may be chosen by turns, to serve in that
Parrish for Governors, according to that which I have written above; if
therefore such a multitude be appointed, as which being close seated together,
and disposed in galleries, the voice of a Preacher may well be heard of them,
then judge I the Congregation to be duly proportioned. And indeed want of
disposinge the room of the church, as best may fit to conteyne a great
multitude, and this also within hearing the voice of a Teacher, causes that
far fewer assemble convenlently then were meet; for it is but vain there to
resort, where though the church have room enough, yet use cannot be made of
it for hearing the Preacher. True it is that Men's voices are diverse, neither
cann all volces answer to the serled disposure; but yet if respect be had to
the ordinary voice of Man, and the Room fitted according thereto, fitter it
is that the defect of voice be supplied by some help, then that the disposure
of place for audience be changed. Such Pastors therefore as have low voices,
may do well to supply that defect with oftener Preachinge, that so at one time
some, at another time others of the Parrish may conveniently hear them. These
things I write of our Parrishes in populous Cities, where the neereness of
dwellinge, and multitude of strangers lodged, causes a very great Congregation
in a small quantity of ground; but in the Country, where in a very large
circuit of ground are but few inhabitants, the proffit of the people rather
then State of a Congregation is to be tendered, leastby too long leangth and
difficulty of way, people be dishartned from resortinge to Church. Surely the
former disposure of these things in this Land was very good, according to
the times, and we in these times need the less alteration, save where the
Parrish is too small to yield a convenient Revenewe, or else too great to
assemble within hearing of a Preacher. Thus havinge written of our
Parrish-boundes, I pray that I may write also of the bouudes of our
Bishoppricks and Arch bishoppricks.

If Arch-Bishhopps succeed in the Office of Timothy and Titus, meet it is
that they execute in the Church that Office; therefore the bounds of their
Charge should be such, as wherein conveniently that weighty Charge may be
executed by them. And indeed it is fitter to respect rather, the Proffit of
the due execution of the Charge, then the Pontificality of the Bishop; though
both are to be tendered, yet the former rather then the latter.

Now, that Arch-Bishopps propperly, rather then Bishops, succeed in the Office
of Timothy and Titus, I gather from this evidence: First, because Titus had
entrusted unto him by the Apostle, the Charge and Care of diverse Cities and
their Churches, Titus, 1.5: Secondly, because the Scripture shows by many
perticulers, that the Office of Titus, and the Office of Timothy was one and
the same; but the Office being the same, the extention of the Charge over
diverse Cities may also be the same: Thirdly, because the ancient Fathers with
one voice, did ever accoumpt of the Offices of Timothy and Titus to be a like:
Lastly, because the ancient Christian Church, allowed of the Charge of one over
diverse Cities and their Churches and Officers, as an Ordinance Apostolically
delivered to the church: and in ancient time such were called Arch-Bishopps;
which also was a Name very anciently given even to the Bishop of Rome himself.
These thiugs considered I conclude, that in as much as now, and in the most
ancient times, Archbishops have and had the Charge of the Churches in diverse
Cities, therefore they propperly succeed in the Office of Timothy and Titus:
For surely City-Bishops never had the Charge of diverse cities, but only of
one city, and some circuit of ground there, about at most. This therefore I now
petition your sacred Majesty for, that in England, the Office or Charge of
Timothy and Titus, be required of our Archbishops to be executed by them in
this Church: and that the bounds of their Jurisdiction be so limited, that
conveniently they may execute that Charge. And for the Charge, I rather have an
eye to that which I find in the Epistles of Timothy and Titus, then to the
Canons of the Church in after time: for the first I am sure are necessary
duties, for which the Officer is answereable to God; whereas the latter are not
of like Nature, save only that they may be wholesome Ordinances, so far
fourth as they are accordant to the evidence of sacred Scripture. The charge
which we find given to Timothy and Titus, is a Charge to see all of all sorts
to live according to the Gospel, and observe the Ordinances of God given to
the Church by the Apostles; therefore his Charge streatcheth to private
Christians, to see that they live as the Gospel requires, and also to all
Officers of the Church, to see that they be chosen such as are appointed, and
perform their Offices righty in the Church. Which great Charge that it may
the better be effected, the Apostle entrusted him with Power, to command
things that are right, and to receave Accusations against them that do evell,
and to silence Teachers of evell things, and reject heretics, 1. Tim, 4, 12.
1, Tim, 5, 14. Titus, 1, 11. Titus, 3, 12. Many perticulars are set down in
those two Epistles, which I will obbreviate as I may in this manner: in the
first Epistle to Timothy, The place of aboade is assigned, Chap. 1, 3: He has
the Charge of other Teachers, that they teach none other Doctrine then they
ought, Chap. 1, 4: That heed be not given to things that breed questions,
and brawlinges, rather then godly edifyinge, Chap. 1, 4: That there be an Order
of Divineworship, or Service, chap 2, 1, That women be silent in the Church,
Chap. 2, 12: That Bishops be such and such, and do so and so, chap. 3, 1: That
Deacons likewise be such and such, and do so and so, chap. 3, 8: That he put
all in remembrance of Apostolical Doctrynes, chap. 4, 6: That the Church be
not unnecessarily burdened with Charge, chap. 5, 16: That he rebuke them
openly that sin, chap. 5, 20: That he have care of layinge on of hands, chap,
5, 22: That Elders who Rule well be honored, chap, 5, 17: That the Elders who
not only Rule, but Teach also, be both honored and maintained, chap. 5, 18:
In the second Epistle, He is warned against those who havinge-itchinge ears,
will get them Teachers after their own lusts, chap. 4, 3: That he must do the
work of an Evangelist, chap. 4, 5. In the Epistle to Titus: That be redress
things, Chap. 1, 5: That he ordeyne Elders, chap. 1, 3: That he silence
Teachers of evell things, chap, 1, 10: That obedience be yielded to
Principalities and Powers, chap. 3, 1: That foolish questions, contentions, and
brawlinges be stayed, chap. 3, 4: That Heretics be rejected, chap. 3, 10. Many
other are the perticulers of this Officers Charge, as to see that Servants
behave themselves as they ought toward their Masters, Titus, 2, 9: That Elder
Men and Women be so and so, and the younger Men and Women likewise: and other
like; besides his own private Ministration of the Gospel. Now therefore, if
the perticulers whereto this Officers Office streatcheth, be duly considered,
let any judge, if our Arch-Bishopps bounds in England be convenient for the due
execution. For to what end has a man charge of these perticulers, if both he
be not conveniently near to visit places, and see to the observation of these
things, and also that Accusations against disobedience be not conveniently to
be made unto him? If one Archbishop should be set over all England, were it
sufficient? could he conveniently execute this Charge in the church? neither
truly cann two; therefore Archbishops should be multiplied, that so the Land
may have so many, as well may serve for the due execution of this high Charge.

True it is, that Crete is an isle of great circuit of ground, and contained
in old time many more cities then in these times it does; but respect is tobe
had unto the times; for difference is to be put between times, when but few in
a Land are converted to the Christian faith, and when all the people of a
Land are converted. When few are converted, the Congregations or churches are
the fewer, and consequently the Charge is the less, and the better to be
executed, but when all are converted, then, as necessarily the Churches are
multiplied so also is tho Charge increased, and consequently the duties of the
Office are made the more disticult to be executed in all.

Neither is it probable, nor is it likely, that in the time of Titus, all the
people in that isle of Crete were converted to the faith; but if they were
not, then to retain in the Successors hands the same extent of ground as had
Titus, were to commit to the less able Successor, a greater charge of Churches
then the Apostle entrusted to Titus: which thing cannot be done, without
great prejudice to the Christian church.

As Parishes therefore are to be multiplled, and one to be made two or three,
after the people grow too many for one Congregation, so ancient
Arch-Bishoppdomes bounds should be lessned, and one divided into three or
four, when the People make too many Churches to be entrusted unto one
Arch-Bishopp. I most humbly pray your Majesty therefore, that the perticulers
of the Office be duly considered, and then that the bounds of our
Archiepiscopall lurisdictions may be fitted thereunto. Doubtless if our
Archbishops took care as they ought of the perticulers of this Charge, they
would soon make a holy People in this Land, by reason of their near eye to
observe the several Churches, and their receavinge Accusations when need
requires. And truly the Archbishops Court should not be ordained so much,
for some perticulers tendinge to the Rule over other Bishopdomes, as it should
be for the correctinge of disobediences in all these perticulers, when neither
in the Parishionall, nor in the Episcopal Court and Government order is taken
in the same: For the Archiepiscopall Charge is no less, to see Evangelicall
Ordinances observed in the Manners of every particular Christian, then to see
that Pastors and Bishops, and other ecclesiastical Officers, execute their
Ministrations rightly.

I grant, that Parishionall, and over them Episcopal Goverments, greatly ease
the Archbishop, and because of them his Charge may be very large, comprisinge
diverse Bishopdomes; but yet with this caution, that he may conveniently visit
every part, and also from all parts Accusasations may conveniently be made
unto him; when there is any fail in the Parishional and Episcopal Government.
Neither truly ought Arch-Bishopdoms to be extended out as Kingedomes: For
Kingedomes are in larged or restreyned as their Power cann extend its self,
which also is ordered by God himself, he letting loose and restreyninge the
Powers as he will; whereas Arch Bishopdoms ought to be fitted to the execution
of the Charge of the Office. Thus have I (Dread Sovereign) been the longer in
my wrytinge of Arch-Bishopps, because of the necessary consequence, that if
they be made less, then Bishopdomes also should not be too large, because
diverse of them are to be comprised in one Arch Bisho-dome. For Bishopdomes
therefore I in breife pray, that in our England they may be more, that so they
not comprisinge over many Patishes, the Bishop may conveniently visit the
particular Parishes, and Accusations conveniently be made out of all Parishes
which fail in Government, unto him. The Bishop differs from the Archbishop
cheisely in this, that his Charge streatcheth not over other City Bishops, but
only over Bishops or Pastors and other Clergy of particular Congregations. As
for other differences which the Canons of the Church have put, they are
necessary as the times require only: For the Churches Ordinances have ever
been dispensed with, in cases of Necessity when they could not be observed, and
when there is no more needful use of the same; but this difference which here
I put, seems to be a Divine Ordinance, in as much as Titus was set over diverse
Cities and the churches therein, and consequently over all ecclesiastical
Officers which necessarily are in them. But then if the Arch-Bishopps Charge
streacheth to Man and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, saying
to it that they in their Manners one toward another, observe the commandments
of the Gospel, should not the Bishops Office within his particular limits
streatch to the same? Therefore I humbly pray, that our Bishops Office be not
streigtned unto some few perticulers, but that it be enlarged to see even to
all these things also, as the most weighty perticulers of his Charge. Which
thing duly considered, I hope it will soon appear, that necessarily (for the
due saying unto these things, and for the convenient making of Accusations of
breach of them, where the Parishionall Government is remiss, not taking due
Care of, and order in such things) our Bishops jurisdictions are to be made
less, then at this time they are in this our Church of England. Doubtless
these Powers and Offices ecclesiastical were cheifely ordained, for Rulinge
of the Manners of Christian people, least they not observinge one toward
another the Evangelicall Commandments, bring a scandal upon the Gospel of
Christ; therefore into these things should our Bishops watchfully look, and
not content themselves with the observation of Ecclesiastical Canons only. If
any say, that the description of this Office is in Scripture such, as is rather
to be wished then effected, I answer, that the Apostle would not so deeply
Charge Timothy with these perticulers as he does, 1. Tim, 5, 21, if he thought
the execution of these things to be rather to be wished then effected;
therefore I hope none shall be suffered to shrowde their Negligence, under the
mantle or coveringe of this devise. If in after times many inventions are made,
to busy Atch-Bishopps and Bishopps so with them, that they cannot attend to
these other, are these which are the weightlest to be left for the lighter?
Shall honor and Glory attend rather those then these? were not this a notable
corruption, a snare of Satan, and an insufferable divertion from the true
Episcopal duties? But now (my most gracious Sovereign) in hope of your
reproof of such things, and commandinge and honoringe these the chiefest
episcopal duties, I pass from writing of the boundings and Jurisdictions,
unto my Petition, for your freeinge our Clergy here, from forreiue and
unlawful Ecclesiastical Powers.

3. PETITION: That your Majesty continue to free this Church, from all
foreign and unlawful Ecclesiastical usurpations and Powers.
THe permission of inconvenient extents of Jurisdiction, has been the chief
cause, not only of the disorders of Ecclesiastical Polity, and of the evell
execution of true Episcopal Charges, but also of the Antichrists Reigninge in
the Church; therefore high time it is that in the Churches Reformation, this
maine error be taken order for. It is reported of that first great and famous
Council of Nice, that it confirmed to the Bishops of certain cities, the huge
extents which formerly their Charge had streatched its self unto; but what
followed hereupon? surely there followed not only the turbulency of such great
Powers, and the insatiable affectation of Glory, but also the openinge or
reveilinge of that Man of sin. For as the Apostle said, 2. Thessal. 2, 6: And
now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be reveiled in his time, so
indeed it fell out; for the Emperors keepinge his Seat at Rome, withheld the
Bishopp of Romes Reveilinge; but the Emperor removinge his Seat to
Constantinople, this Council of Nice some few years after was assembled,
where these huge extents of Jurisdiction being confirmed, the Bishop of Rome
being held as Chief of them, this caused his first measure of Reveilinge. It
is fit therefore that that Councils proceedings be examined, whither in oughts
God left it to dissent from his sacred Word. Papists usually allege that
Council, as countenancinge the offeringe up of the Body and Blood of the Lord
in the Service of the Lords Supper; but if this that Council did, then
expressly erred it from the Scriptureis nstruction concerning that Service.
And how near it was to forbid Priests, the copulation with their wives which
Gods word commandes, 1. Cor, 7, 3, is well known to all that have read the
Story of those times. To this I may add, the uncertainety of its Canons, saying
they are with such uncertainety brought us by Tradition. For all these reasons
I conclude, that that Council is not so to be maintained in its Ordinances, as
that the instruction of sacred Scripture is not rather to be followed. But who
that looks into the holy Scripture shall not see, That Timothy and Titus and
such as were like them, held the highest ordinary Offices in the Church next
unto the Apostles themselves? for by the Epistles of Timothy and Titus it is
evident, that the Apostle set them in Office next himself over the Churches
that were planted. Churches were planted, and they had their Officers and
Governors, but then the Apostle ordained these over them again, and this is
manifest in that Titus had Charge over diverse Cities. Whilst therefore there
is this evidence for their Office: and whilst there is that evidence before
noted, that our Archbishops succeed them in that Office: and whilst the
Church ever held a cessation of Apostles, and the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4, 9, says:
I think that God has set fourth us the last Apostles, etc: We have good
reason, not to suffer other offices to usurp Authority over Archbishops; or
any Arch-Bishopps to be subiugated unto any other Ecclesiastical Ministration.
But if we permit the continuance of those huge extents whereof we read, then,
as necessarily many Arch-Bishopdomes, yea Patriarchdomes must be comprised
therein, so the Bishop of that Seat must be advanced over, and exercise a
Ministration ovet Arch-Bishopps, yea over Patriarchs; which thing what is it,
but both an evertion of the Polity ecclesiastical, which God by his Ordinance
(Apostles taken away) sent the church withal under the Wings of Kings and
Princes: and also a bringinge in Superiorityes, Throanes, and Powers, never
ordained by the Lord? As therefore experience has showen, that when an
Archbishopric has necessarily been divided, then two Archbishops are
placed therein, without subiugating the one under the other, so those ancient
extents of bounds, ought with the increase of the Convertion of people, to have
been divided into many Arch-Bishopdomes, and this without subiugatinge every of
them to the Arch-Bishopp of some one city, who by this means, as he is to take
a New Title, so also he enters into a new Ministration never ordained by the
Lord.

If any say, has not every Snccessor right, to retain the bownds of his
predecessors jurisdiction? I answer, yes, where there is no prejudice thereby
to the Church, and to the Ordinances of God; but when retayninge the same, he
must necessarily Rule over them, whom God by his Ordinance set next unto
Apostles, he then subverts the Ordinance of God, so long as he cannot make
himself an Apostle. Neither cann any ones succeedinge in the Seat of an
Apostle, conferr upon him an Apostles Dignity and Office: for this were to make
such a one an Apostle; but we have good cause to ask of such a one the signs
of his Apostleship, 2. Cor. 12, 12. I conclude therefore, that those extents of
Jurisdiction, which carry with them a bringinge into the Church, Powers and
Ministrations above that of Archbishops, are unlawful, as bringinge into the
Church strange Ministrations, which have no manner warrant from Gods Word in
Scripture, but rather are contrary to the Polity which there God manifests
to his Church. And indeed because of the huge extent of the Pope of Romes
jurisdiction, we find that above Arch Bishopps are Patriarchs, as also
Cardinals (as now Cardinals are) and Popes Legates, and a rabble of other, who
all serve rather as Ministers of this Corruption of Ecclesiastical Polity
warranted by God, then of the church, and of the Gospel. For how many are the
Officers which the Pope of Rome needs for to serve him only, in the execution
of so large a jurisdictio^ as now he exercises? even so proportionably is it
with every Patriarch, yea with every Arch-Bisshop when he has a Jurisdiction
so far extended fourth, as that neither he can personally visit conveniently
the parts of his Charge, nor they of his Charge cann conveniently make
Accusatio^s unto him, if the Parishional or Episcopal Goverments fail in
execution of Justice. But now, saying God has given so blessed Testimony, to
the Reforminge of things by his word in Scripture, why should not such Offices
be cut off, as superfluous and justly Offensive, which exercise any Authority
over the Archbishops of the Christian church? Should we not think that the
Lord expects a Reformation even herein, as well as in Doctrine? Should not his
words direction be of power with us, as well in Reforminge errors of
Jurisdictions, or Powers and Offices, as in reforminge of Doctrynes? Therefore
if the Scripture show, that the Offices of Timothy and Titus, was the highest
ordinary Office in the Church, after Apostles ceased, as being in the life
time of the Apostles next to the Apostles: and if there be good evidence, that
those had under them at the most but Bishopps of Cities, then why should not
Arch-Bishopps be acknowledged as Succeeders into their Office, and consequently
to be the highest ecclesiastical Officer, which God sent the Church with
among the Nations, after his taking away of Apostles? If it be said, that
those who succeeded into the Seats of Timothy or Titus, and others like them,
are Patriarchs, not Arch-Bishopps, then I demand, what Manner Bishops cann any
prove that either Timothy or Titus, or the next Successors ruled over? whither
were they Arch-Bishos or only Bishopps of Cities? Surely, the greatest
evidence of purest and most ancient Tradition is, that those of those Seats
were first accoumpted but Archbishops, and though they seemed to have Charge
of a great circuit of grownde, yet where any Archbishop was ordained, I find
not any good evidence, that they exercised Authority over them also, as now
Patriarchs do over them, and the Pope over Patriarchs. As for the extendinge
out of Care, or seeminge-Charge of the Churches in great extent, we find in
ancient time, not only an affectation, but also a real effectinge, of
chalenginge the Charge of all those Churches, whereunto some Bishop of special
Accoumpt streatched his Advise and Counsalle: as if over all, to whom Advise
and Counsel is given, the giver of Advise and Counsalle should have Charge,
and over the^ exercise Episcopal Authority. If thus the Bishops of those times
did, (and some evidence there is that some so did) then this is no sufficient
warrant, for chalenginge of so excessive charges or Jurisdictions as some
Patriarchs and Archbishops challenge; much less should we admit of such
extentions, when we see that it is discordant to the Ordinance of God, as I
have before showed. Moreover, if the Council of Nice approved of such large
and excessive extents of Care and Jurisdiction in any, yet we are to think,
that it but Confirmed that Jurisdiction which they then had; but at that time
the extentions of Inrisdiction were not so large as in after time. Had the Pope
of Rome then such Jurisdiction as now, when no part of Germany, nor other
Nations had embraced the faith as since they did? Or should we think that that
Council subiugated to that Bishop, Churches not as then propagated? If no,
then neither by warrant of holy Scripture, nor by warrant of that Council,
has that Bishop any right of Jurisdiction over all the Arch-Bisshopps of all
the Christian Nations in the West: As for claim as Successor to the Apostle
Peter, it is strange that he alone, should make a claim of succeedinge to an
Apostle; for where be the other Bishops, who claim to succeed to this or that
Apostle? I find none but him of Antioch: and that also rather a figment of the
Bishop of Romes, then any true claim of that Bishops. And as for his claim
from Scripture, I have elsew here proved it to be directly against that which
our Lord commanded to his Apostles.

These things considered, I now humbly beseech yoursacred Majesty, that as
hitherto you have showen great favor to our Clergy, so you will continue to
preserve them from any foreign and unlawful ecclesiastical Powers, which
would challenge Authority over them. Princes may do well to have an eye at the
wisdom, and gracious Ordinance of God, observinge with what Powers
ecclesiastical he (Apostles taken away) sent the Church under their wings: For
surely there cann be no better Polity of ecclesiastical Government for
Princes, then that which we find the Lord to leave in the Church, after his
taking away of Apostles. Should the Lord send any Officet under the wings of
Princes, who should streatch his Authority far further, then any Prince cann
streatch his vvings of protection? Or should one Bishopp be under the vvings of
many Princes protections? what then if those Princes fall at variance, shall
the one protect his Adversaries subject?

Therefore I cannot but conclude, that as it is not good for the Church, so it
is also in convenient and dangerous for Princes, that there be in the church
any Ecclesiastical Ministers of huge extents of Jurisdiction, such as are some
Patriarchs, and the Pope of Rome.

Thus havinge written at large of these things, because our times greatly
need the so doing, I now close up this Chapter, and my notes upon the former
Scriptures collected. prayinge that I may proceed to other.

II. CHAP.
OF King Hezekias we read, 2, Chron, 31, 4: That he commanded the people that
dwelt in Jerusalem, to give a part to the Priests and Levits, that they might
be in couraged in the Law of the Lord And when the Commandment was spread,
the Children of Israel brought abondaunce of first fruicts, of Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, and Honey, and of all the increase of the Field, and the Tithes
of all things brought they abundantly. And Hezekias questioned the Priests and
the Levits, concerning the Heaps. And Azariah the chief Priest, of the house
of Zadock, answered him, and said, since the people begann to bring the
Offerings into the house of the Lord, we have eaten, and have been satisfied,
and there is left in aboundannce. And Hezekias commanded to prepare Chambers
in the house of the Lord, and they prepared them, and carried in the first
fruicts, and the tithes, and the dedicate things faithfully. And over them was
Coniah the Levite the chief, and Shimei his brother the second. And Core the
Son of Imnah the Levite Porter toward the east, was over the things that were
willingely offered unto God, to distribute to their Brethren the Oblation of
the Lord, and the holy things that were consecrate, their daily portions.
Again, of King Josias we read, 2. Chron, 34, 8: That he sent Shafan and
Maaseiah the Governor of the City, and Ioah the Recorder, to repair the house
of the Lord. And when they came to Hilkia the high Priest, they delivered the
money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levits that kept the
door had gathered, at the hands of Manassch and Ephraim, and of all the residue
of Israel, and of all Judas and Benjamin, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And they put it into the hands of them which should do the work. Again,
Exodus, 36; 3, we read thus: And they received of Moses all the Offeringes,
which the Children of Israel had brought, for the work of the service of the
Sanctuary to make it: Also they brought still unto him free Gifts every
morninge. So all the wise men that wrought all the holy work, came every Man
from his work which they had wrought, and spoke to Moses, saying: The people
bring too much, and more then enough for the use of the work, which the Lord
has commanded to be made. Then Moses gave a Commandment, and they caused it
to be proclaimed throughout the host, saying: Let neither Man nor Woman,
prepare any more work for the Oblation of the Sanctuary. So the people were
stayed from Offeringe.

In these Scriptures I note these four things specially: First, That the
King commanded the People, to give to the Maintenance of the Ministers:
Secondly, That Maintenance is for their encouragement to serve in the
Ministry: Thirdly, That the King cared also for the Repairinge of the
Churches, wherein God was vvors hipped: Lastly, That when there was a
Sufficiency, this was to be acknowledged by the Clergy, and the People were to
be stayed from giving; According to which observations, I humbly pray, that I
may petition your sacred Majesty, as hereunder shall appear.

It being the Commandment and Ordinance of God, 1. Cor. 9, 14, that the
Ministers of the Gospel be maintained by them to whom they Minister the
Gospel, Christians are bound to find them Maintenance, if they be not
bound also to maintain them by Tithes, first fruicts, freewill Offeringes,
and the like. But where the Manner of doing is not appointed by God, when yet
the thing to be done is appointed, there Gods Ministers of Rule and Government
have Power to appointe the Manner of doing, and none may lawfully except
against the Manner which they appointe. In this church of England then, your
Majestics famous Predecessors havinge ordained, and your self graciously
confirmed, that the Ministers Maintenance be gathered by Tythinge of your
people, I most humbly pray, that the full Tithes of the Land be given to the
Lords Clergy. Doubtless (dread Sovereign) the permission of Impropriations,
where, not the Clergy, but Lay persons reap the Tithes, causes both a
discouragement to Gods Clergy, through want of convenient Maintenance in such
Parishes: and also a scantery of able Ministers to serve the Lord in those
places. And truly it is lamentable to observe, both how poorly some Clergy
are feign to live, even there where they execute the Office of their Ministry,
and where a Lay Man gathers such a quantery of Tithes, as would serve for a
sufficient Maintenance for one or two of the Clergy: and also how many
Ministers, painful in Preachinge the Gospel, after they have worn out
their life in poverty, leave their wife and children (well near) to beggary.
But saying it is Gods Law that his Clergy may marry, 1. Tim. 1, 2: and saying
it is likewise his Law, that the married yield due benevolence, 1. Cor. 7, 3,
meet it is, that the Cleargyes portions be such, as that they may (with
thrift) lay up also for their Wife and children. Yea, the Apostle in saying,
2. Cor. 12, 14: for the Children ought not to lay up for the fathers, but the
fathers for the Children, implies a Necessity laid upon all fathers, and among
them such of the Clergy as have children, that they provide and lay up for
their children; therefore such Clergy as keep such Hospitality, as spendes
the Revenewe of their livings, are rather to be blamed then commended, whilst
withal they lay not up for their wife and children. Moreover, saying it were
most unbefittinge Christians, to villify the Ministers of the Gospel in
maintenance, whom they are to have in honor for the Ministration of the
Gospel, most meet it is, that every Paris hes allowance, every Bishopdomes,
and Arch-Bishopdomes allowance be such, as may serve for to maintain each of
the Clergy, in such rank and fashion as best beseems; therefore as our
Bisshops and Archbishops have place of eminency and dignity among our Nobles,
so the Pastors of Congregations are to have such Maintenance as may in able
them to bear company, rather with the better then with the meaner sort in
each Parrish. As for our Bishops and Archbishops, their Maintenance is already
commendably great, through the large Bounty of our forefathers, and your
Majesty's confirmation of what they now enjoy thereof; but because I have in
the former Chapter entreated, for the multiplyinge of the number of
Archbishops and Bishops in this Church, I now humbly petition your Majesty,
that I may move unto one thing which would be needful. If it be necessary
that there be more Bishoprics and Arch-Bishopricks in England, then now there
are, (and this I have proved before) then it follows necessarily that
Maintenance also be increased. I therefore petition, That unto that which
already our Bishops have among them, there may be added a tax upon all the
People of the Land, that every house-holder contribute a small yearly Gift to
his Bishop, and an other small Gift to the Archbishop in whose Province he
is; for by the multitude of families in a Bishopdome, a small matter raised
from every family, would affoorde a very great portion to the Bishop: and by
the multitude of families in an Arch-Bishopprick, the like great portion
proportionably would arise to the Archbishop. Hereby the Bishop and the
Archbishop would be the more bound, to have care of, and (without Charge)
often to visit privately, the several Parishes, saying to it that all things
be therein according as they ought to be: for it cannot well be that they
should neglect them, when half yearly or quarterly they are put in mind of
them by their Benevolence unto them. And verily, better it is for Gods people,
according to their several conditions of quallity, to part with an easy
payment, of six pence, or a shillinge quarterly, or more or less, to their
Bishop and Archbishop, that here-through their Jurisdictions being the
smaller, they may proffitably execute in them their several Ministrations
according to Gods Ordinance, then for want hereof to suffer them to enjoy so
large and spacious Jurisdictions for Pontificality and Revenewe, as that they
do not, nor conveniently cann, execute rightly their several duties and
Offices. I grant that every Parishes Charge is already great, by the payinge
of Tithes, or other somes of money, toward the Maintenance of the Clergy of
their several Parishes; but yet, for so good and proffitable an occasion as is
this, they shall do Christianly to bear moreover a small tax for their
Bishop, and another for their Archbishop.

Great was the bounty of our Predecessors in this kind, and this also done
even under Popery; and shall we then injoyinge a most happy Reformation, and a
pure Doctrine, be greived to part with a little? In the second of Chronicles,
chap. 31, 8, we read thus: And when Hezekiah and the Princes came and saw the
heaps, they blessed the Lord, and his people Israel. So likewise, 2. Cor. 9,
12, the Apostle says thus: The Ministration of this Service, not only
supplieth the necessities of the Saints, but also is abundant by the
Thanksgivinge of many unto God. And, Phili pp. 4, 17, he says: Not that I
desire a Gift but I desire the fruict which may further your reckoninge. Now I
have received all: and have plenty: I was even filled, after that I had
received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odor that smells
sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God. Here we see what Blessings,
what Thanksgivinge to God, this liberality in Gods people toward the Lords
Ministers, stirred up in the Kings and Apostles of the Church, here we see
also that this is to God as a Sacrifice acceptable, and pleasinge unto him. And
our Lord himself, Math. 10, 42, says thus: Whosoever shall give unto one of
these little ones to drink a Cup of cold Water only, in the Name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. It is a
precious thing therefore in the sight of God, when any one gives to his
Ministers, because they are his Ministers, and gives not only of Necessity or
of Superfluity; for we must not give, only because of our Superfluity we cann
give; but we ought to give in faith, saying in our hearts: Lord, this is a
Minister of thy Church, I give therefore to him, Beleevinge thy word of
Acceptance. This is a holy Liberality: this true Christian Liberality,
therefore thus minded, (and not grudgingely, or only for the Laws sake) we
should give to the Maintenance of the Lords Ministers. For this cause as I have
written for our Bishopps and Arch-Bishopps, so I write also for our Parrish
Clergy, that the full Tithes be allowed, and that Peoples free will
Offeringes may be admitted, until each Parrish throughout the Land, have a
competent Means for the Clergy of the same. How bounrifull were our
Predecessors in givinge of Lands for a certainety of Revenewe, to frieries and
Nunneries? if then they were so bountiful where God imposed no bond so to do,
and this upon them who proved unproffitable Members of the Church, should not
we much more give some part of our Lands, for a certainety of maintenance to
the needful Clergy of our Parishes! If therefore any Parishes be so small,
or poor, that it yeildeth not a competent Means for the Clergy thereof, it
would be a blessed thing, if those that are able, give some part of their
Land, to yield to the same a certainety of Revenewe, besides the Tithes, and
other Benefits which the Parrish its self yeildeth. The needful Clergy of a
Parrish I accoumpt, a Pastor or Teacher, and a Deacon for an assistant unto
him; for truly it is not meet, that we put him to read Divine Service always,
and always to do other Cleargicall Duties, who should give himself
diligently to Reading, that he may Preach the Gospel often unto us, and
soundly. If therefore in Parishes already sufficiently provided for, there be
any so Christianly minded, as that of the abundance of their possessions they
will set by a part, toward the Maintenance of the Clergy of another Parrish
which has need, I humbly petition your Majesty that you graciously permit
this. To these I may add the Maintayninge of such Officers also, as are
necessary for the perfourmance of a Solemn and Divine Service in our
Cathedralls: and also such as necessarily need in our Schools and
Universities; for if God so graciously accepted, 1. Chron. 17, 1, of the
augmentation of the State and Magnificence of his vvorshipp, which we find
after the Buildinge of the Temple, then may we under the Christianity also
Believe, that our Princes caringe to increase in a time of the Churches
prosperity, the State and Magnificence of the vvorshipp of God, is most
acceptable to God, and consequently the Officers necessary in such Service may,
(though not all as Clergy) be maintained of the Charte of Gods people. And so
likewise, because the churches supply with learned and able Ministers is sight
needful, therefore as our Schools or Universities are needful, for the
trayning up of some hereunto, so the Governors of them are also needful, as
doing for Gods Church a very special Service; therefore also such are to be
Maintained at the Charge of Gods people, that so they may be encouraged in the
Service of the Lord. But one thing here I wish and petition for, that such be
the large Revenewe of every several Ecclesiastical Officer of our Clergy, as
that the Means of the livinge being sufficient, no one of them be suffered to
ingross any more spiritual livings into his hand: for it is the villifyinge
and decayinge also the Ministration of the Gospel, when one Man havinge
diverse Charges, executes one himself, and leaves the rest, either unto too
seldom visitation, or else to some readinge and insufficient Minister.

Thus having written for the Maintenance of our Ministers, I will proceed to
write also of the Repairing of our churches.

If the Lord so graciously accepted, of the disposition of King David,
concerning increasinge the Magnificense of the vvorshipp of God, 1. Chron. 17,
3, by changinge the Tabernacle into a glorious and magnificent Temple, why
should we not think that under the Christianity also, the Lord most graciously
regards our beautifyinge of the very Temples where he is worshipped? how ill
befitting the^ is it, that in this lands, but specially in our country
Parishes, Gods Temples are most basely provided for, lyinge so ruined, and so
dusty, as that it cannot but abate the devotion of Gods people. My humble
petition is therefore unto your Majesty, that you provinge an english Josiah,
zealous of the glory and splendor of Gods Temples, permit the free will
Offeringes of your people, until there be sufficient for the Repayringe and
Adorninge of the Churches of God. It is truly an error in some under the
Reformation, that they (so as they but vvorshipp God in his Temple) make no
conscience of Beautifyinge and Enrichinge also the place of Assemblinge; but
now from the Example of the Church under the Law we see, how acceptable to God
the Care and Bounty of Gods Kings and People is, even in this matter of
Beautifyinge the very Churches wherein we vvorshipp God. As for the manner of
Adorninge of Churches, though some like Pictures of holy Stories, yet I rather
wish a pain tinge and guildinge, as the Arches, and fashion of pillars, will
best agree with, and a wrytinge of Divine Stories here and there. For truly I
find the Lord, no where to commend to his people any former things done, to be
represented by Pictures; but rather he commends unto them a writing of his
word about their howses, and in memorial of things passed, to set up either
Stones, or other like things, which carry no resemblance of the thing done,
This I take to be to the end, that for matters of faith, which we must have
faith of that once it was done, he would not use us to any representation of
the same to our eye. And indeed what this Devise of picturinge Divine Stories
in Churches came unto under Popery, we may mourningely perceave; for the next
to this was Images also, and then Idolatry. Men are too proane to delight to be
put in mind of things of faith, by pictures of the same set before their eye;
but it is the next way to put faith out of the heart, and argues a fall in
wardly of the sight of those things, by faith of the word read and Preached.
For these causes (Dread Sovereign) I humbly petion, that your people be not
accoustomed again as under Popery, to Pictures of things of the Divine Story;
but rather that they may learn to have a sight, through faith of the word
preached and read, and so adorn the Churches rather with seemly paintinges
and guildinges, then with paintinge of Stories. Moreover, because in some
places the Congregation is so great, and the Church either so scante, or so
ill provided of room, that the people cannot conveniently kneel at prayer, or
sit the time of the Sermon, meet it is that such Churches be either in larged,
or provided of Galleries and forms, as need requires; for it is no small
disorder, when a Church is glorious by Adorninges, and yet not fitted for the
peoples worshipp. Lastly, whereas our Church (in the ordinary Custom) has
well ordered, a settinge aparte one part of the Church for Men, another for
Women, so preventinge a dangerous intermixture of the Sexes in that place, I
humbly petition, that the disorder hereof in some populous Congregations may be
redressed.

If therefore at any populous Assembly it fall out, that there be disorder
herein, meet it is that the Governors have power of the Seats, to dispose
them to Men, and Women a part by themselves; neither truly is there in these
times little need of this, if the wickedness of some in populous
Congregations were known. To avoid therefore an occasion and advantage of
evell, it is very neeedefull to observe more strictly then now usually is done,
that custom of our Church, in orderinge one part of the Church for Men, the
other for Women.

Thus havinge written also of the Repayringe and Adorninge of Churches, I
humbly pray, that I may proceed to the last observation made upon the former
collected Scriptures, which was, That when there was a Sufficiency, this was to
be acknowledged by the Clergy, and the people to be stayed from Offeringe.

It has been an old fault in the Clergy, but specially under Popery, never to
acknowledge a Sufficiency of Maintenance, but to be ever cryinge, Give, Give,
and this to the insufferable burtheninge of Gods people. And which worse is,
there has been a multiplyinge of the Orders of Clergy, above that which in
old times was: and also an increase of Offices, rather for the Service of the
Roman Papacyes unlawful extent of Jurisdiction, then for the necessary
Service of the Gospel, and of the worshipp of God. Neither have wicked Men
rested with this, but they have added, the swarminge of religious Orders of
friars and Nuns, permittinge them (all that may be) to exhaust Threasure from
Gods people. Therefore when a Land is well divided in to Parishes,
Bishopdomes, and Arch-Bishopdomes, and when the Cathedral Churches, and
Schools, are of convenient Number, fit it is, that these havinge sufficient
Maintenance, it may be to the glory of God acknowledged, and all unnecessary
burthenings of Gods people removed. And truly it is a wonder to see the
corruption of things, in that the false Clergy, and the Offices servinge
rather the Antichristian usurpation, then the Ministration of the Gospel, and
the unlawful orders of Friars and Nuns, exhaust far more of the Threasure
of Gods people, then does the true and needful Clergy ordained by God. As
for false Orders of Clergy, me thinks the very evidence of their addition, to
the Orders of Clergy in the primitive times, should move men to perceave and
hate the Corruption. And as for those Offices which serve the Pope rather then
the Gospel, me thinks that the evidence of the evell of the Popes extent of
Jurisdiction, should move the Nations to put of from them the burden of all
such Offices. And for Prieries and Nunneries, saying the Gospel warrants not,
that every one that will but give himself to Prayer, should presently charge
the Church of God; but rather ordeynes, that all eat their own Bread, 2.
Thessal. 3, 10, except Gods Clergy, even they who Minister the Ghospel, 1.
Cor. 9, 6; therefore me thinks, that as the Nations would not be guilty, of
maintayninge such as live inordinately, and this to the express disobeyinge of
a very special Ordinance of God, so they should not suffer among them the
swarminge of Friars and Nuns, who all live of other, not of their own labor
or Means. True it is, that it has been an Ornament to the Church, yea and to
the Gospel, that some single Persons have given up themselves to serve God
extraordinarily in Prayers and Supplications, and to be serviceable in
Christian Duties to such as had Need, yea and to live single and chaste; but
though we under the Reformation also, may do well to honor such in our
Congregations, yet let us not bind them by Profession or vow ever to continue
so, but rather commend them to Gods Grace to continue or discontinue as God
shall move and enable them. And much less let us suffer such to live
inordinately, by livinge upon that taken from others, but rather let them live
of their own Means, or else apply themselves to work. It is evell lookinge
upon the Show only of Devotion, when vvithall, disobediences to Gods holy
Ordinances, are suffered in them who make such Show.

To conclude therefore, I now humbly petition your sacred Majesty, that a
Sufficiency being provided, for the true Clergy of Parishes, and for Bishops
and Archbishops, and such Clergy as necessarily need in Offices under them:
as also for our Cathedral churches solemn Divine Service, and for our
Schools and Universities: And lastly, when our Parish and Cathedral churches
are sufficiently provided of Adornements, as well of the Temple, as of
Ministerial vestments; then that People be stayed from Offeringe any more unto
the work, save only as new Repayringe of things shall renew occasion.

But because experience has declared, that the Clergy being once
sufficiently provided for, and made sure of injoyinge duringe life such
Maintenance, have grown lassivious of life, light of Gesture, yea and
negligent of Preaching the Gospel conveniently often, therefore I humbly
petition a prevention, of this abuse of yours and your Peoples Bounty. This
prevention is no otherwise to be done, then by subiectinge our Clergy to
danger, in case that upon being settled in a livinge, they then behave not
themselves as becomes the Ministers of the Gospel. Our Church at her givinge
Orders has taken Care hereof in her Charge given to them who are Ordained, and
in taking of them a Rynde of Promise so to do; but the fail is, that
afterward they not doing so, the Report of the Parishioners is not hearkened
unto, unless some formal Accusation second the same. Under this Shield our
Clergy are so carcless to carry the Show of Godliness and Holiness, that
rather they incline to the contrary, even to a Show of licentious Liberty.
Truly when I saw the very Show of Sanctity which Popish Priests make, and
marked the effect and power even thereof in the people, I wished the true
Sanctity of some of our Divines in them, and their Show of Sanctity in all our
Divines: for the very Show of Devotion and Sanctity in Priests, as it
answers to the holy Offices they hold, and profession they make, so it is not
in vain to the people of God, but rather is a Light and example unto them. For
this cause I here petition, that the voice of the Parishioners concerning
their Clergy may be hearkened after, as a Means to come to the knowledge of
the lightness, or evell Manners of their Clergy: For Men are loath to be
Accusers in Courts of Justice, when yet in faithfulness, and with true Charity
toward Gods Church, they cann see, and saying mourn for, the Lightness,
lasciviousness, Looseness, and evell disposition and Manners of their Clergy.

Moreover, it were good, that our Bishops bound our Divines, to the usinge of
religious exercises and duties in their familyes, such as are Morninge and
Eveninge Prayer, Grace before and after Meare, Readinge the Scriptures by them
of their household by turns, Repetition of Sermons, and Catechisinge
conveniently often; for hardly cann a Man observe in his family these things,
but it will bind him to have a care of his own Manners and Conversation, that
it be not in his family, nor abroad in Company, otherwise then Godly and
Religious. We have seen the lamentable effects of Riches and Glory in the
Clergy, when Gods Princes and People havinge given bountifully unto them, and
made such Bounty assured also unto them to enjoy the same: for then the Clergy
have taken Liberty, to live licentiously, and ungodly. Neither cann we expect
any other fruict of great Revenews in Cleargy-Men, if Gods Princes awe them
not with the Sword, professinge the use of the same against them, if they
leave to be that which God by his word requires them to be, and be that which
Gods word condemns. Let us enrich our Clergy, but let us not hurt them,
either by an excess in Giving, or by leavinge the reins of their Manners wholly
unto themselves. How great hurt did those two great Emperors do to the
Clergy, Constantine the great, and Charles the great, if the report of
their Donations to the Bishop of Rome be true? what Blood have those Lands
occasioned the sheddinge of? what boldness have those possessions engendered in
the Clergy of that city? By those possessions chiefly, the Clergy of that
city grew not only licentious, but also incorrigible; but it hurts both the
Clergy and also the Church of God, when Gods Princes possess the Clergy of
such measure of possessions, as that both they will be wicked, and also are
able to resist the Discipline of the Sword, if any Prince would in duty to God
make use of it against them. Therefore of former experience we of these times
may beware, that we possess not the Clergy of too large and indeed
Superfluous Revenews, least they grow the clean contrary to that which the
word of God requires them to be. Yea to come nearer home, do but look upon
our silken Clergy since they have but felt the blast of the Princes favor,
observe their lightness of Gesture, boldness against all Men, liberty in
speech, that I add not, lassiviousness and lussfull vvantonness. I speak of
our younger sort of Clergy, who by Nature are aptest, and therefore first do
beginn a declination from Cleargicall Holiness; but, have no eye at these to
mark and correct their abuse of this Grace, and shortly, even when they grow
older to supply the rooms of our Bishops, you shall have a new a wicked
Bpiscopacy. Therefore I humbly pray your sacred Majessie, not that you change
from favouriuge, honoringe, and enriching our Clergy, but only that an eye
may be had of them that they abuse not this Grace, turning it into ungodly
liberty: As also, that our clergy be enjoined to use their family to religious
household duties: and lastly, that the report or same of those who are
conversant or neighbors with our Clergy, may be hearkened after by our
Bishops, and occasion thereby taken, to have an eye at such, whose light
behayiour, looseness of conversation, lewdness of life, or neglect of holy
family exercises, declares their corruption though the settled and tich livinges
they enjoy.

If this be taken heed unto by our Bishopps: if also your Majesty vouchsafe
to be zealous herein, givinge also Power to your Ministers of your Kingedome to
have a care of, and an eye at these things in the Clergy near them, then
would I not sear any harm, by the moderate increase of your and your Peoples
Bounty toward our Clergy. With the petitioninge whereof, I close up this
Chapter also, and proceed to an other.

III. CHAP. OF King leheshaphat we read a, Chron, 17, 7: That he sent his
Princes, and with them Levits and Priests, who taught in the Cities of Judah,
and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout
all the Cities of Iudnb, and taught the People.
From this Scripture I observe, That the King did not only take Care that
there were Teachers, but also that those Teachers teach the Peoplet yea he
joined his Princes in this Care, that in every City they should see, that the
People be taught by their Teachers. I therefore observinge in this Kingedome,
that many-many Parishes, either had no Teachers, or having Teachers, yet those
Teachers carelessly taught the People, Preachinge the Gospel once a month
only for satisfyinge the Law, was moved to write that my short and Zealous
little vvrytinge, which first I exhibited to your facred hands at Theobalds;
adventuringe now also, to continue my petition in this writing more at large.
Neither would I have troubled your Majesty with this petition, if it were not
evident to all Men, that neither leangth of time, nor cry of people, have
prevayled over our Teachers to teach their People diligently. Neither have our
Bishops furnished each Parrish with a Teachinge Minister, neither have they
punished those, who cann teach, but do not conveniently often Preach unto the
People. If your Majesty therefore, and your Princes assist them, that they may
place Teachers where there are none, and may punish or remove such as can
teach, but do not, or if at all, yet not conveniently often, you shall do a
holy work, and shall greatly benefit the Church of God. Your Majesty has
good experience (blessed be God) but that out Universities are not so barren as
not to affoorde Teachers enough, and also that your people are not so sparing,
as not to give largely (besides what of Necessity they give) to have a Teacher
appointed uuto them; for many are the places in this Kingedome, where being
ill fitted with those settled in the livings, they of their voluntary raise from
among them a yearly stipend for a hired Teacher. Saying therefore Gods
blessinge is such upon our Universities: seeing also your people are so well
disposed, pity it were to force them to content themselves with a dumb Priest
so long as he lives. My petition therefore unto your Majesty is, that where
one possesses the place who cannot Preach, and where any one possesses the
place, who though he cann, yet does not conveniently often Preach unto the
people, there such be removed from the livinge, havinge only some small
yearily stipend allowed them, and an other placed in the same, who both cann
and will Preach the word conveniently often. Surely if such were awed with
hazard of the livinge, who though they cann, yet do not preach conveniently
often, this would provoake them to study harder, and with practice to attain
a sacility in Teachinge, that so they may conveniently often Preach the word:
for, we see how careful they are of all those things, by which they shall
hazard the loss of their livinge. And is not Teachinge the very special Duty
of a Teacher what therefore should rather hazard the loss of his livinge then
a Negligent Teachinge? If it be now demanded, what I accoumpt conveniently
often, I answer, once upon the Sabbath day, if not twice; for uuly, Monthly
Sermons serve not, cither for the sufficient instructinge of people in the
Divine Mysteries, or for the reproose of their evellManners. Alas (my Lord) if
the word preached be appointed for a Soule-food, cann the Souls of Men be
fed with Monthly Sermons? but your Majesty is not ignorant, that in
country-Parishes, such is the backwardness of people to understande and
conceave the Mysteries of religion necessary to Silvation: such also, not the
rudeness only, but the wickedness of disposition concerning Manners, that it
must be no small labor to instruct them in the one, and to Reform them by
Religion in the other. Teachinge is not barely the leavinge a Sermon with a
company of people, but it is the fittinge the word to the present Necessityes
of the hearers; therefore also he that will be a good Pastor or Teacher, must
have his eyes and cares abroad among his Parishioners, to observe what they
are ignorant in, and what erroneous opinions any fall into, and what their life
and conversation usually is, and whither in their familyes they use or neglect
religious duties, for, who so does not this, as he cannot well know the
Necessityes of his Parishioners, so also he knows not to fit the word to the
occasions. But because, cither the ancient may be ignorant in some points of
Religion very necessary to their Salvation: or because the ignorant youth
grows daily in each Parrish or because they which know religious Mysteries
need encouragement and confirmation in them: or because Satan's temptations,
and the corruption of Manners is never idle, but dally assaults the people, to
draw them either to neglect the word, or not to obey and observe it in their
life and conversation, therefore there is necessity of Preachinge the word
once at the least every Sabbath, and Monthly Sermons suffice not. That kind
of Preachinge which takes a text at random, and only in largeth a discourse as
it gives occasion, is but a kind of general Preachinge, which may fit all
places; but Pastoral Teachinge needs a respect to the occasions of the
Parrish. Vain were physic if it rested only with a general declaration
what is good for such and such diseases, and did not moreover descend to
particular diseased Persons, to be applied as the Necessityes require; even so
is it also with Divinity. Who would coumpt him a good Shepherd, who though
he knows and cann declare all diseases, and all remedies pertayninge to
Sheep, yet applies not each remedy as any diseased Sheeps gives occasion? It
is therefore a defective Teachinge, where either the Pastor is ignorant of the
spiritual diseases of his people, or knowinge them, yet fits not the word of
God unto them, or havinge only done that, leaves to second the Preachinge,
with the Power and Discipline of Rule and Government. Alas, how small effects of
the word preached find we, where the Pastor havinge Taught his people, has
no Power nor Authority further, to judge and punish the disobedient.

And indeed what other fruict or success cann we expect, while we sever that
which God joined together? for he joined ecclesiastical Power of ludgement
and Punishment with the ministration of the word. Let us but look into
several Parishes, where ludgement and Punishment do not accompany the word
preached, but the Pastor rests with his leavinge a Sermon only, and the
people are left for matter of Government or Rule to the Bishops Court, and
there let us observe, if the people be not so careless of the word once
heard, that they care not of all the vvecke after, either to think any more
of it, or to reform themselves in any one thing by it. Hence partly it is,
that where there is every Sabbath day Teachinge, yet the People remain as
unchristianly in their conversation, as if they never heard the word of God at
all; though indeed in some few places, the earnest zeal of the Preacher,
prevails over the people to take the more heed, and the more conscionably to
observe the things Preached; but yet even there it is evident, what a defect
there is of Rule to accompany the Preachinge. Neither let us think that the
Churches Rule and Discipline, should not streatch unto the very conversation or
speech of Men, saying the Gospel rests not with actions only, but
streatcheth its seife unto Men's Speeches also; therefore we read, Ephesians. 4,
29: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths: and verse, 31:
Let all evell speakinge be put away from you. And chap. 5, 3: All uncleaness,
let it not be once named among you, neither filthiness, neither foolish
talking, neither jestinge, which are things not comely.

These and many the like precepts the Gospel gives to Men even concerning
Speech, neither are these to be accoumpted as bare Counsels, but rather as
Commandments, which the Discipline of the Church should correct in the
disobedient. True it is, that the Gospel streatcheth also to the affections,
yea to the very thoughts of Men, when yet the Churches Discipline cannot
streatch to such things also; but yet because Discipline is ordained for things
that come fourth of Men, therefore it ought to second as well the Precepts
concerning Speech, as the precepts concerning Actions of Drunkenness,
Fornication, Adultery, Theft, or Idolatry. Though the Laws of Kingedomes
therefore, streatch not to filthy speakinge, to punish it where it is usual,
yet the Churches Discipline ought to streatch even to it.

Wherefore (Dread Sovereign) I now humbly pray, that such Teachers may be
appointed Pastors of our Parrish churches, as who not only reprove corrupt
Communication by preachinge, but also Rulinge according to the Doctrine
Preached, do take notice of unchristian Communication in their Parishioners,
joyninge with the Rulinge Elders of the Parrish, both in calling such to
Accoumpt, and in judginge the same, and punishinge such as continue still in
that disobedience, not with standinge any exhortation or warninge given. This
is truly to feed the flock: this is truly to Teach; therefore if your Princes
by commission from you, do in their several abidinges or dwellinges, observe
in the Clergy the Neglect hereof, and leave it not to the Bishop only to call
such Clergy to accoumpt, but do themselves (the Bishop not proceedinge after
sufficient Notice, against such Clergy) proceed against them, executinge as
your Ministers your Power in the reprovinge and punishinge of such, then would
the Clergy of our Land be awed, and your people would surely be diligently and
proffitably Taught. Wherefore I petition your Majesty, that the Care hereof be
not left to our Bishops and Clergy only, but that your Princes, Justices, and
other Magistrates, may in places remote from your Princely presence, have also
authority to see to the Teachinge of the People, and to the Cleargyes
executing, both concerning Teachinge also and Rule, their true Duties and
Offices in every of our Parish Churches.

Thus havinge written hereof also, I humbly pray that I may proceed, to
write of other things in another Chapter.

IV. CHAP. OF King Hezekiah we read, 2, Chron, 29, 27: That he commanded to
offer the burnt Offerings upon the Altar: And when the Offerings begann, the
song of the Lord begann with the Trumpets, and the Instruments of David King
of Israel. And all the Congregation worshipped, singinge a song, and they
blew the Trumpcts: All this continued until the burnte offeringe was finished.
And when they had made an end of Offeringe, the King, and all that were
present with him, bowed themselves, and worshipped. Then Hezekiah the King, and
the Princes, commanded the Levits to praise the Lord with the words of David,
and of Asaph the Seer. And Hezekiah spoke, and said, Now ye have consecrate
your selves, come near, and bring the sacrifices, and offering of praise, into
the house of the Lord. Also, Hezektah sent to all Israel and Indah, and also
wrote letters to Ephraim, and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of
the Lord in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel.
And Hezekiah spoke comfortably unto all the Levits, that had knowledge to singe
unto the Lord.
From these Scriptures I gather specially these four things: 1: That in
time of peace and prosperity, the Lords worship may be increased in
Magnificense: 2: That the King took care, of the solemn, Stately, and right
perfourmance of the same: 3: That those who have the Art in song, and in
Music, were cheris head by the King: 4: That the King took care of, and
surthered, the Peoples resort unto the same.

It is truly worthy our observation, that unto the Manner of Divine Service
ordained in the wilderness, God approved of the Additions of Kings and
Prophets, made in lymes when the Church was in Peace and Prosperity: For here
we read of the words of David, and Asaph the Secr: also, of the Instruments
of David King of Israel; neither of which lived in the time when the Church
was in the wilderness. If therefore God approved of this Addition, which
made in some measure a change of the former Manner of Divine Service, why
should we under the Christianity think, that the increase of the Magnificence
of the worship of God is not acceptable? They are therefore to be reproved,
who contend against the Magnisicent Manner of Divine Service, ordained by Gods
Kings and Priests, and not dissonant from his former reveiled will, which we
find established in the Christian Church, after the Kings and Princes
embraced the Christian faith. Neither ought any to think, that Kings being
converted to God, they have not a special prerogative in orderinge the set
form of Divine Service.

I grant, they are not left wholly at Liberty to do what pleaserrh them; for
I noted before in the first chapter, that the Commandment was by the hand of
the Lord, and by the hand of his Prophets; but yet this I say, that under the
Christianity, where we have not new Revelations for all things, there the King
and Gods Priests have power, to order the Manner of the Divine vvorshipp, so as
they do nothing in Substance against the will of God already reveiled. They
may indeed under the shield of this liberty, bring in many vain and
nnseemely things; but we trust to Gods strong hand over them.

And if they be so ill minded, yet we need not doubt, but that the Lord
will in due time discover their evell, and raise up redress for his CHVRCH, by
the hands of more faithful Servants. In the mean time, if they command
things, which in themselves are not against the word of God reveiled, we are
safer in obeyinge, then resistinge. I approve not therefore of those, who
contemptuousely speak of the solemn Service of our Cathedral Churches,
speakinge rather their own singular conceit, then that which has any sound
warrant from the word of God.

These things considered, I now for this matter conclude, That God is to be
blessed, for your Majesty's Judgment and wisdom, in retayninge still under
the Reformation, the Magnificent Manner of Gods Divine vvorshipp used in our
Cathedral churches, and in some few other places; for, saying the same was
ordered by former Princes and Bishops, it was fit to be retained, save only
wherein we have direct vvarrant by the word of God, or by evidence of
evell, to alter and Reform the same: for we owe a Reverence to that which
former Ministers of God have ordered, save in things which either are directly
against Gods word, or which carry with them an evidence of evell. But now,
as on the one hand I bless God, for your Majesty's continuinge the Stately
worship of God in our Cathedral Churches, so on the other hand I humbly
pray, that I may make two petitions: the first, That the peoples
understandinges may be more yet tendered then hitherto it has been: the
second: That the singinge Men, and others employed in any Service, may be taken
care of, that they be of an honest, religious, and holy life and Conversation.

For the better perfourmance of the first, it were good and proffitable, That
whatsoever is sunge or plaide in that solemn Divine Service, be printed in
books, that the same may be read by the people, at the time of the singinge or
playinge the same in the Quire. Neither this only, but it were also good that
the people were instructed, both readily to know what is sunge or plaide, and
also readily to turn to the same in the book where they may read it: yea,
children should be taught this in the Schools; that so being trained up
herein, they may in their age resort proffitably to this solemn Service also
sometimes, as well as to their own Parrish Church ordinarily. For, (Dread
Sovereign) though charitably and religiously, your Predecessors have caused
the Divine Service to be translated into the English tongue, yet, partly,
because all that assemble, cannot convenietly assemble in the Quire, (neither
cann the Quire be altered, because of the fittinge the same to the voices of
the Singers, that they may hear one an other): partly, because Song cannot be
so distinct, as that the hearers can far off discern what is sung: partly,
because the Music plaieth some times alone in the Honor of God, when yet
some thing is, or ought to be intended, the tune whereof is with Art of
Music plaide alone: and lastly, because the common sort are not skillful in
the Order, what is now sunge, what then plaide; therefore, your people are even
in these times little better, then if the Service were performed in a strange
tongue. Herethrough cheifely it is, that your people do not commonly so
respect that solemn Service as they ought, neither indeed care at all to
resort to the same at any time; yea, and most of those that do sometimes come
to the same, come near only when some thing is read out of the Bible, or
when those Prayers are said, which easily they cann discern and understande;
but when any thing is done in Song, or when the Music silently plaieth, you
shall then synde them to retire themselves, and to give themselves to vvalkinge
and talkinge. Others, of the yet simpler sort of people, are (even as those
under Popery) pleased with the tune only, and delighted with the song and
Music, and with the sight of the Stately ordetinge and perfourmance of
things; but this, without caringe at any time to vvorshipp God in the Spirit,
and with the understandinge, so that they only stand gazinge, thinkinge it a
sufficient worshipp if they have but been there, and seen Divine Service. But
as this evell in Gods people cannot but be displeasinge to God, so surely if
some good order be not taken for redress hereof, it cannot but endanger the
Lords acceptance of the very Service its self: for, it is not so much the
Service wherein a few worship, as the worship of many in Spirit that he
regards.

Thus havinge written of my first petition, I humbly pray, that I may proceed
to the second,

If only Art be heeded in them admitted Ministers in the Divine Service, as if
(so they be skillfull, then) it matters not what their lives and conversations
be, then when any profane or irreligiously disposed Persons are admitted, we
(from experience) cann hardly expect other, then that their unsanctified Souls
will bring fourth, as profaneness in their life and conversation abroad, so
irreverence and a measure of profaneness in the very execution of their parts in
the Divine vvorshipp. But when people see irreverence, or any measure
profaneness in the Ministers, it abates their devotion, and is no small Scandal
to the Service its self. Therefore I humbly petition, that our Bishops have
not care that they reverently perform their parts in the Service only, but
also that they or the Deanes do inquire of their life and conversation abroad
also out of the Church: for, if abroad in their howses, or common company,
they be wanton, lascivious or profane, no Awe will serve to restreine, that in
the Service also their disposition break not fourth upon every little
advantage or opportunity to show the same. If therefore our Bishopps and Deanes
Inquire after the common life and conversation of such what it is abroad out
of the Church: if also they inquire whither in their familyes they use or
neglect religious Duties, such as are eveninge Prayer at leastwise, Grace
before and after meat, readinge the Divine Scriptures, Repeatinge of Sermons
some times, and some times Chatechisinge; then this would Awe them to exercise
themselves to a Holiness of life and conversation; Especially, if as they shall
be found conformable, or disorderly, so they shall be admitted, or put by the
Service. Yea it were good, that an exhortation were given to all, that if any
of them know any among them, to be loose and lascivious of Speech, profane
in conversation, or negligent of religious Duties in their familyes, they
should inform the Bishop or Deane of the same, that so the party may be
observed, and as occasion is given be proceeded against. Verily, it greatly
endangers the Service, both toward God, and toward Men, when the Ministers of
the same are known, to be wicked Men in their life and conversation: for it
cannot be but that the Lord should turn his face, even from a good Service
executed by such, (if authority allow such to be Ministers therein, as who
commonly are known to be wicked of life and conversation): Neither cann it be
but that the people also, should take such offense at such, as that even the
very Service also shall well near be sorsaken.

If these things therefore (Dread Sovereign) be carefully seen unto, I
nothing doubt, but that our Divine Servico now used in our Cathedral
Churches, will both be more acceptable to God then heretofore, and also more
conscionably and religiously then heretosote srequented by your people. I may
here add the like petition against our Clearkes of Parishes, who commonly
being of the lewdest of the Partish for life and conversation, do also so
irreverently, unskilfully, and unseemely perform their Office, that the
people of God cannot but take offense there at, and this to the scandal of the
Service its self of out Church.

To conclude my Collections, together with my observatio^s upon these
collected Scriptures, I now humbly petition, that as here it is said, That the
King, and the Princes commanded, etc: so as in your Presence your self see to
these things, so likewise in places remote from your sacred Presence, your
Princes and Magistrates (by commission from you) may have power and Authority to
see, that Divine Service be celebrated orderly and reverently throughout the
Kingedome. So will our Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Officers be the more
careful, that just cause of reproof be not given, not just cause of your
Princes and Magistrates proceeding against any, for disorders and unseemely
perfourmance of Duties.

These Collections (most mighty and Dread Sovereign) I have made out of
sacred Scripture, thereby in some special perticulets to show, how Gods Kings
and Princes in that ancient Church under the Law, took care of, and by their
Authority ordered, even Ecclesiastical things also pertayninge to the Divine
worship and service. Hereupon I have adventured to note unto your Majestic,
diverse weighty perticulers, wherein this our Church of England needs the
redress of your powerful hand. If therefore you vouchsafe to be assistant
unto the Church of God in these things, you shall surely bind the same unto
you to hold your Memory blessed for ever: for, by orderinge these things, you
shall both restore the Ordinances of God to his church, and dispose rightly the
extents of our Clergy Jurisdictions: you shall further the Preachinge of the
Ghospel in all places of this Land, and also be the Means, not of a pompous
Service only, but of a Stately, Magnificent, Holy, and Proffitable vvorshipp
of God. Which being done, it will be no less your Glory, that preventinge the
abuse of your and your Peoples Bounty by our Clergy the Clergy, have a large
and rich Revenewe, together with Dignityes and Honors among your Nobles and
Gentry,

I need not here prove from evidence of holy Scripture, that Kings and Princes
under the Christianity, are confirmed by God in the same Offices which the
Kings under the Law executed, this I shall prove elsew here, where I have
occasion to write of this subject to those, who as yet are so deluded of Papal
leasings, that they acknowledge not the same; but your Majesty professinge
your knowledge hereof, and practisinge in your Kingedomes according to such
know ledge, I need but to certify of some things only, which even to this day
need redress in this our church of England. If it be objected that I move unto
Changes, and that Changes are ever dangerous in Kingedomes, I then humbly pray
your Majesty to consider, that I move to no Changes but such, as which the
evidence of the will of God in Seripture witnesses unto. And what the Glory of
Changes made under the Reformation, according to the word of the Lord in
Scripture has been, the whole world now sees, and your Majesty enjoys and
inheriteth the Glory and Power of the same.

Doubtless, without a great Change, and the same very strange and dangerous,
we had had no Reformation of things; if therefore Gods word has made us
happy in overcomminge the dangers of the greater Change, should we neglect the
yet further Conforminge of things to the word, for feate of the danger of the
lesser Change? I beseech your Majesty therefore, that you will so tender the
Good of the Church of God, as that no fear of the danger of a Change, may
hinder the yet further conforminge of things, to the evidence of the will of
God as we find it in holy Scripture. With which Petition I put an end to
these my Collections out of holy Scripture, humbly praying, that I may yet
further continue this writing of mync, showing unto your Majesty the evidence
of the prevaylinge, or not prevaylinge, of the Kingdom of heaven among your
People, as the Ministers are good or bad, painful or idle, who are allowed in
this your Kingdom to possess our Spiritual livings. Verily, (my most gracious
Sovereign) who so loves the prevaylinge of the Kingedome of heaven, and
desires the suppression of the Kingedome of Satan, cannot but cherish and
rejoice of the industrious Ministers of the Gospel, and be zealous against
the negligent and idle Hopinge therefore of your Majesty's gracious disposition
toward the Kingedome of Heaven, and zealous hatred of the Kingedome of Satan,
I will proceed to show, the Means by which the Kingedome of Heaven
prevayleth among your people, petitioninge also your gracious cherishinge, and
assistinge the same.

V. CHAP.
EXperience has declared, that the Kingedome of Heaven has increased, and
Satan's Kingedome decreased, by the Ghospells being Ministered by Men, who
have an inseazoning of the Spirit of God; therefore every child of the
Kingdom of Heaven, as he loves the prevaylinge of the one, and declyninge of
the other Kingedome, so he is to love, cherish and sustain to his Power, such
Ministers of the word, as have cvidence of an inseazoninge of the Spirit of
God. The Seripture every where witnesses, that the Ministration of the word
through the Spirit in the Minister, is truly that prevaylinge vaylinge Power
and effectual Ministration, by which, if not only, yet cheifely, the
Kingedome of Heaven prevalleth, and the contrary Kingedomes subdued; therefore
though the word Ministered by a wicked Minister may be of some, yet certainly
it is not of like Power, as when the Spirit of God assisteth the Minister in
ministringe the same. It is therefore none of the least virtues of a godly
King, to observe the Ministers of the Gospel, markinge in whose Ministration
the Gospel most prevails, and in whose not; the one to cherish as
proffitable Ministers, the other to reprove as unproffitable. Suffer me
therefore (Dread Sovereign) I humbly pray you, to set before your view in a
breife manner, the diverse sorts of Ministers, which I find in this your
Kingdom of ENGLAND, and the diverse effects in your people of their diverse
manner of executinge their Ministrations; that so it may by the effects and
Fruicts appcare, who be those Ministers who cheifely have an evidence of an
inseazoninge of the SPIRIT of GOD.

Some are admitted Ministers in the Church of England, who neither by the
Spirit, nor yet of industrious Study cann Preach at all; therefore they content
themselves to read Divine Service only, or at the most to read some times a
Homily to their Parishioners. These, when they read Divine Service, you
shall find them to do it very irreverently, postinge over it also as hastily
as they may: Also if they read any Homilyes, it is then but seldom, and this
also in such a manner, as plainly shows, that they little tender the peoples
in struction. If you observe the Speech or Communication of these out of the
Church, you shall find the same to be wholy of the vvorid and worldly things,
havinge no evidence of Religion, or of faith according to the Gospel. Yea,
you shall find the most of these to be pott companions, and this also in the
lewdest and most profane company of the Parrish: they are as lascivious as
those who have no fear of God; their talk also is full of foolish jestinges,
if not also of ribaldry. Look into the familyes of these, and what shall you
find? verily, as little show of Godliness, fear of God, or faith, as in the
most ignorant and profane familyes of your Kingedome.

No Morninge or Eveninge Prayer, scarce Grace before and after meat, little or
no Readinge of the Scriptures, No repetition of Sermons, nor any Catechizing
throughout the year. As for your People in such Parishes, you shall commonly
find them ignorant in Divine Mysteries necessary to Salvation: Careless to
know them at all: Swearers, Drinkers, Iesters, filthy speakers, and in a
word, without any Show of true Godliness, save only that to satisfy the
Law, they resort on sundaies to the Readinge of Divine Service; but there,
neither caringe to mark oughts for their instruction, nor coming away, to be
oughts at all bettered in life or conversation.

In these Parishes, you shall commonly find very few, if any, Bibles: no use
made of them at home if there be any; Nor any religious Duties (as I said
above) exercised in their familyes, such as are, Eveninge Prayer, Grace before
and after Meat, Repeatinge of Sermons, or Catechisinge. Alas, what evidence of
the Spirit of God in such Pastors? what prevayling is here of the Kingdom of
heaven? Does not the Kingdom of Satan rather prevail in such Parishes?
verily (my Lord, and King) you shall find under such Pastors as now I write
of, the rudest, ignorantest, and wickedest of your people; therefore my humble
petition is, that for the betteringe of your people in such places, and for
removinge a scandal from our Church, such unpreachinge Pastors enjoy not
wholy the livings, but rather be put to some small stipend, and the residue
bestowed on some other who cann Preach the Gospel. I grante that
Homily-readinge is not wholly without use in such Parishes; but yet no Divines
but will confess, that skill in a Pastor to divide the word aright, as the
Necessityes of the Parishioners requires, is much to be preferred unto the same:
for though Homilyes conteyne excellent and sound Doctrine, and are fraught
with Christian precepts, yet they are so general, that without a skillful
making use of the perticulers in a Homily, applyinge things to the present
Necessityes of the Paris hioners, they cannot proffit the people, as does a
skillful Sermon composed by the Spirit in the Pastor, and fitted to the
occasions of the time and of Persons. For, in a Pastor in seazoried with the
Spirit of God, the Spirit assists in his choice, in his judgment, and directs
him secreately to the Doctrynes most proffitable for the people of his Charge;
therefore a Sermon so disposed, is far to be preferred before a Homily which
is penned at random, servinge generally for all places, and all people a like.
But when the people feel not their own ignorance met with, nor their own
knowledge confirmd, nor their own Manners reprovd or commended, they
acknowledge no Power in that read unto them out of a Homily. Neither are
Homilyes written to occasion in our Clergy a Negligence of Study, but rather
for the help of those only who cannot Preach soundly at all; therefore fart be
it from our Church, to fetter a Congregation to a Homily reader only, if the
times affoorde Ministers who cann divide the word of the Gospel aright.

Thus having written of one sort of Ministers, I humbly pray, that I may
proceed to another.

Other Ministers there are, who though they cann, and do Preach well, yet
they preach as seldom as Law will permit them. Herewithall many of them are
loose of life and profane in Conversation. Yea they are common pot companions:
they serve as jesters at great Men's tables: and make no conscience of their
Speech, so as they may gain a Meals meat in such company of Credit. In a
word, neither commonly in their Conversation, nor commonly in their dealings
with Men, they show any Signs of a Religious disposition of mind. If you
examine their family, you shall find there as little exercise of religious
Duties, as in those familyes where there is neither faith nor fear of God. In
such Parishes the voice of the people is, That they have a Parson that cann do
well if he would: that he is a good fellow, and the like; but they cannot
commned him, either for any painful Preachinge, or for any evidence of Piety
And according to his evel disposition and example, so you shall commonly find
the Parishioners, to take all liberty in wickedness, so far fourth as they
dare for the Law of your Kingedome. Here, what faith? what Sanctification?
what fear of God? what talk of religious things? here you may find some
dusty Bibles in familyes, but they serve not for any use all the yeate long,
save only to carry to Church on Sundaies. Here, scarce in any one family of
the Parrrish, you shall find, or Morninge, or Eveninge Prayer, the whole year
through: here, no Repetition of Sermons: no Catechizing of the family at any
time; yea scarcely Grace before or after meat. What evidence here then of the
Kingedome of heaven? what child of that Kingedome would not mourn, to see
here so small fruicts of the Gospel? If it be objected, that Morninge and
Eveninge Prayer, Readinge the Scriptures, Repeatinge of Sermons, and
Catechisinge of the family, are new taxes not laid upon Men by the Gospel,
then I answer, That these duties are included either expressly, or by
consequence, in the Commandments given us in the Gospel. Moreover, because
those commonly do these things, in whom the Gospel most prevayleth,
therefore the not doing them servs as a Sign, that there the Gospel
prevails not in people as it ought. Lastly, saying every family is a Charge,
where Parents have Charge of Children, and Masters of Servants, therefore in
every family there ought to be some Religious exercises, by which faith and
devotion may be furthered.

Another sort of Ministers there is, who both cann, and do Preach well, yea
and often, as every Sabbath day once; but though of the abundance of their
learning, they leave excellent Sermons with their Parishioners, yet, what
comes of it they care not, neither ever look after its taking any effect at
all. And for all their Preachinge, yet observe them in their life and
conversation, and you shall never hear them speak of religious things, longer
then they are in the Pulpit; for abroad, all the week and year after, their
Parishioners find that their talk is wholly of worldly matters, so that by
true Signs the Parishioners discover them to be wholly worldly minded. Civilly
courtious they are, but Men may easily see, that it springs but from Civility,
not from Religion. These love their Parishioners, but it is but because they
reap Proffit by them; not for that they find the Gospel and the Grace of
God to prevail in them. If you search into the familyes even of these, you
may find commonly more store of Bibles, and more use also made of them, then
in the Ministers howses of whom I have before written; but yet here you shall
find the use to be, only as for a vvearinge out of the time with readinge,
which else they could not at present tell how to pass away. Here you may find
Graces before and after meat, and generally more civility in the family, and
more show of Religion also then in the former Ministers howses; but yet for
Morninge or Eveniuge Prayer, Repetition of Sermons, or Catechisinge, you shall
hardly find these things the whole year through. As for the People in such
Parishes, you shall commonly find them better disposed, then in the Paris hes
whereof before I have written: they are commonly more Civil, and respective of
their life and conversation They resort with more reverence to the Church, and
have more store of Bibles then in the Parishes before written of; but as for
family exercises at home, such as are Morninge or Eveninge Prayer, Readinge the
Scriptures at convenient times, Repeatinge of Sermons, or Catechisinge, you
shall not commonly find these things used throughout the year. If you search
them more narrowly, you may find indeed some good measure of knowledge of
Divine Mysteries; but as for faith, or Sanctity through the Spirit: as for any
conversinge of things of faith: as for any joy of things hoped for, according
to the Gospel of Christ, you shall hardly find these things in them, no
nor Signs of them. Here we may thank God, for the evidence of the prevaylinge
of the Kingdom of Heaven in this your Kingedome, and this by the sight of a
sound Divine Service, and Preaching, and peoples resortinge to the Church; but
we cannot here rejoice of that Kingedomes prevaylinge, in the hearts, lives,
and conversations of your people.

I grante indeed (Dread Sovereign) that it is no small matter, that the
Gospel pressed with your Royal Laws, prevails over Lords, and inferior
Governors of familyes, so much as to bring their familyes to the Church;
neither indeed is it a small Power, that has brought even this to pass.
Moreover, if Lords, and other Governors of familyes, usinge their familyes to
the Church, do leave them therewithal to God, hopinge that the word
preached, and Gods Grace accompanyinge the same, works in their family to
make them inwardly good Christians; not further using their family publicly,
to Morning or Evening Prayer daily, or to a reading of the Scripturs through,
every one his or her part, at convenient times, or to Repeating of Sermons, or
to Catechisinge, yet we may not doubt, but that in every such family there is
one, or some, in whom the word of God works, and faith in God grows in
them according hereto, and so herethorowe there is in that family a private
prayinge, and a private reading the Scriptures, and private Meditations, and
selfe-Catechisinges; therefore also we may not condemn or reproach all such
families, as wherein publicly, (the family gathered together) there is not
usually holy exercises performed. But yet, because the very Show of Godliness
is good, not only for an evidence to Pastors, of the prevailinge of Gods Grace
in their Parishioners, but also for examples sake to others, as servinge to
provoake or incite one family by another in the use of such pious exercises and
Show of Godliness, it is very behoovefull, that families have their public
holy exercises at convenient seazons. Indeed some of those who most use these
pious family exercises, make Religion a weariness to their family, by so
continually drawinge them (in every minute of time, wherein they work not) to
these exercises, that they leave no time for their familyes recreation and
refreshment, by sportinge, dancinge, usinge exercises of Activity, or exercises
of danger for animatinge them to valiancy, and other like.

Thus by an extreme, a vice grows, and this both to the hurt of the family,
and also to the scandal of the Gospel of Christ; for some erroneously
conceavinge, that Religion cannot stand with such things, they make their
Children and servants dull, and slow of motion, and unsit for the defense of
the Kingedome and of the Church; and others thinkinge that the Gospel admits
not such things, make the Ghospels yoke heavier then the Lord would have it,
and so make the people take offense thereat. Yea, some have raised a reproach and
caused themselves to be a by-worde, through their puttinge the bridle of their
own word in peoples mouths, restreyninge them in things which Gods word
restreynes them not in: such Men do both themselves, and also the Gospel
wrong. The Scriptures declare the Lord not to dislike, but rather to approve,
of sportinges, Genesis 26, 8, dancings, Exodus 15, 20, Judges, 11, 34, 37, and of
exercises of Activity, Judges, 20, 16, 1. Chron. 12, 2; therefore none ought by
a word of their own to restreyn Gods people in such things. Such Men would
make conscience to do as David did, who for the rescue of a sheep, would
follow after a Bear, and after a Lion, but this exposinge a Man's self to
such dangers even upon such causes, the Scripture rather approves then
condemns. Surely the Scripture commendinge as an Ornament and Honor of
Kingedomes, that there are Active, and valiant Men in the same, 1. Chron. 12,
1, it does consequently allow of such hazardous exercises as incyte and move
Men to a valiant exposinge themselves to dangers; therefore the baitinge of
Bulls, of Bears, and huntinge of vvilde Beasts and the like, are not to be
condemned to be used by Gods people. If any evell be done, or evell Speech
heard in the usinge of these things, let that indeed be reproved and
punished; but let not Gods people be debarred from the use of these lawful
things, under pretense that Religion and Holiness will not stand with such
things. Would God that they that use these things, would say, and resolve,
and profess, that saying God is gracious to allow them to sport, to dance, to
use exercises for Activity, and even unto danger for animatinge of them to
valiancy, therefore he should not be dishonored by any in the use of them; for
surely if Gods people did this, the Lord would delight in his peoples
exercisinge themselves in these things. True it is, Man's corrupt nature is
such, as that hardly it cann use these things without taking Liberty with
all, both to forget God, and also to put away his fear, in the time of their
making use of these things; but if Masters of families, and public
Governors, as also their Pastors, would teach them frequently to mind the
Lord, and to have care in their hearts not to displease him in their usinge
these things, as also would be ready to reprove and punish any, that should
dishonor God in the time of the use of these things, then the corruption of
nature would be kept down herein as in other things hereby: for the Awe of
Government changes the Manners, which a depraved Nature is apt to bring
fourth. And why should not every one of every family think with themselves,
that as to do or say oughts in their sportinges, one with another, or family
with family, or neighbors with neighbors, which would displease their
Masters, and also their Magistrates, knew they thereof, were the next way to be
deprived of these Solaces and Refreshments, so to displease God, is likewise
the next way to make him also to deprive them of them, and to plague the Land
and them? Therefore people should use these things as by Gods permission,
havinge an Awe of God in their hearts, not to permit or do any thing in the
use of them, which is truly a breach of any of Gods Commandments.

As for the Sabbath day, whereas some use exercises of violence unto Blood,
such as are baiting of bulls, or bears cudgel playinge, and other like,
these, though they be lawful at other times, yet not on the Sabbath; more
harmeless solaces and delights befits the same, both for convenience, and also
for that it is a rest, as well to Beasts as to Men: the like I might say for
hobby-horses, and men in vvomens apparel (but this indeed unlawful) which
our Maygaimes commonly use; for, even in indifferent things, there may be a
fitness not to use them on the Lords Sabbath day. These things I thought good
to touch at here, because men are apt to err by an erroneous restreinte,
as well as by an erroneous liberty-takinge. Again, I find in those who most
use holy and religious duties, a custom of long prayinge, as if they would
make a custom, or get a Name for great prayinge; whereas the Lord does in
Scripture declare himself, to delight in short prayers, tendinge to the
present occasions of praying, which also are fittest for the Spirits
attendance thereto, and to be made in faith of that prayed for. There is no
truth in prayer, when the Spirit, and faith, accompany not the things prayed
for; neither cann they conveniently accompany long and tedions prayers. In
Congregations indeed, there must be in the Pastor a sense of, and prayer for
public offenses and Benefits, and the very rehearsing of many perticulers is
there truly needful; but in the private family, the occasion of the prayinge,
vvhither it be for the morninge or eveninge is especially to be tendered,
though some other perticulers for the common wealth may also breifely be
remembered.

Thus have I noted some evells, whereinto some the most devoute, are apt to
fall, that so such evells may be prevented; but yet if this Care be taken
against these evells, it would be very proffitable that every family aparte
use its self to such Religious Duties. For, for want of accoustominge a
family hereto, we find that Men goinge to church and coming from thence,
make that all their Religion for all the week after; never thinkinge any more
of any thing learned at the Church, nor caringe to do in the week, as they
were at Church taught to do; whereas if at home the family were used to
these pious exercises, it would occasion a making conscience to resort to
Church, and there to vvorshipp God with faith in the Spirit, as well as in the
external Gestures of the Body: as also it would make them careful of that
taught, to remember a part, and some special things, either to Believe them
heartily, or to practice them in their Actions and Speech all the time of their
life: for some things are to be Believed only, other things are to be
practiced, and in both every hearer ought to be careful, that he do it as he
is taught by the GOSPEL of CHRIST.

Thus havinge written of some sorts of Ministers, and observed unto your
Majesty the effects of their defects in your People, I now humbly pray, that I
may proceed to write also of those other Ministers, in whom I cannot but
rejoice, blessinge God also for them, and for the rich and plentiful Fruicts,
of their zealous and painful Ministration.

Other Ministers there are in this Church of England, who being learned, are
also painful Preachers of the word. They preach once at the least, but
ordinarily twice on the Sabbath day, if not once in the week days also.
These observe their Parishioners, whither usually in their life and
conversation, they bring fourth any Fruicts of their Preachinge. These vvatch
over any erroneous opinions in their Parishioners, informinge them better, and
stayinge their outspreadinge. These watch also over the Manners of their
Parishioners, as well their conversation as their dealinge, observinge when
they are either vicious or virtuous. These apply themselves to fit their
Preaching also unto these observations, usinge Comminations or Consolations as
the peoples vices or virtues, neglect or observation of Doctrine gives
occasion. Which that they may the better do, they observe and mark the common
fame that goes of any in the Parrish, and herewithall they have their eyes and
ears abroad in the Parrish, even faithful and godly Men, who observinge the
common conversation and dealings of their Neighbors, do faithfully inform
them how they find their Neighbors commonly disposed: whither to observe
religiously what is Taught them, or to neglect to observe the same. All this
they do, before any of their Parishioners come to such height of iniquity, as
to be publicly accused, and proceeded against in any court of lustice: Yea
and hereby they so prevent peoples so offendinge that well near, rather they
by their well directed Doctrine, and grave or Pastorly Authority, then the
fear of the Punishment which is by your Law to be inflicted, do bridle and
restreine your people from offendinge your Laws. These, in their own
familyes, use Morninge and Eveninge Prayer, Grace before and after Meat,
Readinge the Scriptures through in time, every one of the household their turn
or part. These use their family to Repeatinge of Sermons, and also Catechize
them conveniently often. If you talk with these, you shall find them
religiously disposed, affectinge also in all conference with Men, to leave some
Seeds and gracious impressions, either confirminge Men in the faith of some
special thing of the Gospel, or dehortinge them from some wickedness to
which they are (by report) inclyncable. These are religiously courteous, and
affable, lovinge their Parishioners, not for their own private gain they have
by them only, nor only for neighborhood and freindshipp, but, (after the
example of the Apostles) for the evidence of their faith, and for the evidence
of their receavinge carefully, and practisinge conscionably the word of Life.
These show themselves by many apparent Signs, that they love and seek the
Salvation of their People, rejoycinge of the comforteable likelihood of many,
and assurance of some, that they shall be partakers in the future
Glorification. These are grave in gesture, sober and meek in conversation:
they are devoute: they are Holy: yea, a Man may by good Signs discern, that
from a Spring of faith in themselves they exhort others unto faith, and from a
sense of the sweeteness of obedience in themselves, they encourage or animate
others to obey the Gospel. In a word, these go before their Parishioners
in those things, whereunto by their Preaching they exhort them. This for the
Ministers themselves, and their familyes; now consider the people also under
them. You shall find here the common voice of the Parishioners to be to this
effect: We have, (God be blessed) a learned and a good Man to our Teacher: he
takes great pains to teach us: he loves us: he is ready to instruct and
teach us, even in private conference, upon any scruple of conscience: he is
courteous even to the meanest of us, shewinge also by evident signs, that he
heartily desires the Salvation of our Souls. In these Parishes you shall
find in the people, in the meanest as well as in the greatest, more knowledge
in Divine Mysteries, then in the Parishes formerly written of. Here, more
evidence of faith of those holy Mysteries, and in God and in Christ according
to the direction of those Mysteries.

Here you shall find more store of Bibles in families: more readinge in them:
more proffit by readinge in them, then in the other Parishes. Here, eveninge,
if not morninge and eveninge Prayer: Here, grace before and after Meat, and
the same done with Reverence also, and an evidence of faith, and fear of God.
Here you shall find repeatinge of the Sermons at convenient times: Here,
catechisinge also conveniently often. Here, the Neighbors will conferr some
times one with another, as well of heavenly things as of worldly: yea and this
they will do, not to show what they cann say of such things, or to get a
Mastery in conference, but with a mutual Hope for such things, confirminge one
another in the faith and esteem of such things, animatinge one another to
prefer them in their love and desire, before these vvorldly things, which all
men have and enjoy. When I saw this in some, I rejoiced, as one who had found
some who are answerable to that exhortation of the Apostles, where he
describinge in some measure the future resurrection of our Bodies, 1. Thssal.
4, 17, says: Comfort your selves one another with these words. Doubtless
where people thus do, as fit opportunity, and mutual disposition of minds
will serve, the Lord will draw near to hear their talk, openinge also
their understandinges yet better, as we read of him that he did, Luke, 24, 13.

Furthermore, in these Parishes we find the People, not only to reverence
their Pastor, but heartily to love him, being glad also to have occasion of
doing any thing, whereby they may manifest the Love they bear him. Here,
there is an abstayninge from usual and unlawful swearing. Here you shall not
find usually any excess in drinkinge, Here, no lasciviouss, filthy, or beastly
talk, no bold, lustful: and filthy gestures; but rather you shall find here
the contrary virtues, even an abstinence from evell, and yet a freedom of Love
and delight as youth requires, but with a restreinte of such wicked excess.
Here, in a word, you shall find a comforteable show of Godliness: Here, a
true evidence of Christian life and conversation. Here therefore is indeed, an
evidence of the inseazoninge and habitation of the Spirit of God, both in
Pastor, and People: Here a plain evidence, both of the Kingedome of Heaven in
Power, and also of the weakeninge, if not castinge out of the contrary
Kingedome, even the Kingedome of Satan. Of these Ministers and Parishes
therefore I rejoice, and for your gracious favor toward them, for their
better encouragement in well doing, I humbly petition your sacred Majesty in
this writing.

But, some, and too many of these, are in the number of those, whose Ministers
are silenced, and whose people are reproached with the nick name of Puritanes.
My Lord and King, I petition not that their errors be suffered; but this I
petition, that the Ministers leaving their errors, and the people also
forsakinge them, both Ministers and People may find you gracious toward them,
by restoringe the Ministers to their former Ministration, and by acceptinge the
people as the Lights of our Land for Religion. There is no Garden where
vveedes will not grow; neither do men destroy the Garden for the vveedes
sake, but rather vveede out the vveedes and preserve the Garden still. We may
not conceave, that none that are true Christians, and have the Spirit, fall into
any errors; for Peter had his error, Galat. 2, 11: and the Churches of Corinth
and Galatia had their strayinges from the truth, when yet neither Peter was
silenced, but only the error he fell into withstoode, nor those Churches,
forsaken, but only the vveedes weeded out. And it is truly a hard thing,
that Men's Ministeryes are wholly suppressed, for an error or two in Judgment,
whereas rather first, they should be but stayed from Preachinge such errors,
and afterward upon obstinate persistinge, silenced. But saying many of our
learned and painful Divines, whose Ministry has been very proffitable in
this Church of England, are wholly for some few errors silenced, I am now a
petitioner, that their Ministry may be restored, so as they forsake those
things which truly are errors in them. And for the people, I humbly pray, that
leaving to speak against Lawful Powers and Offices in the Church, and against
our Divine Service, and leaving to condemn Gods people in lawful things, they
may be relieved from those scandales which wicked Men cast upon them. Surely
(Dread Sovereign) these Congregations where silenced Ministers have been,
do manifestly declare themselves to be Gods Saints in your Kingdom; yea I
have observed, that where a Minister conformable to the Ordinances of our
Church, has succeeded in the place of a silenced Minister, Godliness has more
and more decayed in your People. I will not say it is the fault of their
Conformity, God forbid; but this I say, it is the fault of their not
exercisinge like Pastoral duties, as the silenced Ministers exercised: and it
is the fault of our Bishops not pressinge them to exercise such, but rather
leavinge them to a prejudicial Liberty in Life and Conversation.

Thus have I, (my most gracious Sovereign) adventured, to set before your
view, the diverse dispositions of your People, according to the diversely
disposed Ministers set over them. I need not now doubt of your Majesty's quick
apprehention and discerninge, where in your Kingedome the Kingedome of Heaven
most prevails, neither yet where are the best evidencyes of the Spirit of
God. You have given such Signs of your excellent judgment in these things,
that I rather rejoice thereof, then infourme you oughts at all.

True it is, that it is not rigor of Punishment, no nor Laws, that will
bring people on to these holy exercises in their familyes, and to this blessed
restreinte from ungodly conversation, so well as the word of God frequently
preached, and wisely directed, by a skillful Minister Neither is there any
expectation, that a whole People should at an instant be brought to this
measure of conformity to the Gospel of Christ. Yet, if Parishionall
Government, might accompany Parishionall ministration of the word, the people
would doubtless the sooner be brought hereunto. Not that there should be any
violent disgracinge, or proceedinge against all that presently are not
conformable, (for this were to provoake untymely the people, before the Lords
time for their conversion be come) but that by little and little, with
Meekeness and Gentleness, the Parishionall Governors draw them on, to
conform themselves to the Rules of the Gospel. But, where any family is too
obstinate, refusinge for long time to exercise therein any religious duties,
there I humbly pray, that your Majesty encourage the Parishional Governors,
to proceed on orderly against such; for surely, a family that within its self,
does wholly neglect all pions exercises, is near unto Atheism, yea though they
observe customarily their coming to Church. This if your Majesty vouchsafe
to do, you shall surely make your Memorial blessed for ever, even as is the
memory of these good Kings blessed, of whom before I have written. If it be
objected, that Tradition shows us no evidence, that ever at all the Church had
such a Government by Lay Elders also as which I now press, (for this is the
difficultest Change I petition for) then I answer; If we receave the Office of
Bishops and Archbishops, because Tradition brings them to us, when yet we have
not any great vvarrant from Scripture, both for Bishops and Arch-Bishopps,
(though indeed for one, set over Teachers and Churches we have great evidence)
shall we not much more receave a Government by Lay Elders, which has evidence
as I have before showen in Scriptures, yea though corrupted Tradition affoorde
us no Light for such? The Lord has not given such evidence to a Reformation,
which has aimed at the purest Tradition only, as to that which has aimed to
Reform things by his word in Scripture; therefore to Conform the Offices
and Government Ecclesiastical, to that which the Scripture gives us Light for,
is surely most acceptable to God, and shall receave the greatest blessings.
Therefore I will conclude this my vvrytinge, first with a petition to your
Majesty, for the admittinge of such a Parishionall Government, (having an eye
rather at the Ordinance of God, as we find it in holy Scripture, then at
corrupted Tradition and its testimony and authority): and secondly with my
Prayer to God: That he give you a heart to execute his will, and establish
your Throane in the Church, continuinge your flourishinge Kingedomes to your
self, and your posterity for ever. For truly, our Church prays well, where
it says: Almighty God, whose Kingedome is everlastinge, and power infinite,
have mercy upon the whole Congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen
Servante, James, our King and Governor, that he, (knowinge whose Minister he
is) may above all things seek thy honor and glory: And that we his Subjects,
(duly consideringe whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and
humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and
ordinance, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

Your Majesty's Loyal Subject. THOMAS PROCTOR.

Faults escaped in the Printinge.
IN the Title of the Book, for consormably, read conformably. In the Petition
to the Lords of the Parliament, page 3. line 1, for Ma^tie, read Matie. And
line 4^ for off, read of. And line 12. for off, read of. In the Petition to
the Kiuge, page 6, line 32, for ordeninge, read orderinge. Page 7, line 9,
for, your Royal Powerful, read, your Royal and Powerful. Page 7. line
15, for, burnts Offeringes, read, burnte Offeringee. Page 8, line 5, for,
ovet, read, over. Page 8, line 11, At conveyed, conceave that a full point
should be. Page 9, line 7, for not, read, not. Line 31, for miply, read,
imply. Page 10, line 7, for, rhus, read, thus. Page 11, line 6, for, frow,
read, from. Line 8, at labor, conceave, a, vvantinge. Page 12, line 28, for,
I write, read, I write of. Page 14. line 3, for, Preachers of the Gospel
are may, etc: read, Preachers of the Gospel may, etc: Page 14, line 6, for,
who preach the Gospel exempted, read, Preach the Gospel are exempted.
Page 16, line 35, for Talks, read, Talk. Page 17, line 29, at City, conceave
a full point vvantinge: and in the same line, for, for, read, For. Page 20,
line 17, for, the Elders Church, read, the Elders of the Church. Page 34, line
1, for, Scripturies, read, scriptures: and for, nstruction, read,
instruction. Page 36, line 14, for, as superfluous, read, as are superfluous.
Page 38, line 21, for, Officet, read, Oflicer. Page 39, line 28, for Judas,
read, Judah. Page 46, line 18, for Lands, read Land. Page 47, line 20, for,
petion, read, petition. Page 49, line 18, for, of, read, off. Page 52, line
3, for and made, read have made. Page 55, line 2, for but, read both and line
5, for uuto, read unto, Page 5, line 17, for also and, read, and also. Page
60, line 2. for Offeringes, read Offeringe. Page 63, line 3. for Childreu,
read Children. Page 67, line 7, for iu, read in. Page 68. line 12, at idle,
conceave a full point vvantinge. Page 69, line 3. for Kingedomes, read
Kingedome. Page 72, line 13, for commned, read commend.

